READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: surya_siddhanta.json
Dataset number: 374 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 1,147,731 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Surya-Siddhanta
Creator: Ebenezer Burgess
Date: 1935
Description: Burgess, Ebenezer (1935). Translation of the Surya-Siddhanta. University of Calcutta.

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Surya-Siddhanta
  • creator: Ebenezer Burgess
  • date: 1935
  • description: Burgess, Ebenezer (1935). Translation of the Surya-Siddhanta. University of Calcutta.
  • subject:
    1.
      astronomy
    2.
      history
    3.
      India
  • identifier: cu_pub720
  • source_folder: cu_pub720
  • total_pages: 476
  • total_words: 213863
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.862
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cee
: PP a)
el /
4 CENTRAL UBRAAY —
-S
te: : ear '
wi _ TRANSLATION
SORYA-SIDDHANTA
BY
Rev. EBENEZER BURGESS,
ForMERLY Miasicnuny OF THE A.B Cc. F.M. is Invi.
ue
sate . ~~
Reprinted from the edition of 1860.
Edited by S&S ‘
_ PHANINDRALAL GANGOOLY, M.A., B.L..
PREMCHAND RoYCHAND SCHOLAR,
Lecrurer, CatcutTra UNIVERSITY
With an Introduction by
PR :ABODHCHANDRA SENGUPTA, M.A.,
" Soerme Lecruner IN INDIAN / STRONOMY AND MATHEMATICS,
-CaLcuTra UNIVERSITY

apacinoata 3 Wath! 1-HOO
RAGA A. Ha ORR CREO
ecu 220
At THM CALCUTTA UNIVERSITY PRESS, SENATE HOUSE, CAICUYTA,
oe
a
oe
” ad
«ff A&A
a7
a)
eS

NOTE.
It was in 1860 A.D. that Reverend E. Burgess published
his famous translation of the Sarya Siddhdnta, in the Journal of
the American Oriental Society. Owing to the time, thought and
patient diligence that he and his colleagues devoted to the task,
this translation stands out as a model of research work io the
field of Hindu astronomy. Now after a lapse of three quarters
of a century it has become almost inaccessible to any Indian
researcher of the present times. The Calcutta University is now
publishing a reprint of this valuable work and this, it is hoped,
will remove a long-felt want. The supervision of the work of
reprinting was done by Mr. Phanindra Lal Ganguly, M.A.,
B.L., P.R.S., of the Department of Pure Mathematics, Calcutta
University.
To the reprint is prefixed an introduction which attempts at
tracing the growth and development of the Sarya Siddhanta as
to its date, authorship and methods according to the most recent
researches of its writer; it also aims at showing the independence of the Hindu scientific astronomy of any foreign, more
specially the Greek, source.
The cost of publishing this reprint 1s met out of the Research
Fund in Indian Astronomy and Mathematics created by the
late Maharaja Sir Manindrachandra Nandi, K.C.I.E., of
Cossimbazar.
CALCUTTA,
August, 1936,

INTRODUCTION
The Hindu scientific astronomical works are divided into
, ‘two classes. Some of these are works of distinguished aatronomers like Aryabhata T (499 A.D.), Liatadeva (505 A.D.),*
Varabamihira (550 A.D.),t Brabmagupta (628A.D.), Lalla
(748 A.D.),t Manjula (932 A.D.), Sripati «028 A.D.) and
Bhaskara II (1150 A.D.), whose works are :
Works. Authors.
The Aryabhatiya and another Yantra ... Aryabhata I
The Romaka and the Pauliga Siddhantas Latadeva § (Expounder,
The Pafica Siddhantika ..- Warahamibira
The Brahmasphuta Siddhanta and the
Khandakhddyaka ... Brahmagupta
The Sigyadhiorddhida ... Lalla
The Laghumdnasa and the Brha-
= nmdnasa ... Manjula
li The Siddhanta Sekhara ... Sripati
a The \Siddhanta Siromani ... Bhaskara II
wae ‘These works and their authors are now wellknown. Of
these ~Liitedeva | was a direct pupil of AryabhataI. There is
now no doubt as to the times when they lived and composed
y
ss their works.
ss Some again of the Hindu astronomical works are alleged as
Ge hors have hid their names
dnd , vetc., Pafica Siddhantika, i. 8.
—— ee | ata I (Ponca Siddhéntika, xv, 20), and is mentioned
i i by: , (Brahmasphuta Siddhante, xxi, 39).
PLL at: FC. Tntroduction to the Khandokhadyaka, pp. *xiv-xxvil, Calcutta
The Khagdakhadyaka was knowo to Burgess as the Khandakatake
" § Panca Siddhantika, 5, 8.
|| P. ©. Sengupta, Introduction to the Khandakhadyaka, p. xixaS

viii SURYA SIDDHANTA
and their times with the definite motive of making their astronomical systems and calculations acceptable to the people of
Hindu India, by representing them as direct transmission from
their gods. To this class belong the following Siddhdntas -—
1, Strya Siddhanta. 10, Maricit Siddhanta.
2. Paitamaha Siddhénta. 11. Manu Siddhdnta.
8. Vydsa Siddhanta. 12. Arigira Siddhanta.
4. Vasistha Siddhdnta 13. Lomasa (Romaka ?) Siddhdnta.
5. Atri Stddhdnta. 14. Paulisa Siddhdanta.
6. Pardsara Siddhdnta. 15. Cyavana Siddhinta.
7. Kdayapa Siddhanta. 16. Yavana Stddhdnta.
8. Ndrada Siddhanta. 17. Bhrqu Siddhdanta,
9. Garga Siddhdanta. 18. Saunaka Siddhanta.
Their name is eighteen * to match the Purdnas of which also
the name is eighteen ; so revelation is etghteen ways stated. The
versifier might have easily pushed up the number to twenty which
is the number of the authors of the Dharma Sdastras.+ But
at the time of Varaha only five of these Siddhdntas were known,
viz., the Paulisa, Romaka, Vasistha, Saura and the Paitdmaha
Siddhantas.t Even at the time of Bhaskara II, the well-known
ones were five,§ and regarded as garitas or treatises on astronomy. Some of these eighteen works are known from the
quotations made from them by Bhattotpala (966 A.D.) in his
commentary on the Brhat Samhitéd of Varahamibira, while the
rest are known in name only. Some of these, again, were purely
astrological treatises. The Sirya Siddhanta is at the top of
this class of revelations. It was revealed to Maya an Asura, in all
probability an Assyrian or rather a Babylonian. The date is
* aor: ferret at afardisfa: vom: waa aed) aif welfergefires: i
aan: difesras saat aaat wy: | Wis seTerae Safe maT:
Quoted by Sudbakara, wancfirs}, ¥: 0!
C/. Bargeas’ quotation on pp. 322-24.
+ safafeqenta-arssesniswtisfrc: | anaeedaal:; saree i
quanta saat) . miatag afea wheat:
Ydjaacalkya Smrti,
t Pfewoaeales-dieGarrerg fers: | Ponca Siddhantika, i, 8.
§ afearts we wqtttcrraiaea a: ) Lildeoti, 250, the last stanza.

, INTRODUCTION ix
stated to be 2163102 B.C.* to which no historical value may be
attached. Again the Sirya Siddhdnta is the most important of
this class of works and some attempt should yet be made to
ascertain its true date. From internal evidence alone Burgess
came to the conclusion that the superior limit to its date is
--490 A.D.+ and that the !ower limit is 1091 A.D.} as ascertained
by Bentley, and took the mean date to be 560 A.D. Our view as
to the nature of the work is that it is a composite growth dating
- from about 400 A.D. to the middle of the eighth century or the
lower limit may even be the end of the eleventh century as found
by Bentley. The date of its commentator Ranganatha is 16038
A.D., when it was made safe from the hands of its interpolators.
It is possible to distinguish three distinct stages of its growth :-—
- {a) The original work as it existed before Varahamihira.
. (6) Varahba’s redaction with the epicyclic theory in it.
_(c) Later additions and alterations,
Evidence of Astronomical constants compared.
All these three stages are discernible firstly from a comparison
of the astronomical constants of the modern book with those of
oo Aryabhata Las given or indicated in the Khandukhddyaka of
| Brabmagupta with those of the Sirya Siddhanta of the Pafica
\Siddhantika of Varaha.
5 A. Planetary Revolutions in a Mahadyuga of 4,320,000 years.
A= alate
yn sat According to
a r. ling to th * A ing pcordiny Change od
[a . | .| Sa iddhdnt the modern e mode
Le handa yaka rya hdnta Sersa Siddhanta.| Stérya Siddhanta.
of Varaha.
m Siddhanta , i, 57. + Translation, p. 244.
, P. 24, also Bentley's Hindu Astronomy, p- 103,

Ax SURYA SIDDHANTA
| It is clear from the above table that the modern Sarya_ Siddhdénta is different from the state in which Varaha left it.
Thus far as regards its planetary revolutions only. There were
other changes also as will appear presently.
B. Longitudes of the apogees or aphelia of the orbits at 499 A.D.
According Accordin Kozprate to
P to the to tata - the Brahe According to As calculated
lanet. K) °- Siry sphuta the modern from modern
Mercury 320° 220°
Venus 80" 80°
From tbis table it is seen that the modern book is not in
agreement with Varaha’s Sirya Siddhdnta, As to the longitudes of the apogee and aphelia of Sun, Mars and Jupiter the ©
modern Siddhdnta is in agreement with the more correct values
of the Brahmasphuta Siddhanta of Brabmagupta or that it has
borrowed these elements from the latter work.
C. Dimensions of Epicycles of Apsis.
eal (2 ‘Kecording to | According t to | According to According to
Planet, the Khanda- Variha’ the Uttara the modern
khadyake. Sérya Siddhanta. Khandakhddyaka,| Sirya Siddhanta.
Mare 70° vite - 92° to 75°
Jupiter 32° 2°
. The great disagreement in the estimate of the longitude of the sphrlion of Venus
by the ancients is due to the fact that the eccentricity of its orbit was taken a8 nil
of the Venus’ epicycle was taken more or less coincident with

INTRODUCTION ia
Here also the modern Sarya Siddhdnta seems to have. borrowed from Brahmagupta, specially in the cases of the Sun, Moon
and Saturn.
D. Dimensions of the Sighra Epicycles (Epicycles of Conjunction).
According to the According to Varaha’ According to the
Planet. Khantakhadyaka. | Sarye Siddhanta. r mod. 3.3 dhanta.
Saturn 40°
” Jupiter 72°
Mars 234°
Venus 260°
Mercury 132°
3 _eeze :
E. Longitudes of the Nodes of the orbits of Planets at 499 A.D.
According to According According to As calculated
Planet. the Khanda- Variha« the modern | from
khadyaka- Sarya Siddhanta.) Sarya Siddhaénta. rules.
. | Not given io
a. Jupiter 50° the text of To"aL 65°13"
la . Pafica | 7
pk Mars 40° Siddhantika. 40°5" 37°69"
ay hoes Ss 4 - --
nek “ ‘Tt will appea that in the eletnénts under D and F the modern
7 - book has not changed much from Waraha’s Sarya Siddhanta.
F. Geocentric Orbital Inclination.
cording to the According to the According to
wathadyake. | Steve Sevnom® | sarge Sudthonte
Ee

Br SURYA SIDDHANTA
‘Here we see the modern book follow the Khandakhddyaka,
but the figures of Varaha’s Sarya Siddhdinta show that there was
a Surya Siddhanta before his time and that he did not think it
necessary to change these elements.
G. Number of Civil days in a Mahayuga.
According to the Khandakhddyaka = 1577917800.
RA Varaha's S. Siddhdnta = 1577917800.
< the modern S. Siddhdnta = 1577917828,
which shows an excess of 28 days, evidently a later innovation
done by some unknown person after the time of Varaiha at least.
Now as the Khandakhadyaka constants are taken from Aryabhata I’s drdhardtrika (midnight) system of astronomy and as the
constants of the Sarya Siddhdnta of Varaha as given in his
Parca Siddhantikad are almost the same as those of the Khandakhddyaka, it is clear that the old Sirya Siddhdnta was made
up to date by Varaha by replacing ‘the old constants init by new
ones from Aryabhata I’s ‘midnight system.” A subsequent
redactor of the Sérya Siddhdnta changed the constants as _ introduced by Varaha by following Brahmagupta’s teachings in his
Brahmasphuta Siddhdanta and the Uttara Khandakhddyaka, as has
been shown above in the elements under the headings B and C.
He also made other changes as have been noted already under
the headings A and G.
Thus from a’ comparison of astronomical constants we have
established that there was a book named the Si#rya Siddhdnta
before Varaha’s time. Variha was one of the first to improve upon it and make it up to date. The present redaction
took place decidedly after the time of Brahmagupta. In course
of time even these changed constants were thought out of
date, and according to Bentley at about the beginning of
© Of. P.O. Sengupta, Introduction to the Khapdakhadyaka,

INTRODUCTION sili
» sixteenth century, the planetary revolutions were further
ed nied —_—*
Changed el esi |
as corrected by bija. Change.
Bae ording to Diksita these new corrections were introduced
7 y 4 2 eee ee
a y the author of the Makaranda tables. Vy
~- Aleie ie ‘The position we have taken as to the nature of the modern
s aye a Siddhanta is further corroborated by
se sa Che Be idence of Planetary Theories in the Modern Book.
tee: |
e Ey rnin he meer Sitrya Siddhanta the traces of its oldest
1 Lad ‘recognised. We can actually find two distinct
planetary ‘theory which is followed by the ee tal epi-
‘The first few stanzas run as follows :—
ee F ori 18 of time, of invisible shape, stationed in the zodiac,
Ellas a's 4 junction © (Sighrocea), apsis (mandotca) and the
Vion a (pa pata), are the. causes” of the motion of the planets. The
wate hed to these | beings by cords of air, are drawn away
yy th ae ; Ae h the ‘right and left hand, forward or backward,
“tees 8 aie ST Ciitiw

me SURYA SIDDHANTA
according to nearness, towards their own places. A wind, moreover, called provector (pracaha) impels them towards their apices
(ueca) ; being drawn away forward and backward, they proceed
by a varying motion. When the planets, drawn away by their
apices (ucca) move forward in their orbit, the amount of motion
so caused is called their excess (dhana); when they move backward, it is their deficiency (rma)."" *
This represents a system of astronomy prior to and quite
distinct from the epicyclic astronomy. The weca is conceived
as of two classes, the first, the mandocca, in the case of the sun
and the moon, means the apogee where this angular motion is
slowést and in the case of other planets it is the aphelion point
of the orbit. The other type of ucca is the Sighrocca (the apex
of quick motion), which in the case of superior planets coincides
with the mean place of the sun, and in the case of an inferior
planet, is an imaginary point moving round the earth with the
same angular velocity asthe angular velocity of the planet round
the sun - its direction from the earth is always parallel to the line
joining the sun and the inferior planet.t The pata means the
ascending node of the orbit.
We first proceed to explain the action of the mandoccas on
the mean positions of planets.
Let U P MN M’ be the circular
orbit of the sun or the moon round the
earth E. U the position of the god
of mandocca who is supposed to be
sitting there facing FE, the earth.
When the mean planet is anywhere at
M in the half circle UMN, it is drawn
toa point P which is nearer to U, mM Pp’
the pull or rather the displacement is M P and is negative ; hence
according to this theory the equation of the centre is negative
from the apogee U to the perigee N. In the other half circle
N P’U, the pull is exerted by the left hand, the mean planet M’
is drawn forward to the point P’ and the equation of the ceritre
ya
* Translation,
¢ i, 20 aia xii,

INTRODUCTION xv
is” now positive. Thus so far as the character of the equation
was concerned this crude theory was deemed sufficient, The
mean motion was thought to be produced by the planets being
beaten by asterisms as described in [, 25-26. The strings of air
by which the god of apogee produced the displacements were
given the name pravaha. It is further eyident the ideas of
. ‘attraction’ and the consequent ‘displacement’ were not
fully distinguished. To sum up, this represents a system of
astronomy which only recognised the inequalities due to apsis
and tabulated the equations according to the position of the mean
planet relative to the apogee.
We now proceed to consider the other planetary inequality,
and this was considered to take place under the attraction of the
god of Sighra or the quick apex. The older theory of modern
book also tells us that this god also draws the planet towards
himself. This is now separately illustrated for inferior and
superior planets.
Siqhra of Infertor Planets.
‘Let B, H, V be the positions respectively of the earth, the
sun and an inferior planet in superior conjunction. From the
line EHO, cut of ES=HYV the radius of the orbit of V, then 8
: is the position of the Sighra of VY. After some days let E’ and
V’ be the positions of the earth and the inferior planet. Irom
B’ draw E’S’ equal and parallel to HV’, then S’ is the new

SURYA SIDDHANTA
The inferior planet is seen from B&B’ in the direction B'V'.
The Sighra god has, as it were, drawn the mean inferior planet
from the direction E’H to the direction E’V’ and the displacement produced is measured by the arc HM shown in the figure
and is in the direction of S’—the line E’H is, as it were, turned
towards E’S’ to the position E’V’. In other positions of
E, V and S$ the displacements due to Sighra are also readily
explained.
Sighra of Superior Planets.
Let FE, H, J be the positions of the earth, the sun and a
superior planet at conjunction. Let E’ and J’ be the positions
in the respective orbits of the earth and superior planet after
gome days. The superior planet is now seen in the direction
E’J’ from E’. From E’ draw E’O parallel to EHJ, and EJ,
equal and parallel to HJ’. Here the fighra is H. The planet
instead of being seen in the direction E’J, is actually seen from
E’ in the direction E’J’. The displacement due to the éighra H
is represented by the angle J’E'J,, or the are J,M shown in the
figure. The turning of the line E’J, into the position E’J” is
towards the direction E’H of the éighra. Similarly in other
positions of E, H and J, the displacements due to Sighra are
readily explained. |
It is evident that the imagined displacements due to this god
of éighra are always towards himself and are sometimes positive
and sometimes negative,

INTRODUCTION oil
The state of development of astronomy is apparently preepicyclic. It shows that both the planetary inequalities were
separated, however imperfect this separation might have been.
Ptolemy might claim that it was he who first separated the twofold planetary inequalities,” but his claim to originality should
now be set aside. Even Hipparchus is now regarded more as &
verifier and corrector of Babylonian astronomy than as the maker
of a new science. t
Having finished our explanation of the older planetary theory
of the Sarya Siddhdnta as to the action of the gods of manda and
éighra on the motion of planets, we turn to the action of the
pitas on the ascending nodes which is thus described:
‘¢ Tn like manner, also, the node Rahu, by its proper (own ?)
force causes the deviation in latitude (ciksepa) of the moon and
the other planets, northward and southward, from their point of
declination (apakrama). When in the half orbit behind the
planet, the node causes it to deviate northward ; when in the
half orbit in front, it draws it away southward. In the case of
Mercury and Venus, however, when the node is thus situated
with regard to the conjunction (sighra), these two planets are
caused to deviate in latitude, in the manner stated, by the attraction exerted by the node upon the conjunction (ighra)."" Il, 6-5.
This statement here unmistakably means the ascending node.
Tn the case of the inferior planets a very great advance was made
when their celestial latitude could be recognised as depending on
the distance of the 4ighra from the node. This step must have
had a long history behind it, which is now lost.
We omit the next three stanzas which are unimportant , the
next two are:
‘(The motion of the planets is of eight kinds: retrograde
(vakra), somewhat retrograde (anucakra), transverse (kutila), slow
(manda), very slow (mandatara), even (sama); aleo, very awilt
(atisighra), and that called swift (Sighra). Of these, the very swift
* Tbibaut, Introduction to Parca Siddhantika, p- lii.
: : Jia Britannica, History of Astronomy, Babylonian Astronomy.
Manitius also in bis introduction to his edition of the Syotuxis repudiates the inordinate claima of Ptolemy (Teubner, Leipzig, 1915).
fe o

SURYA SIDDHANTA
(atisighra), that called swift, the slow, the very slow, the; even —
all these five are forms of the motion called direct (rju); the somewhat retrograde is retrograde."' I1, 12-13...
The concluding portion of the last stanza has, not been
properly translated. by Burgess.. The last sentence should have
been “‘ what are retrograde motions bave been enumerated in
proximity to anuvakra motion."’ The last stanza means that the
last five sorts of motion enumerated in the twelfth stanza, are
direct and the first three are retrograde. Burgess’s . observation
on this is worth quoting. He says ‘‘ this minute classification
of the phases of a planet’a motion is quite gratuitous, so far
as this siddhdnta is concerned, for the terms, here. given do not
occur afterward in the text.’ We think he could have also said
that the conception of the gods of manda and Sighra for explaining planetary inequalities was equally so. But we hold with
reason that these eight ways of planetary motion are a relic of @
forgotten history of Hindu astronomy. Such eight-way motions
of planets are thus referred to by Brahmagupta:
‘* A person who has said that Aryabhata knew the eight-way
motions of planets has made an incorrect statement.’ *
Again of these eight-way motions of planets we find two used
in the Patica Siddhdntikd, Chapter XVILI, which describes what
is known as grahacara (the courses of planets). These. are the
vakra and the anuvakra motions ; the latter motion spoken of as
taking place after the cakra motion (retrograde motion), is according to the literal meaning of the term anuvakra, when the planet
is reaching the next stationary point.
The next stanza of our siddhdnta runs as follows: ** By
reason of this and that rate of motion, from day to day, the
planets thus come into accordance witb their observed places
(dr&)—this their correction, I shall carefully explain.”
The translation though not very exact yet sufficiently conveys
the idea. After these introductory words one would naturally
* wena aon asrenfl ageateceqi
Brihmasphuta Siddhanta, xi, 9.
Cf. also Brhat Samhita, vii, 15-16, and commentary thereon which quotes from
Vrddbs Garga.

INTRODUCTION xix
expect that the author would give us tables of equations of apsis of
all the planets and in the cases of the ‘ star planets ' the different
stages of their eight-way motions together with their amounts
in different periods of time. Instead of this we percieve the
hand of the interpolator breaking the continuity of the topic and
all ‘op a sudden bringing in @ table of ‘ sines " copied bob a
from the Aryabhatt ya, * and how to use it for finding the * sine '
ce. and the ‘ cosine ' of any given arc and the converse process ; the
method of finding the sun's declination, how to find the anomalies
of apsis and of the Sighra ; the dimensions of the epicycles of
either class for the planets; the methods for the calculation of
the equations of apsis and of the Sighra and how to apply them ;
e the methods of calculating the instantaneous daily motions of
planets both for the apsis and the Sighra borrowed respectively
from Aryabhata ITand Brahmagupta as we shall see later on.
_ ‘Then suddenly the older planetary theory is suffered to remain
in its original form, viz.,
oe” * al a a
"re?
« When at a great distance from its” conjunction (Sighrocca),
ie * planet, having its substance (body ?) drawn to the left ane
a Fy 3 prih ed slack cords, comes then to have a retrograde motion.’
: ¢ Ay Ty
a “semi ‘older theory of cords’ of air of the gods of Manda and
— Sighra thas been spared by the interpolator. The stanza shows
or an a recognition of the fact that in the case of a superior planet, the
- ’ tf ‘retrograde motion takes place mear about the opposition and in
the ease of an inferior planet near about its inferior conjunction.
ee Tov this old stanza could be permitted by the interpolator to
remain i in the book with all its vagueness seems to us a mystery.
_ In the very preceding stanza is described the explanation for the
: gra de motion under the epicyclic theory. After this we can
“no further find any trace of the older theory left in it. Thus
we find another argument in support of our theory that the
hen siry Siddhanta is a composite work showing the relics
Shy ts older strata yet contained in it.
a
b - “a value of the * sine ' of GO" is wrong, while those of Brahmagupts
and Shiskara TT ‘are ‘vnecurate. BR. &. Siddhante, ii, 2-5; ‘Siddhanta Siromens

oe ee SURYA SIDDHANTA
Evidence of Astronomical Methods
We, now proceed to consider some of the astronomical methods
of the modern Sirya Siddhanta and to show that it has drawn
largely from Aryabhata I and Brahmagupta.
(a) Instantaneous Daily Motion of Planets affected by the
Inequality of Apsis only.
The planets meant are of course the sun and the moon
according tothe Siddhantas. The rule for finding the instantaneous
daily motion of either of these ‘ planets’ is perhaps best illustrated
by considering the case of the moon.
Acourding to the modern Sarya Siddhanta (II, 39, 43) the
equation giving the longitude / of the moon on any day is
P* x KR sin (mm —a)
i=m—
where m is the moon’s mean longitude, « the longitude of the
apogee, P°=the periphery of the moon's epicycle of apsis where
the circumference of the concentric =360° and R=3438'.
If nandn’ be the rates of the mean daily motion of the
moon and her apogee in minutes, the instantaneous daily motion
of the moon is expressed as
_ (n—n/)P* x Tabular difference of * sines ’ at are_(m —o)
Here the term ‘ sine " means the Indian sine and is=R sin @,
where @is the arc. The value of R is also 8458 according to
Aryabhata I, but ie =3270' according to Brahmagupta and 120!
according to Varahamibira. The sines are calculated at intervals
of 225’ of are. The above formula for instantaneous daily motion
is readily demonstrated as follows :—
Suppose |’ to be the longitute of the moon after a fraction r, of
a day, then Y
SSeS de a xR ain {m—a+(n—nr},

INTRODUCTION _ xxi
ays +. the instantaneous daily motion
cr atilen- mea sin {m—a+(n—n')r}—RK sin (m—a) |
gegen a” x Tab. Diffce. of ‘ sines * at arc (m—a).
This vole itself is expressed by Lalla in his Sisyadhtorddhide f
ii, 15 thus : :
“The instantaneous daily motion of the moon
ee Tabular Difference of ‘sines’ at are (7 —a) x 10
tte) ~6#BB ’
i ies en Gall x 31°30’ x Tab. Diffce. of ‘sines” at arc (m—a) —
whic i taken, by alla as
ae Ae
fe divisor 295 12 shows that the moon’s mean anomaly was
no oa ea. lly contemplated to receive an increment of more than
25'; n— =n! iteelf is is about 784’.
Thi role is again. found fault with by Lalla in Chapter iii, 43,
whe re k ne | Bays,
Th ule of dividing the daily motion in anomaly of the
fioon by. 228 a5 by © which the pupils of Aryabhata have obtained
shite mean daily motion, gives the apparent
er, >. N
ae
the | CO. yrrection to.
ALS
Ne mo bon * e
(ae | pk ty

SURYA SIDDHANTA
used for the current day.’* *
We are not going to discuss tbe truth or otherwise of Lalla’s
allegation; what concerns us here is to show that the rule we
are considering was obtained by Aryabhata I’s pupils under the
guidance of their teacher: The same rule is copied from
Aryabhata I by Varahamibira in his Pafica Siddhantika, IX.
Thibaut translates it as follows:
daily motion of the moon for the day elapsed and it carmot be
‘* Multiply (the motion of the anomaly) by the difference of
the sines of (at ?) the anomaly, and divide by 225; reduce the
result (to terms of the epicycle). The are of the result is to be
deducted from the mean motion in the six signs beginning with
Capricorn, and to be added to it in the six signs beginning with
Cancer.’’ +
Put symbolically it is equivalent to:
The instantaneous daily motion
P(n—n’) x Tab. Diffee. of ‘sines’ at arc (m—a) x 225
=ii—
Here the multiplier 580 reduces the result to terms of the epicycle,
and the factor reduces the result to arc. As Variha's radius
Th’
The rule of the modern Sarya Siddhanta under consideration
is thus proved to be taken from Aryabhata I's or his pupil's
works. We had to cite the rules of the Sigyadhierddhida and
the Sarya Siddhdnta of the Pafca Siddhantikd, only because
the Aryabhatiya does not contain it. The rule in the form
© geetcarts acieced am oe afrraraece ferai: |
an esct afradtiafetgyfwarenttr wrarerrar ny SeTA
Sudhaikara Dvivedi’s Edition.
+ @eccareregtem fafaeredre at ofa
Panes Siddhdntikd, ix, 14,

INTRODUCTION: xxiii
in which Varaha gives it is given also by Brahmagupta and may
be symbolically expressed as
(n—n’) x Tab. Diffce. of ‘sines’ at arc (m—a)xP ,
Instantaneous Daily Motion of the ‘Star Planets."
We next consider the instantaneous daily motion of the
planets which are affected also by the inequality ‘of the Sighra or
conjunction.
The rule of the modern Sarya Siddhdnta runs as follows :-—
‘“ Subtract the daily. motion of a planet, thus corrected for
the. apsis (manda), from ;the daily motion of its conjunction
(Sighra); then multiply the remainder by the difference between
the last hypotenuse and radius, and divide by the variable
hypotenuse (cala karpa); the result is additive to the daily motion
when the hypotenuse is greater than the radius, and subtractive
when this is less ;: if, when subtractive, the equation is greater
than the daily motion, deduct the latter from it, and the remainder is the daily motion in a retrograde (Vakra) direction."
Symbolically it means, that’ the instantaneous daily motion of
such a planet
=n 4 ae =) me ne = R)
in form, when n represents the mean daily motion of the planet
as corrected for the apsis, n’ the mean daily motion of the Sighra
(conjunction), H stands for the bypotenuse of the fourth step in
finding the longitude of the planet, R the radius=343* in all
the siddhantas which are ‘revelations.’
* aye Bory fon lrcaferriseot ear (ats) HT!
eral zafefien’ wrataed wenfirg 4
ereawatergniticer eerie: Ya
B. S. Siddhinta, ii, 41 + 42}.

exiy SURYA SIDDHANTA
(n!—n)(H—R)
‘Now n+ SSS
readily transforms into s
ni~ (=n) xR
H
in which form it is given in the Soma Siddhdanta thus :—
‘* Multiply the daily motion of the Sighra (conjunction)
anomaly by the radius and divide by the hypotenuse ; the result
applied negatively to the daily motion of the Sighra (conjunction)
is the true daily motion, the motion is retrograde when the
subtraction haa to be done in the inverse way."’ * II, 29.
This rule is evidently taken from the Brahmasphuta Siddhdnta
of Brahmagupta where it is stated in the form:
‘“ Multiply the motion of the Sighra (conjunction) of the
planets of which Mars is the first, lessened by their mean
motion as corrected for apsis, by the tabular difference of ‘sines’
used for finding the Sighra equation and divide the product by
the first sine (214’) ; multiply the result by the radius and divide
by the Sighra hypotenuse, subtract this last result taken as
minutes from the motion of the Sighra (conjunction), the remainder is the instantaneous daily motion of the planet."’t
If EF, denotes the Sighra equation of the planet, then
* detcafefesren safaar waa |
shawna: ere yiramgine rae ween
Soma Siddhanta, ii, 29, edited by Mm. V. P. Dvided!, Henares.

INTRODUCTION xxv
adopting the same notation as before the rule may be syinboli-.
cally expressed as )
aye (=n) x Tab. Diffce. of ‘sines’' at arc Es x R®
214xH
Now the first thirteen of Brahmagupta’s ‘sines’ are
Hence the first thirteen tabular differences are:
Fach of these divided separately by 214, the first ‘sine’
gives very nearly a result=1, and a calculator séaing that the
Sighra equation does never exceed 47° and using Brahmagupta’s rule simplified the fraction
Tab. Diffce. of ‘sines’ at Ee
to unity and thus gave the rule as
-q/- mime
n/ Sy = Sea
which was modified in form and included in the modern Sfrya
Siddhdanta.
This rule of Brahmagupta has not been traced to any other
earlier writer. It does not occur in the Pafica Siddhantika of
Varahamibira. Lalla has quoted Brahmagupta’s rule with only
one necessary change in his Sigyadhivrddhida, ii, 44-46. The
* For a proof of tho role the reader may consult the paper “* Infinitesima! Calculus
in Indian Mathematics’’—by me in the Oal. Uniy. Journal of Letters, Vol. XXII,

xxvi SURYA SIDDHANTA
proof of it is to be found in my paper on the Infinitesimal
Calculus already referred to, and which is substantially the
same as given by Bhiskara II in his Grahaganita, Spastddhikara,
Comm. on stanza 39. Burgess has given a new proof of the rule
in his translation which is now quite unnecessary.
Other instances might be cited showing how the modern
Sarya Siddhanta has borrowed from Aryabbata I and Brabmagupta. Some of these we will discuss later on.
Thus by some arguments by similarity of method we come to
the conclusion that the modern Sirya Siddhdnta developed
into its present form after the time of Brahmagupta. We now
proceed to consider the date of the Sfirya Siddhanta from another
evidence, Piz.,
_ Evidence from the Polar Longitudes of Junction Stars.
The polar longitudes of the ‘ Junction Stars * as given by
Brabmagupta, Lalla, and the modern Sfrya Siddhanta are now
brought into evidence. Some of these longitudes are traditional,
viz., those that are the same in these three works, some are
corrected by the authors themselves. We may be enabled to
find both the superior and inferior limits to the date of the
Sarya Siddhanta from a comparative study. The Pafica
Siddhantika of Varaba also gives the polar longitudes (according
to Thibaut) of seven of these ‘junction’ stars which we shall take
to be of the old Sirya Siddhanta as it existed before the time of
Varaha. -

Star. 3:
Adin
2 Bharapi
Kyttika 32° 40°
Rohini 48°0°
Mrygadira
P Ardra
Punarvasu 88°0"
‘Pury’ teas!
eS ; Aéless 107 “40°
INTRODUCTION
P. Long.
Brahmasphuta
Siddhanta,
Polar Longitudes of Junction Stars.
Brahmagupta |
Traditional
Brahmagupts
Do. |
Traditional
Brahmagoupts
New
-Brahmagupts
Doe.
| Traditional
Deo.
Brahmagupta
New
New
Brahmagupts

x xviii SURYA SIDDHANTA
For the date of the old Sirya Siddhdnta we select the following stare:
Excess in P, Long. io
Brahmagupta.
Krttika 4° 48/
Rohini 1° 28
Punarvasu | Sed sy
Magha s° 0
P, Phalguni 8° 0
Citra 8°
The mean excess in Brahmagupta’s longitude comes out
for these six stars to be 3° 23’, which at the rate of 72 years per
degree is the excess for a period of 244 years. As we know
definitely that Brahmagupta’s date is 628 A.D., the date of
the original Sarya Siddhanta becomes 384 A.D., this date we
may set down as 400 A.D., which is the upper limit to the
date.
To find the lower limit to the date we have to select the
following stars:
Excess in P. Long. over
Brahbmsagupta.
Aslega se Acree lye 2
Visikha ... ema OF
Abhijit... Pe ook! d
Sravana ... Se: wf
The mean excess over Brahmagupta’s polar longitudes for
these four stars works out to be 1° 15’, which may be taken to
correspond to 90 years after the time of Brahmagupta the Sas
comes to about 715 A.D.

INTRODUCTION waix
We are thus led to the conclusion that the modern Sarya
Siddhanta became a composite growth from about 400 A.D. to
725 A.D. from the evidence of its star table alone. The method
: we have followed is perhaps more correct than the one that has
ae been followed by Bentley and Burgess as to this star table.
ss We: have assumed that Brahmagupta and other observers of
stars before and after him have been liable to the same
sorts of errors. While no data are available to push up the
upper limit to its date, the lower limit as calculated by Bentley
from the latest value of the planetary revolutions cannot be
challenged.
The Sarya Siddhdnta has thus undergone progressive changes _
Pa n its constants and the star table from 400 to 1100 A.D. The
ey original work was in an amorphous condition before the time
ee; x of Varaba who gave it a crystalline structure by including in
it the new astronomical constants and the epicyclic theory from
_ Aryabhata I. Not only these, Varaha also put into his S@rya
a Siddhanta even the astronomical methods of Aryabhata I and his
_ pupils, as we have seen in some cases already. More will be
_ evident later on.
The changed Siddhanta was known to Brahmagupta”*
x: perhaps as a distinct and different book from its fragmentary
i ee redaction in the Pafica Siddhantika. Bhattotpala (966 A.D.),
“Ae the commentator of the Brhat Sarnhita of Varahamihira, cites
7 fome stanzas + from the Sarya Siddhanta current in his time.
Pee oes «1 Brahmasphute Siddhante, xx, 8.
a rerereresere Pret wreak <fa: i we warefawea a fedtd saw a
| it ‘Roret aren: euif aeretersiten: | waren fe eas aerefzafasiieen:
£*U4e
+ gil Foor mer aft wrevererer <2: | qa ae 4 yen wreak cha: a
es: of Brhat Samhita, IV.
Bot

_=xx SURYA SIDDHANTA
These, however, cannot be traced in the modern book. It appears
that some stanzas have been deleted or replaced by new ones ;
some again were rejected as interpolation by the commentator
_Ranganatha. To this latter class belongs a stanza got by
Burgess after I, § in bis manuscripts without the commentary.
A Bengali edition * of the S#rya Siddhdnta records twenty-one
additional stanzas between xiv, 23 and 24, which speak of the
application of a system of corrections called Bija to the mean
places as calculated from the S#rya Siddhdnta. These stanzas
were no doubt a later addition. Burgess at the end of his
translation rightly observes :
“The Sfirya Stddhdnta, in the form in which it is here
presented, as accepted by Ranganaitha and fixed by his commentary, contains exactly five hundred verses. This number, of
course, cannot plausibly be worked upon as altogether accidental ;
no one will question that the treatise has been intentionally
wrought into its present COMPASS..........cesccccsereescccerecscccceecssene
There can be no reasonable doubt that the text of the iaatine
has undergone since its origin not unimportant extension ano
modification."*
As we have already said we are inclined to understand that
the original Sirya Siddhanta came from the asura or Babylonian
source, and the date of its arrival was about 400 A.D. The
question now is, could it not have arrived much earlier? In
our opinion this does not seem probable for reasons set forth in
the following brief historical review of Hindu astronomy from
the earliest Vedic times.
A Bird's-eye View of Hindu Astronomy from the
Vedic Times to 80 A.D.
So faras we have come to discover of the astronomical
knowledge current in Vedic times, we find that the chief requirements for the performance of Vedic sacrifices were to find as
accurately as possible the equinoctial and solstitial days, and
* Sarya Siddhante, rendered into Bengali, by Vimali Prasids SiddbantaBaresvatl, Caloutts, 1896,

INTRODUCTION XXXi
thence to find the seasons. The Vedic months were synodic
months and reckoned from a full-moon to the next full-moon.
The month of Magha for instance was begun from the full-moon
at the star group Maghas, of which the central star is a Leonis
or Regulus till the full-moon at the star group Uttara Phalguni
8 Leonis and a Virgo.* The year was comprised of twelve or
thirteen lunar months ;+ so that even in Vedic times there was
always an attempt at adjusting the lunar calendar to the solar.
The solar year was begun either from an observation of the sun's
rising at its extreme south point or from the sun's rising at the
east point exactly. Sometimes the year was begun one month
: before the sun’s arriving at the yernal equinox ¢ or with the
spring. The seasons were, the winter, spring, summer, rains,
* antumn, the hemanta or pre-winter, and six in number. Sometimes hemanta and winter were counted as one season.§ The
duration of each of these six seasons was two months and
winter began when the sun turned north and the rains when he
turned south.
Again at the earliest Brahmana period (i) the sun reached
= the winter solstice || at the full moon of Magha, (it) the year was
considered to be at its end at the full-moon at the star group
P. Phalgunt,{ (iii) the Krttikas (Pleiades group) rose exactly at
® With the procession of the equinoxes and solstices, the same month of Maghs
eame to be reckoned from the naw-moon preceding the full-moon at the Magbas till
the following new-moon. Later on due to the same cause the month of Mighs was
taken to ond with the full moon at the Magha&s. These two ways have survived up
to now through the adoption of the sidoreal year in place of the contemplated tropical
year of the Vedic and later Vedic times.
¢ aren aT 8 Walem AT SaaS ATT. INO
Satopatha Bradhmags, It Kaéods, 2 P., I Br. 27.
Ae 1 Ure ata: | Hi BT. % % % & @!
1s . Satapatha Br., It Kanda, 1 P., 6 Br., 9.
1 = ii gg BASANITES AA | Se
+a Kaugitaki Brahmape, XIX, 3.
>i a : qT qa a ary Seqrcet ay TTA dard? qaant FE TI
Kaugitaki Brahmans, V. 1.
hy = ae Cf. also Satapatha Brahman, VI Kinds, 2 Adbyay™, 2 Br, 18 and also Tasttirsys
a Oh apeaga 1, 1,2, 8.
Ci a 2 ea a

Exxii _ SURYA SIDDHANTA :
the east point* and that (ic) the spring t set in one
day after the new moon of Caitra. From all of which we gather
that the summer solstitial colure of the earliest Brihmana period |
passed very nearly through the star 6 Leonis and that the date
when this was the case, was 3100 B.C.¢ The vethal
equinoctial colure passed through the star Rohini or Aldebaran. In
the later Vedic times the sun’s turning north very probably took
place a fortnight earlier. The Satapatha Brahmana says that
‘“ some want to have a few nights more ; if they want some more
then they should begin the sacrifices on the night on which the
moon becomes first visible before the full moon at the Phalgunis.""§ These sacrifies were begun as soon as the sun turned
north. It shows that the solstices had preceded by about 15° and
that the date when this took place was 2000 B.C. The earliest
Brahmana period may be called the Rohini-Phalguni period.
Even at this time the five early luni-solar cycle was knownill
The calendar was luni-solar in character. The chief signals
for the beginning and the end of the year were the full-moon at
the U. Phalguni and that at the P. Phalguni respectively ; from
which the intercalary months were detected.
Then we have the record of a Krttika-Maghd period, 1.€.,
when the full-moons at the Pleiades and the Regulus were
regarded auspicious times for the baths at holy places. The
surmmer solstitial colure passed through the star Regulus and
the vernal equinoctial colure passed through the stur group
Pleiades. It can be shewn that this was the case at the time
of the Mahabharata heroes, the Pin /avas, who are also mentioned
inthe Aitareya and the Satapatha Brahmanas.** Time of this
* ge © 3 Bre fean 4 ers—Salopotha Brahmana, IT Baggs, Ch, 1, Br. 2, 3.
$ @aqrerareta care cufter: eicarma we wafa— |
t P.O. Sengupta, Age of the Brahmapas, in the Indian Historical Quarterly,
§ Satapetha Brahmanga, II Kanda, Ch. 6, 4 Br., 11.
{| weedeat wt care sf) | Tasttirive Brahmana, 2, 7, 11.
q MBhb., Santi, Ch. 162, 17-18; Anuédsana, Ch. 25, 36 and 46; also Anufdsona,
* Aitereya Brahmoga, IV, §, 21; Satepatha Bréhmags, XUL Kagda, V, 4,2,

ed geste ; INTRODUCTION xxxiii
¥ _ determination of the equinoxes and solstices was about 2450 B. C.
ee ae knowledge of astronomy only progressed up to this tbat in
Ee ewery five years there were two intercalary months. The months
a iy were counted by nights, and perhaps not by tithis as we know
-—s them to be now. The nights were named by the stars to which
_ _-——s the moon was in conjunction ; thus ‘‘I went out with the eo
pea _ at the Pusya and have returned with the moon at the Sravana.’
~~ We have no definite record whether the ecliptic was divided
it into: 27 equal parts, or into unequal parts as we find mention of
. — in the Brahmasphuta Siddhanta, XIV, 47-52.
a We next have a record that the sun turned south at the
nee x beginning of the naksatra Magha.+ The date of this on the basis
Ss of the Pafica Siddhdintika nakgatra division the oldest at present
known is about 1880 B.C. We do not know of any details of
the development of astronomical knowledge in India at this point.
i) Then as we come to thetime of Jyotigavedianga we meet
- with a statement that the sun turned south at the middle of the
oe nakeatra Aélesd. If we accept the same Pdfica Siddhantikd nakgatra
division, the time of this becomes about 1400 B.C.} The progress
of the knowledge of astronomy was up to this that—
In a period of five yearly luni-solar cycle,
Sa _ there were (i) 1,830 civil days,
a (it) 62 synodic months
» geet Gi) 380 omitted tithis.
=i "We notice the adoption of the new chronometrical unit the
7 _ MBh., ‘Salys, Ch. 34, 3.
oi
a a. ‘The hall (year) commencing with the asteriam Magha and ending with the
ait the ‘Sravigtbi belongs to Agni, while the sun performs his southern journey
ae Cowell). ‘Maitri Upanigad Prapa, 6
= ae es Archdeacon Pratt ‘na ipiaintetahe by taking the
5 eS 9° Behind the star Regulus; the beginning of Magha is
i i . Siddnantiba at 6° behind the same star. His date 1151 B. C., must therefore
he ve eke by ba 216 years; the corrected date would be about 1100 B.C.
nis F ositic of the solstices did not belong to the Pindsva time, as taken by all
ers from Sir Wom. Jones, Colebrooke, Davis to the time of Pratt.
the common ancestor of the
f wrong identification by
odia, Calcutta Univerae
beginning of the Magh4 at
placed according to the
ome r -Paridgara was not the father of Vyise
one papa the Kauravns. Here we have an error o
nila: rity of names, cf. Dr. Pradhan's chronology of Ancient I

xxxiv SURYA SIDDHANTA
tithi, i.e.,in which the moon gains 12° of longitude over the
sun. From this time the lunar months very probably began to
‘be reckoned from a new moon to the next new moon.
This crude astronomy continued till the time of the present
redaction of the Mahabharata or the Sravanddi- Kala, i.e., the
time when the winter solstitial colure passed through the naksatra
Sravana." The nine planets, viz., ‘sun, moon, Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and the moon’s nodes, had been already
discovered.t The signs of the zodiac were recognised to be
12 in number but they are not named in it. (MBhb., Adi, Ch. 3.)
They were probably taken as parts of the ecliptic traversed by
the sun in one month.
The knowledge of astronomy did not progress any further
also at the time of Kautilya (300 B.C.), who in his Arthasdstra,
gives the same account of the knowledge of astronomy.
At this time perhaps the only addition was the so-called
Grahacadras or courses of the star planets discovered. (ArthaSGstra, Ch. 41, mentions the cdéras of Venus and probably of
Jupiter also.)
Then came the time of the Sirya Prajfiapti or the Abhijitddi
Kala, i.e., when the full-moon at the naksatra Abhijit, marked
the summer solstice. The time for this was about 200 B.C.—
the knowledge of astronomy was at the same state, excepting
perhaps a theory of a flatearth, with its mountains, two suns
and two moons, causing days and nights.
The same state of the knowledge of astronomy continued in
India even up to 80 A. D., the date from which the calculation
of the Paitadmaha Siddhanta as known to Varaiha starts.> The
signs of the zodiac were perhaps not yet called by the names,
* Mahabharata, Anusasona, Chapter 44.
4 Aa to the discovery of Jupiter we have in the Taittiriya Brihmana, G,2y 1%
evafe: wae saat: 0 fel wewafirdeqa oor when “‘Jupiter was first born
he dofeated the mnakgatra Pugyi by his brilliance." The star group Pugy®
(3, acy cancri) has no bright stars in it and the planct Jupiter was detected when
it came near to this ster group. | :
+ Pafca Siddhaintiké, xii, 1-2.

INTRODUCTION ae
Mesa, Vrsa, &c.* A peculiar fe ature of the knowledge of astronomy of this period was the idea that the moon was more distant
than the sun,t which is also noticeable in the Purinas.
Thus from 100 to 400 A.D. we have a great gap of three
hundred years in which astronomical knowledge from Babylonia
and Greece came to India. The oldest Sirya Siddhanta was
transmitted to this country during this period and its astronomy
was most probably of a little more improved type than that of the
Vasigtha Siddhanta of the Pafica Siddhantikad (P. C. Sengupta,
Aryabhata, Cal. Univ. Journal of Letters, Vol. XVIII,
We accordingly conclade that the earliest date of the Sirya
Siddhdnta, cannot be pushed up much higher than 400 A.D.,
‘ while 499 A.D. was the date of our most famous astronomer
Aryabhata I.
Opinions as to its Date and Authorship.
(() Nityainanda, the author of the Siddhantaraja.
In his commentary on the Pafica Siddhantika Mm. Sudhakara
Dyivedi bas said that the date of composition of the Si#rya
_Siddhanta was stated by Nityananda to have been the Kalt era
| 3,600 years elapsed §=421 of Sakaelapsed = 499 A.D., the time
of Aryabhata I. What were his reasons underlying his statement
| ms ait are not stated. One reason perhaps was this :—
s Sie - | That according to the modern Sarya Siddhanta, the total preceskena sion from the beginning of Aries at this date = 0. The process is
aaee nA *In the ‘Yajuga Jyotisa there is @ stanza
‘the zodiac beginning with Mina or Pisces, but is regarded a3 an i
by 3 mo. Sudhikara Dvivedi, It is so unnumbered stanza put between 4 and 5
Gudtakara’s edition- For a history of the formation and naming the signs
. £0 Babylonian
which speaks of the signs of
nterpolation
4 ots
the zodiac ef. Encyclopaedia ‘Britannica, History of Astronomy,
"ar ee ia combated by Brahmagupta in the Brdhmasphufa Siddhanta,
a ee higher up thao the sun, how could the phases of the moon be
pon were ted tothe earth would always be
frames faearranactt B: qefireesataa wna

SURYA SIDDHANTA
briefly shown below :
Total number of years elapsed since
‘creation * till the end of the last
Krta Yuga cab aww = 195,37,20,000
No. of years of the Trefa and Dvdpara ages sen sive = 21,60,000
=F * ,, Kali age elapsed... = 8,600
Total = 195,58,83,600 years.
Now the number of alleged “‘ oscillations °’
432,000 years
of the equinoxes in
. the total number of oscillations done in 1,955,883,600 years
Now balf an oscillation or a revolution gives no arc for
finding the ‘ sine’ ; hence at 499 A. D,, according to the rule of
the modern book the ayandméa or the total precession = 0.
If we accept the explanation of the commentator, the ‘ circle of
constellations’ was about to swing eastward at 499 A.D, as
the first oscillation according to him began in the weatward
direction. The rule itself is awkward. Moreover what is taken
to mean 600, may, from a strict grammatical point of view, mean
really 30 as was understood by Bhiskara Lic
The rules for finding the total ayandmhéa, is regarded as an
interpolation in the modern Sirya Siddhdnta by many critics.
Burgess himself (p. 119) says, ‘‘ There seems, accordingly,
sufficient ground for suspecting that in the Sirya Siddhanta, as
originally constituted, mo account was taken of the precession ;
that its recognition is a later interpolation."’ We do not find any—
¢ Bhiskara, Gola, Golabandhadhikara, 17, ayaa; Sa aver Kye

INTRODUCTION xxxvii
rule for calculating the precessional change in Aryabhatiya, the
Brahmasphuta Siddhanta (628 A.D.), the Sigyadhivrddhida (748
A. D.). These rules are undoubtedly of later origin. The date,
499 A. D. or 421 Saka year, is the date of the Hindu scientific
astronomy from which really all calculations start according to
the Aryabhatiya and the modern S#rya Siddhanta.* The position, however, is that the modern Sarya Siddhdnta bears unmistakable signs of its indebtedness to Aryabhata I and Brahmagupta, as we have already pointed out. The modern book cani, not be taken to have been composed at 499 A. D., nor can we
subscribe to the view of Muniévara (1646 A.D.) that its author
was Aryabhata I himself. There are indeed similarities between
the Aryabhatiya and the modern Sirya Siddhanta, but there are
dissimilarities too ; here is an example:
- The rule in the modern Sarya Siddhadnta for finding the ‘sine’
of the zenith distance of the nonagesimal is evidently taken from
the Aryabhatiya.
Sirya Siddhanta, Aryabhatiya,
Multiply the ‘ meridian sine * What is obtained by multi_ by the ‘Orient sine’ and divide plying the ‘meridian sine" by
— by the radius: square the result, | the ° orient sine" and dividing
a fir a} and subtract jt from the square by the radius—the square root
Ta of the ‘ meridian sine” : the | of the difference of the square
‘square root of the remainder jg | of that and the square of the
oft the ‘sine’ of the ecliptic zenith ‘ meridian sine * is the ‘sine’ of
Be.) distance (drkkgepa). the observer's ecliptic zenith
— distance (drkkgepa).
a This rule is only approximate as Burgess observes, ** the value,
et then, of the ‘ sine’ of the ecliptic zenith distance (drkkgepa) as
iG... ‘determined by this process is always less than the truth.”’
_-~—« hee: aim here is to find the ‘sine’ of the zenith distance of
. the nonagesimal, asa leading step to find expressions for the
A ae Pa
pala be eg as) «8 iv
< = © he Jatakarnaca rule for the total shifting of equinoxes atart from 421 A. D.;
= ef. BP. C. Sengupta, Introduction tothe Khandekhfidyaka, p. xix ; the Aryabhatiya,
Kalakriya, 10; also: P,. ©. Sengupta, Aryabhata, the Father of Indian Epicyclic
As FONOID) » pp. 35-86.
bad

Xxxviii SURYA SIDDHANTA
parallaxes in latitude and longitude of the sun and the moon at
the time of solar eclipses. Aryabhata I's rules may be expressed
symbolically thus :—
Parallax in latitude = sin-"($ x drkkgepa )*
Parallax in longitude=sin-1( 4 / R2sin?Z — (drkkgepa)? ), j
where 2 is the radius of the earth, d the distance of the planet from
the earth and Z the zenith distance of the planct ; the assumption is
that the celestial latitude of the moon is also = z.
The above rules of Aryabhata I, are found in the Pafica Siddhantika.
They are referred to as such by Brahmagupta in Chapter xi, 23-25, and
found fault with as ‘* tedius operations.’"!
Here
— rT OOD ee 2
drkkgepa == / (Meridian ‘ Sine’)? — ; Orient Sine x Merid.‘Si _ }
Rk
according to Aryabhata J.
The mistake in the rule for finding the drkksepa was perhaps first
pointed out by Prthoidaka in his commentary on the Braihmasphuta Studh nta, xi, 27.
Prthidaka takes a station on the arctic circle where as
soon as the first point of Aries is on the horizon, the ecliptic coincides with the horizon. Now if the sun’s longitude be 90°, the
sun is at the north point at that time, thus,
The ‘ sine * of his amplitude or the ‘ orient sine" = R, the
radius ;
The so-called ‘‘ meridian ‘ sine * *’ is also equal to KR, as the
culminating point of the ecliptic is the south point.
So, Orient Sine x Meridian Sine _RxR _ R
Wad Sac. oa Te ‘
* Pafica Siddhantika, ix, 24-25.
: nak ae gia 8s aes alg ie
i,

ie | INTRODUCTION exuie
= wa (Merid-Sine)? —(Orient Sine x Mer. Sine)?
Oe Ae
es me taf Te ee ne. 0.
6 Hence the parallax in latitude which is proportional to drkkgepa,
In this case the parallax in latitude has evidently maximum
Maher viz., the horizontal parallax. Aryabhata’s rule fails hope_ lessly in this case.
a Again under the same conditions, the sun’s zenith distance
~~ 4 = 90°, _ hence the ‘ sine ’ of the sun’s zenith distance=R.
oes Hence the parallax in longitude P
am = ain Nees JR? sin Z— (drkkegepe)* )
wath ( ¢ yRI=O Jasin (>*R)
a Horizontal parallax.
um?
om i!
Py But here the parallax in ion gies is clearly=0, and AryaMh chat here also,
; ect i in ee 3 rules are those for ee the
‘ “= nied the wrong rul le of ey ati I up to this point ; but han
e u bse quently followed Brabmagupta for finding the parallaxes in
latitude.
‘ heey modern Surya Siddhanta for parallactic shift-
<i % a ineeenk of conjunction is expressed as
ee t ad
is yarns « R sin pane He C08 28 ghatikas,
‘ hoa % a foe
ie (F be een = Sy La F>
ae Wes) o ‘aes Siddhanta, IV, 7-8,
, re 1st itanc tee ahs san radidngtinde. N for the longitude of
he nonas jagesin na a the wenith: distance of the nonagesimal, and

Brahmagupta’s rule is — | . .
=— St ghatika,*
4 R cos Z!
which is practically the same in form as that of the modern
Sirya Siddhanta.
Again the rule in the modern Sarya Siddhdnta for finding the
parallax in latitude
_ _(n’—n) x drkksepa
STARE (V, 10).
According to the Brihmasphuta Siddhdnta (V, 24, also xi,
(n'—n) Resin 2’
The same = IsxR
Here n’ and n are the apparent daily motions of the moon
and the sun, Z%’ the zenith distance of the nonagesimal; drikksepa
and the ‘ sine’ of the zenith distance of the nonagesimal are
taken as identical. Here the modern S#rya Siddhanta has given
up the rules of Aryabhata I, which bring in the radius of the
earth and the distance of the planet in the equations, and
calculating the parallaxes in longitude and latitude separately for
the sun and the moon, and which have been branded by Brahmagupta as tedious.
Hence the opinion of Nityinanda that the modern Siirya
Siddhanta was composed at 3,600 of the Kali years elapsed and
that of Muniévara that it was written by Aryabhata I himself
are not tenable. ,
(ij) Then again Albérini has said in his Indika that the
Sarya Siddhanta was composed by Létadeva.t We now know
that Lata, the expounder of the Romaka and the Paulisa
Siddhantas according to Varaibamihira, was 4 direct pupil of
* Rrahmasphuta Siddhanta, v, 4-5. |
} AlberGni’s India, Translation by Sachau, Vol, T, p. 153.
SURYA SIDDHANTA ;

INTRODUCTION xii
2 tae EY ibhata I * and got the appellation of wafeurre, the teacher.
of alll the systems of Siddhdntas. If he did really compose
_ the Sérya Siddhanta the date of the work should have been 427
of the Saka era and not the end of the last Krta yuga.
Farther Lata’s ahargapa starts froma sunset at Yavanapura, +
y
- > ig while Aryabhata’s starts either from the midnight or the sunrise
according to his two systems of astronomy.¢ If Lata had a
_ ‘midnight’ system as well, we would have got a mention of it
from WarShamibira. Of course both the Sirya Siddhantas, of
_-Varaba and the modern, make their ahargana start from the
midnight at Laika or Ujjayini.
: _ Hence all these speculations as to the date and the authorship
ofthe Sirya Siddhanta at any of its stages of growth are not acceptable. Suffice it to say that it has had a composite growth, the
earliest date as we worked out from the star table being 400 A.D.,
and that there is no room left by which its date can be pushed
up higher. It took its present form decidedly after the time of
_Brahmagupta. The earliest person by whom its constants and
_ methods were changed was no doubt Varabamihira, the changes
ra, effected were certainly taken from Aryabhata I's drdhardtrika or
an 7 the ‘ midnight’ system. The new constants, the kgepakas and
. the: methods in Varaha’s revision or redaction, all corroborate
Sees oss copalnsion. § ~
MR on
he Further Indebtedness of the Modern Sirya Siddhanta to
| i | bby Brahmagupta.
a> Tae her instances where the modern book borrows from Brahma-
. a , found; but one of the most important is the
tod ri G) finding the sun's altitude when on the 8S.E.,
“Ss Ww. verticals, ofz., the konasamku.
f
“i <a
el
. (tae
= #oF
ane
ta,
=a
. “fi
Soria

oes Brahmagupta's Rule.
‘‘ Half the square of the
radius diminished by the square
of the ‘sine’ of the amplitude
(Agra), multiplied by the square
of 12 is called the ddya and the
anya is the product of agri, 12
and the equinoctial shadow
when both are divided by the
square of the equinoctial
shadows to which 72 have been
added. ‘Che square root of the
a@dya to which the square of the
anya has been added, increased
or decreased by the anya, accord- |
ing as the sun is in the northern
or southern hemisphere, is the
‘sine’ of the sun's altitude in
the S.E. and 8.W.. verticals.
When the sun is in the northern
hemisphere the anya diminished and increased by the square
root are respectively the ‘ sine ’
of the sun's altitude in the
N.E. and the 8.E. verticals.
This will not be true if the sun
goes south of the prime vertical (?). The length of the
SURYA SIDDHANTA
Rule of the Surya Siddhanta. —
‘Tf from half the square of
radius the square of the sine of
amplitude (agrajyd) be subtracted, and the remainder multiplied by twelve and again multiplied by twelve, and then
further divided by the square
of the square of the equinoctial
shadow increased by half the
square of the gnomon (i.e., 72)—
The result obtained by the wise
is called the.‘ surd’ (karani);
this let the wise man set down
a
in two places.
Then multiply
the equinoctial
shadow by
| twelve and again by the ‘ sine’
shadow and the time may be)
found as before.’"’
Braihmasphuta Siddhdanta,
of the amplitude and divide as
before: the result is styled the
‘fruit’ (phala). Add its
square to the ‘ surd* and take
the square root of their sum ;
this diminished and increased
by the fruit for the southern
and northern hemispheres is
the ‘ sine ' of altitude (Saraku)
of the southern intermediate
directions; and equally, whether
the sun's revolution takes place
to the south or to the north of
the gnomon (Samaku)—Only, in
the latter case, the ‘ sine ’ of
the altitude is that of the
northern intermediate stations."’
Strya Siddhanta, iii, 28-32,

ale
i INTRODUCTION xliii
he ae
a Tf A stands for agr# or the ‘sine’ of the amplitude, P for
___ the equinoctial shadow, R the radius, then
“s Brahmagupta’s ddya= 55575 = Karani of the 8.8.
_ 12xAxP _
3 anyo= — a7 phala of the 5.5.
- ‘ine’ of the sun’s altitude .
sie R2
= -+anya + /(anya)*?+adya of Brahmagupta
. ie : = +phala+ /(phala)?+Karani of the Surya Siddhanta.
Here by this insertion of Brahmagupta’s rule in the modern
Sarya Siddhanta, the renowned astronomer and mathematician
bee been. most unfairly deprived of his due credit.
f oy
ot <
, | We shall not any further study the similarity between the
‘ Te Siticssoact Siddhanta and the modern Sarya Stddhdnta; as
sas we believe that we have established our view as to the nature of
ae the modern Sairya Siddhanta, that its earliest date is 400 A.D.,
= <8 ) Varaha was a most important innovator to it at the middle of
atee.t Beh sixth century ; ‘that its last redaction took place after the
- time ¢ of Brahmagupta, and that Bentley’s finding of this date, viz
A.D. i is quite reasonable.
Wes NPV)
oat x33 a: Other | Extant Siddhantas called Revelations.
"My A) sta SI
= + aay . bs fia, +
A aie 1eF
’ - Pa _“ ao we ae td
‘ aN oy = ce! ” viaheaig
ao wet = _ alee ' 1
ry : Sy #4 7 * ™ +. es 'ere mic
Sele. 2 Ag —_— = yc ot

~ xliv SURYA SIDDHANTA
“more or less of a fragmentary character and hence incomplete.
Some of these have been published by Mm. Vindhyeévari Prasada
Dvivedi of Benares. These are the Soma Siddhdnta, the
Brahma Siddhanta of the Sdkalya Samhita, Paitdimaha
Siddhinta of the Visnudharmottara Pnrdna, the Vrddha Vasistha
Siddhanta, etc. The authors of these books bave not only
done injustice to our great astronomers Aryabhata I and his
pupils, Varghamihira, Brahmagupta, etc., but to some extent
to themselves as well by hiding their own names and times.
Weare not enabled even to honour them where honour is
their due. If we examine the Pait@maha Siddhanta of the
Visnudharmottara Purdna, in the way in which we have
examined the S. Siddhanta, we readily come to the conclusion
that it represents almost a wholesale purloining of the important
portions of the Brahmasphuta Siddhanta of Brahmagupta, and
that this nefarious act was done by a person who had absolutely
no pretension to originality and whose style of Sanskrit appears
Indicrous. A similar examination of the Vrddha Vasigtha
Siddhanta would lead us to the conclusion that it was written by
some unknown person after the time of Bhaskara II.
The Originality of Hindu Astronomy.
The date of the scientific Hindu astronomy is indeed 421
years elapsed of the Saka era, or 499 A.D., the time of Aryabhata
I, but we can show it is not a wholesale borrowing either from
the Babylonian or the Greek science.
First of all in planetary theory the term Sighra or the
‘apex of quick motion’ has not the same meaning 4s ‘conjunction’ te which it has been identified. Then the term mandocca,
the point or ‘apex of slowest motion’ does not mean a point
furthest from the earth as ‘apogee’ does, though ucca means
‘a high place. Thus the meanings of the terms ‘ Sighrocca’
and ‘mandocca,’ should show some originality of idea of the
Hindu astronomers. We are not urging that the Hindu
Epicyclic Astronomy as it was developed by Aryabbata I and his ;

INTRODUCTION a
pupils was quite uninfluenced by Babylonian and Greek sciences
as they came to India. The chief difficulty in finding how
far the Hindu astronomers were original as regards planetary
theory, appears unsurmountable. They were Siirakdras, or
aphorism-givers who have only stated their results but not the
methods by which they obtained them. These methods were at
- first transmitted through generations of Gurus or teachers, and
in the long course of ages they were all lost. Aryabhata I has
condescended to give only one stanza as regards his astronomical
‘methods, viz.,
fafacfadiare fers Caredtrey warfare: |
afaarcrreatsy waa are: SS wes Breit
‘The day-maker has been determined from the conjunction of
the earth (or the horizon) and the sun ; and the moon from her
conjunctions with the sun. In the same way the ‘star planets’
have been determined from their conjunctions witb the
moon.”’
Kélakriya, 48.
he stanza has been considered in detail by me in the
<t Bulletin of the Calcutta Mathematical Society, Vol. All, No. 3,
rat where it bas been shown that by these methods the sidereal
; periods of Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, and the synodic month
: and hence the sidereal months may be determined. Also the
geocentric sidereal periods of Mercury and Venus may be found
to be the same as the sidereal period of the sun.
Py ee ‘No otber Hindu astronomer bas left us anything of their astro-
~ nomical methods. Im 1150 A.D, Bhiaskara II tried to explain
how the number of sidereal revolutions of ‘planets’ could be
verified,” but his expositions are not satisfactory, and in places
“faulty. We cannot for want of space examine them here ;
this examination can be taken up in a separate thesis. We,
cc ingly, must confine ourselves to a comparative presentation
r of the Hindu and Greek astronomical constants.
* Grahaganita, Bhaganddhyaya, Comm. on I, 5.

, eh ‘get our
‘od
R
‘yuopuedepar yng ‘oyna
noera] [[Y senyva WepTy
*@]0IN20" @20NI ONY wA yeeI4)
— @NYEA “YH at 20129 “xePY
) dete
a eeoj Sasogs = qyaom
a pont pyoipoyyepuoyy
a T ‘eo =
—@xom woenbe = npory
See
. “on am — w0mL anyea NPT
| = (i) ava ed 96 «« Karapo}
OS od
a ra eid t.. * op aTH
=e ‘anak
i ns my yn -peuorsse0e2 7
AVAT
wOFLT
wh 86
uFE89
of
“ep
ia
“ep
“hey
wf LAT
I1¥6L- aor
SEINE. 68
“op
AG beb
oll
GLE Fg. 998
"ep
‘DpMoUPHS
ojnydsomypig
vA
Cay Gof)
‘pynippyyopanyy
TI96h2. F6L9
6LOLB8-TSBE
“ep
“ap
HG 88
a'y 66h)
BL
"Pp
‘pisjoygo4sy
Pity 7.5 -
ai wis a
‘awe SUDO saflode #,00g JO na a),
POGEIIG- 498
Be
(awe)
anye A APPON

yo (awa tod ac oe met | at | ort aT
one os Fae bo89T OUT 091 ot
comerar | ge | me | oe |
S)
ae
S moos | cme | conan | ermeu
. snargeqo JO S011 yeaoannd BOFE-61L BeC6-6LL B1C6-6LL TIC6-6LL
Se me mowegre | coce-ren | euog.geg || (SUeeeet | SU0E, G89
cop “ae 7 snawamerty | 9918.9Tt HOL8-9T1 9818-911 1918-411
ke “ap 4p
be oe ijt) 2
| wae

oT IT % ,5 vl 6% ST waa A
BY.8L OL OL 18% 89 “s sir re:
x : 4 ‘ ee the amidag
‘KmOuoIWee NPAT jo soup : £06 90 Toe
‘wedepar ogy soge sxomazgtg SF .0F 08 09 «=|: $.99 0 FOF = "s a
to
Be
a)
ah .
ae)
98.06 sa Sroo78yy
SURYA SIDDHANTA
S
jo (avak tad 9) ons a0 08. 9% 98.88 OW OF AFL ay
‘emnad ogy 4q dn apem oq ie sender
‘OOOT|e8 OPul jo #uUIpT és
“Opty ogy mogs somfy deaqy, M881 WT. 801 001 001 56.001 ES
toe — , ewt* ) "a ¥ O08 10} : SOPON jo sopny 30%]
eee | S| ees! rere )
| ("aveqy)
« "ave
5 ee AmayMd sinydereiynog ‘ayetpoyyopiony | “osieygoMay onje S2apOHy ese.
7 a ee ee eee

INTRODUCTION

SURYA SIDDHANTA ding
It will appear from the above presentation that the Hindu
values of the astronomical constants are alinost all different from.
their Greek values. Hence both the systems must be independent of each other. There is no doubt that Greek astronomy
had come to India before the time of Aryabhata _ I and Varaha
has given us a summary in his Pafica Siddhantika, of what was
known by the name of the Romaka Siddha@nta, but we do not
find any thing of the epicyclic theory init. A verbal transmission of the idea of that theory together with that of a few,
astronomical terms with it from a foreign country, was quite
possible. It must be said to the credit of Hindu astronomers
that they determined all the constants anew. Even in lunar
theory, Manjula (932 A.D.) discovered the second inequality, and
Bhiskara II (1150 A.D.) discovered the third inequality, viz.,
‘ variation.” * The Hindu form of-the ‘ evection equation * is
much better than that of Ptolemy, and stands on a par with
that of Copernicus ’t It is from some imperfections also that this,
independence may be established ; for instance, the early Hindu
astronomers up to the tenth century A.D., recognised only.
one part of the equation of time, viz., that due to the unequal
motion of the sun along the ecliptic, when in 1028 A. D. Sripati
first discovered the part of it due to the obliquity of the
ecliptic. In Greek astronomy both the parts were detected by
Ptolemy. Farther in my paper on‘ Greek and Hindu Methods
in Spherical Astronomy’§ I have established that the Hindu!
astronomers were in no way indebted to the Greeks in this part;
of the subject ; the methods of the former were indeed of the,
most elementary character, while that of Ptolemy was much advanced and more elegant; yet the Hindu astronomers could solve
some problems where Ptolemy -failed,. viz., to find the time by
* P, C. Sengupta, Appendix to the Khandahkhddyaka. — | |
| Godfray's Lunar Theory, Historical appendix. ;
Tt Introduction to the Siddhinta Sekhera edited by Pt, | Baboa Midra, Catcut
University Press. ~
§ P. C. Senguptsa, Greek and Hinda Methods in ‘Spherical Astronomy, Calcutta
University Journal of the Department of Letters, Vol. XXI, also “Appenpix TI to the
Khondakhddyaka.
we)

translated by the word ‘ con)
INTRODUCTION li
altitude and to find the altitude from the sun's azimuth. For
this the reader is referred to my paper mentioned above.
We thus come to the conclusion that although the scientific
Hindu astronomy is dated much later than the time of Ptolemy,
barring the mere idea of an épicyclic theory from outside, its
_ constants and methods are all original. Even 4s to the idea, the
term Sighra (the apex of quick motion) which has been wrongly
unction,’ shows that the Hindu angle
of vision was quite different from the Greek. while the idea
of the gods of * Manda" and Sighra, presente a phase of
growth of the science before the epicyclic theory came into being,
be the idea Hindu or Babylonian.
In discussing the originality of Hindu astronomy we have
pirposaly avoided the Sarya Siddhanta, because no definite date
can be assigned to the work, its latest development taking place
about 1100 A.D. Yet the modern Sarya Siddhanta is a complete
book on Hindu astronomy and at the same time an attractive
book too. No student of Hindu astronomy would be deemed
well equipped for research without thoroughly studying it and
Burgess's translation, indeed, gives a very clear and complete
exposition and discussion of every rule that it contains together
_.- vith illustrations also. Besides his views about the originality
of Hinda astronomy are the sanest and still substantially correct.”
This translation is indispensable to any researcher also for the
wealth of references contained in it. It 18 indeed a real monument to his own memory left by the late Reverend E. Bargess
himself.
CALCUTTA. Pp. C. Sencurta.
January 16, 1935.

ae
z a2 r
a ae
THE LIFE OF REV. E. BURGESS.
Ebenezer Burgess was born at Grafton, Vermont, U. S. A., om June 25,
in the year 1805. He graduated from Ambherst College in 1831 and was
a Tutor in the same College from 1888 to 1885. He then entered Andover
Theological Seminary from which he graduated in 1887. After another
year spent in advanced study at Andover, and after teaching Hebrew and
Greek for sometime at Union Theological Seminary in New York City,
he was ordained to the ministry.
In the year 1839 Burgess catne to India as a Missionary to the
Marathas. He lived in Bombay Presidency for fifteen years; first at
Ahmednagar until 1851, and then at Satara. He returned to the United
States in 1854. From 1857 to 1859 he acted as Pastor at Centreville, Mass.,
from 1861 to 1863 at Lanesville and from 1864 to 1867 at South Franklin.
He was engaged in lecturing and literary work until his death. He died in
Newton Centre, Mass., on January 1, 1870.
The Translation of Sirya Siddhanta was a monumental work of Rey.
E. Burgess. He had written an elaborate essay on the history of astronomy ationg the Hindus and had nearly completed a treatise on the antiquity of man, but both of the above works remained unpublished.

Hate, *
Tee, » a
Tue - ®
er ra
# ot palesere OF
a , z os Bee e
a Sine Se =
INTRODUCTORY NOTE.
oad Soon after my entrance upon the missionary field, in the Maratha
country of western India, in the year 1839, my attention was directed to
the preparation, in the Marathi language, of an astronomical text-book for
_ sehe ols. I was thus led to a study of the Hindu science of astronomy, 7s
bp e hibited in the native text-books, and to an examination of what had been
Bevritten respecting it by European scholars. I at once found myself, on
the one hand, highly interested by the subject itself, and, on the other,
somewhat embarrassed for want of a satisfactory introduction to it. 4
‘aes comprehensive exhibition of the Hindu system had nowhere been made.
‘The Astronomie Indienne of Bailly, the firat extended work upon its subject,
i 1 long been acknowledged to be founded upon insufficient data, to
contain a greatly exaggerated estimate of the antiquity and value of the
| _ Hindu astronomy, and to have been written for the purpose of supporting
be an untenable theory. The articles in the Asiatic Researches, by Davis,
which were the first, as they still remain the most
te i sCo sbrooke, and Bentley,
--—s ¢mportant, sources of knowledge respecting the matters with which they
‘ V Vee
ee dea _ relate only to particular points in the system, of especial prominence
4 anc ‘interest. Bentley's volume on Hindu astronomy is mainly occupied
‘with an endeavour to ascertain the age of the principal astronomical treatises,
‘and the epochs of astronomical discovery and progress, and is, moreover,
even in these respects, an exceedingly unsafe guide, The treatment of the
“eubiect by Delambre, in his History of Ancient Astronomy, being founded
~ only upon Bailly and the earliest of the essays in the Asiatic Researches,
partakes, of course, of the incompleteness of his authorities. Works of
= ue have been published in India also, into which more or less of eats
‘astronomy enters, as Warren’s Kala Sankalita, Jervis’s Weights, Measures
SW ecina of India, Hoisington’s Oriental Astronomer, and the like; but
ee. td, give, for the most part, hardly more than the practical
TOK ae employed in parts of the system, and they are, like many of the
aoe ies already mentioned, only with difficulty accessible. In ase
ag nothing in existence which showed the world how much an
er
aS
oom
ote
riba
Loe
1 Sime ’
oe
- py.
oa =
es ~
aad le
Say oe Hindus know of astronomy, 4s also their mode of presenting
aoe. F its totality, the intermixture in their science of old ideas
e are — i wtth astrology, of observation and mathematical
Ne ;orTen
= Maye 9 } f
a
ees
af

SURYA SIDDHANTA -
deduction with arbitrary theory, mythology, cosmogony, and pure imagination. It seemed to me that nothing would so well supply the deficiency
as the translation and detailed explication of a complete treatise of Hindu
astronomy: and this work I accordingly undertook to execute.
Among the different Siddhantas, or text-books of astronomy, existing
in India in the Sanskrit language, none appeared better suited to my
purpose than the Suarya-Siddhanta. That it is one of the most highly
esteemed, best known, and most frequently employed, of all, must be
evident to any one who has noticed how much oftener than any other it 1s
referred to as authority in the various papers on the Hindu astronomy.
In fact, the science as practised in modern India is in the greater part
founded upon its data and processes. In the lists of Siddhantas given by
native authorities it is almost invariably mentioned second, the BrahmaSiddhanta being placed first: the latter enjoys this pre-eminence, perhaps,
mainly on account of its name; it is, at any rate, comparatively rare and
little known. For completeness, simplicity, and conciseness combined,
the Sairya-Siddhanta is believed not to be surpassed by any other. It is
also more easily obtainable. In general, it is difficult, without official
influence or exorbitant pay, to gain possession of texts which are rare und
held in high esteem. During my stay in India, I was able to procure
copies of only three astronomical treatises besides the Sirya-Siddhanta;
the Cakalya -Sanhita of the Brahma-Siddhanta, the SiddhA&nta- Ciromani of
Bhaskara. and the Graha-Laghava, of which the two latter have also been
printed at Calcutta. Of the Sadrya-Siddhanta I obtained three copies, two
of them giving the text alone, and the third also the commentary entitled
Gidharthaprakicaka, by Rangan&tha, of which the date is unknown
me. The latter manuscript agrees in all respects with the edition of the
Sarya-Siddhanta, accompanied by the same commentary, of which the
ublication, in the series entitled Bibliotheca Indica, has been commenced
India by an American scholar, and a member of this Society, Prof. FitzEdward Hall of Benares: to this I have also had access, although not until
my work was nearly completed. :
‘ My first rough draft of the translation and notes was made while T
was still in India, with the aid of Brahmans who were familiar with the
Sanskrit and well versed in Hindu astronomical science. In a few points
Also I received help from the native Professor of Mathematics in thi
Sanskrit College at Pina, But notwithstanding this, there remained not
5. few obscure and difficult points, connected with the demonstration «and
application of the processes taught in the text. In the solution of these,
I have received very important assistance from the Committee of Publication:
6f the Society. They have also—the main sk of the work falling to
Prof. Whitney—enriched the notes with much additional matter of value,
My whole collected material, in fact, was placed in their hands for revision,
ansion, and reduction to the form best answering to the requirements

CENTRAL UIBRAR
INTRODUCTORY NOTE lv
of modern scholars, my own engrossing occupations, and distance from
the place of publication, as well as my confidence in their ability and
r¥ judgment, leading me to prefer to intrust this work to them rather than to
undertake its execution myself.
We have also to express our acknowledgments to Mr. Hubert A,
_ ___ Newton, Professor of Mathematics in Yale College, for valuable aid rendered
us in the more difficult demonstrations, and in the comparison of the Hindu
- and Greek astronomies, as well as for his constant advice and suggestions,
Ni which add not a little to the value of the work.
: The Sdrya-Siddhinta, like the larger portion of the Sanskrit literature.
es jis written in the verse commonly called the ¢loka, or in stanzas of two
ry lines, each line being composed of two halves, or pddas, of eight syllables
each. With its metrical form are connected one or two peculiarities which
‘ call for notice. In the first place, for the terms used there are often many
synonyms, which are employed according to the exigencies of the verse:
thus, the sun has twelve different names, Mars six, the divisions of time
two or three each, radius six or eight, and so on. Again, the method of
expressing numbers, large or small, is by naming the figures which compose
them, beginning with the last and going backward; using for each figure
not only its own proper name, but that of any object associated in the
- Hindu mind with the number it represents. Thus, the number 1,577,917,825
__—s Gi._: 87) is thus given: Vasu (a class of deities, eight in number) -two-eightmountain (the seven mythical chains of mountains) -form-figure (the nine
digits) _seven-mountain-lunar days (of which there are fifteen in the halimonth). Once more, the style of expression of the treatise 1s, im general,
ss excessively concise and elliptical, often to a degree that would make iis
PSincy meaning entirely unintelligible without a commentary, the exposition of 4
ss native teacher, or such a knowledge of the subject treated of as should
eee ae w what the text must be meant to say. Some striking instances are
i ed pointed out in the notes. This over-conciseness, however, is not wholly
due to the metrical form of the treatise: it is characteristic of much of
; : Hindu scientific literature, in its various branches; its text-books are
wont to be intended as only the text for written comment or oral explication
| , : rather than fully express, the meaning they contain. In our
we have not thought it worth while to indicate, by parentheses
be otherwise, the words and phrases introduced by us to make the meaning
of the text evident: such a course would occasion the reader much more
Te awies Bo » than satisfaction. Our endeavour is, in all cases, to hit the
true mean between unintelligibility and diffuseness, altering the phraseology
ees ation of the original only 50 far as is mecessary. In both the
4 the i adily in view the interests
ab aat PRS Al a
ae tion and the notes, moreover, we keep ste :
the two classes ses of readers for whose benefit the work is undertaken
eee eI eee ‘ . are those who are
+h oF ry wi n > 1 -e orientalists without being astronomers, and |
teanoamere without being orientalists. For the sake of the former, our
tn _
a J
ae

‘as 2 + liye
eee S: | 5 - e ob 2 ‘atte wa - 2 a ==? S
dvi ‘ na e ; “ : . a 8 D A oo 5 aes '’
ca . SURYA SIDDHANTA
explanations and demonstrations are made more elementary and full than
would be necessary, were we addressing mathematicians only: for the suke ;
of the latter, we, cast the whole into a form as occidental as may be, transJating every technical term which admits of translation: since to compel —
all those who may desire to inform themselves respecting the scientific ~
content of the Hindu astronomy to learn the Sanskrit technical languagé.
- would be highly unreasonable. To furnish no ground of complaint, however,
to those who are familiar with and attached to these terms, we insert them
liberally in the translation, in connection with their English equivalents.
The derivation and literal signification of the greater part of the technical
terms employed in the treatise are also given in the notes, since such an
explanation of the history of a term is often essential to its full comprehension, and throws valuable light upon the conceptions of those by whora
it was originally applied.
Wé adopt, as the text of our translation, the published edition of the
Siddhanta, referred to above, following its readings and its order of arrangement, wherever they differ, as they do in many places, from those of the
manuscripts without commentary in our possession. The discordances of
the two versions, when they are of sufficient consequence to be worth
notice, are mentioned in the notes.
As regards the transcription of Sanskrit words in Roman letters, we
need only specify that c represents the sound of the English ch in “’ church,”
Italian c before ¢ and i: that j is the English j: that ¢ is pronounced hke
the English sh, German sch, French ch, while sh is a sound nearly resembling it, but uttered with the tip of the tongue turned back into the top
of the mouth, as are the other lingual letters, t, d, nm: finally, that the =
Sanskrit 7 used as a vowel (which value it has also in some of the Slavonic
dialects) is written with a dot underneah, as r.
‘he demonstrations of principles and processes given by the native
commentary are made without the help of figurés. The figures which we
introduce are for the most part our own, although a few of them were
suggested by those of a set obtained in India, from native mathematicians.
For the discussion of such general questions relating to this Siddhanta =~
as its age, its authorship, the alterations which it may have undergone <n
before being brought into its present form, the stage which it represents =
in the progress of Hindu mathematical science, the extent and character
of the mathematical and astronomical knowledge displayed in it, and the
relation of the same to that of other ancient nations, especially of the
Greeks, the reader is referred to the notes upon the text. The form im
which our publication is made does not allow us to sum up here, in a preface,
the final results of our investigations into these and kindred topics. it
may perhaps be found advisable to present such a summary at the end cf .
the article, in connection with the additional notes and other matters to
be there given, in

SURYA-SIDDHANTA
CHAPTER I.
Or THE MEAN MOTIONS OF THE PLANETS.
ConTENTS -—-1, homage to the Deity; 2-9, revelation of the present treatise; 10-11, modes
of dividing time; 11-12, subdivisions of a day; 12-14, of a year; 14-17, of the Ages;
18-19, of an Zon; 20-21, of Brahma’s life; 21-23, part of it already elapsed; 24, time
occupied in the work of creation; 25-27, general account of the movements of the
planets; 25, subdivisions of the circle; 29-33, number of revolutions of the planets,
and of the moon's apsie and node, in an Age: $4.39, number of days and months,
of different kinds, in an Age; 40, in an Zon; 41-44, number of revolutions, in an
Zon, of the apsides and nodes of the planets; 45-47, time elapsed from the end of
‘creation to that of the Golden Age; 48-51, rule for the reduction to civil days of the
whole time since the creation; 51-52, method of finding the lords of the day, the
7 month, and the year; 53-54, rule for finding the mean place of a planet, and of its
apsis and node; 55, to find the current year of the cycle of Jupiter; 56, simplification
of the above calculations; 57-58, situation of the planets, and of the moon's apsis and
node, at tho end of the Golden Age; 59-60, dimensions of the earth; 60-61, correction,
for difference of longitude, of the mean place of a planet as found; 62, situation of
r his the principal meridian: 63-65, ascertainment of difference of longitude by difference
ss ' between observed and computed time of lunar eclipse; 66, difference of time owing
sto: difference of longitude; 67, to find the mean place of a planet for any required
; ne hour of the day; 68-70, inclination of the orbits of the planets.
- 1. To him whose shape is inconceivable and unmanifested, who is unaffected by the qualities, whose nature is quality,
whose form is the support of the entire creation—to Brahma be
Bete : a
homage! — |
ef - The usual propitiatory expression of homage to some
deity, with
» Y X which Hindu works are wont to commence.
ome 2. When but little of the Golden Age (krta yuga) was left,
a great demon (asura), named Maya, being desirous to know that
__ mysterious, supreme, pure and exalted science.
«3. That chief auxiliary of the scripture (veddnga), in its
‘irety—tl 4 cause, namely of the motion of the heavenly bodies

2 Stirya-Stddhdnta
Qyotis), performed, in propitiation of the Sun, very severe religious austerities.
According to this, the Stirva-Siddhanta was revealed more than
2,164,960 years ago, that amount of time having elapsed, according to Hindu
reckoning, since the end of the Golden Age; see below, under verse 48, for
the computation of the period. As regards the actual date of the treatise,
it is, like all dates in Hindu history and the history of Hindu literature,
exceedingly difficult to ascertain, It is the more difficult, because, unlike
most, or all, of the astronomical treatises, the Stirya-Siddhanta attaches
itself to the name of no individual as its author, but professes to be a
direct revelation from the Sun (siirya). A treatise of this name, however,
is confessedly among the earliest text-books of the Indian science. It was
one of the five earlier works upon which was founded the Pafica-siddhantika, Compendium of Five Astronomies, of Varéha-mihira, one of
the earliest astronomers whose works have been, in part, preserved to
us, and who is supposed to have lived about the beginning of the sixth century of our era. A Sdrya-Siddhanta is also referred to by Brahmagupta,
who is assigned to the close of the same century and the commencement
of the one following. The arguments by which Mr. Bentley (Hindu Astronomy, p. 158, ete.) attempts to prove Varaha-mihira to have lived in the
sixteenth century, and his professed works to be forgeries and impositions,
are sufficiently refuted by the testimony of al-BiraGni (the same person as
the Abu-r-Raihan, so often quoted in the first article of this volume), who
visited India under Mahmiad of Ghazna, and wrote in A.D. 1031 an account
of the country; he speaks of Variha-mihira and of his Pafica-siddhantika,
assigning to both nearly the same age as is attributed to them by the
modern Hindus (see Reinaud in the Journal Asiatique for Sept.-Oct., 1844,
ivme Série, iv. 286; and also his Mémoire sur 1'Inde). He also speaks of the
Sairya-Siddhinta itself, and ascribes its authorship to Lata (Mémoir sur
l‘Inde, pp. 831, 382), whom Weber (Vorlesungen tiber Indische Literaturgeschichte, p. 229) conjecturally identifies with a Lidha who is cited by
Brahmagupta. Bentley has endeavoured to show by internal evidence that
the 5urya-Siddhinta belongs to the end of the eleventh century ; see below,
under verses 29-34, where his method and results are explained, and their
value estimated.
Of the six Vedingas, “* limbs of the Veda,"’ sciences auxiliary to the
sacred scriptures, astronomy is claimed to be the first and chief, as representing the eyes; grammar being the mouth, ceremonial the hands, prosody the feet, ete. (see Siddhanta-Giromani, i. 12-14). The importance of
astronomy to the system of religious observance lies in the fact that by it
are determined the proper times of sacrifice and the like. There isa special
treatise, the Jyotisha of Lagadha, or Lagata, which, attaching itself to the
Vedic texts, and representing a more primitive phase of Hindu science,
claims to be the astronomical Vedinga; but ff sold bo be, Sa
and of small importance.

Mean Motions of the Planets 3
boat The word jyotis, **‘ heavenly body,” literally “‘ light,'’ although the
ris eurrent memes for astronomy and astronomers are derived from it, does
not elsewhere occur in this treatise.
| 4. Gratified by these austerities, and rendered propitious,
- the Sun himself delivered unto that Maya, who besought a boon,
r the system of the planets.
‘The blessed Sun spoke :
5. Thine intent is known to me; Il am gratified by thine
‘gusterities; I will give thee the science upon which time is founded, the grand system of the planets.
6. No one is able to endure my brillianey; for communicastion I have mo leisure; this person, who is a part of me, shall relate
_ The manuscripts without commentary insert here the following verse:
“* Go therefore to Romaka-city, thine own residence; there, undergoing
4mearnation ‘as ‘a barbarian, owing to 4 curse of Brahma, I will impart to
‘thee this science.”’
Tf this verse really formed a part of the text, it would be as clear an
acknowledgment as the author could well convey indirectly, that the
; science displayed in his treatise was derived from the Greeks. Romaka-
— eity is Rome, the great metropolis of the West; its situation is given in a
* following chapter (see Xxil. 89) as upon the equator, ninety degrees to the
west of India. The incarnation of the Sun there as a barbarian, for the
<: purpose of revealing astronomy to 4 demon of the Hindu Pantheon, is but
a transparent artifice for referring the foreign science, after all, to a Hindv
it is inconsistent with
f origin. ‘But the verse is clearly out of place here ;
F the other verses among which. dt occurs, which give a different version of
ss the methed of revelation. How comes +t here then? It can hardly have
> b eng tuitously devised and introduced. The verse itself is found in many
of the manuscripts of this Siddhinta; and the incarnation of the Sun at
Bomaka-city, among the Yavanas, or Greeks, and his revelation of the
science of astronomy there, are variously alluded to in later works; as, for
st the JfAana-bhaskara (see Weber's Catalogue of the Berlin
‘Sanskrit ipts.. p. 287, etc.), where he is asserted to have revealed
also the Romaka-Siddhanta. Is this verse. then, a fragment of a different,
° Ae es _perhaps more ancient, account of the origin of the treatise, for which,
sas conveying too ingenuous a confession of the source of the Hindu astronoso my, another has been substituted later? Such a supposition certainly does
not . plausibility. There is something which looks the same way in the
gel Pa on of:a demon, an Asura, to be the medium of the sun's revelation ;
_ while the essential truth and value of the system was acknowledged,
Hindus derived
yf
mes
Fy .
t
tae” ged =
as .¥
it were sought to affix a stigma to the source whence the

4 —— Strya-Siddhanta
it. Weber (Ind. Stud. ii. 242; Ind. Lit., p. 225), noticing that the name
of the Egyptian sovereign Ptolemaios occurs in Indian inscriptions in the
form Turamaya, conjectures that Asura Maya is an alteration of that name,
and that the demon Maya accordingly represents the author of the Almagest
himself; and the conjecture is powerfully supported by the fact that alBirdni (see Reinaud, as above) ascribes the Pauliga-Siddhanta, which the
later Hindus attribute to a Pulica, to Paulus al-Yanani, Paulus the Greek,
and that another of the astronomical treatises, alluded to above, is called
the Romaka-Siddhanta.
It would be premature to discuss here the relation of the Hindu
astronomy to the Greek; we propose to sum up, at the end of this work,
the evidence upon the subject which it contains.
7. Thus having spoken, the god disappeared, having
given directions unto the part of himself. This latter person thus
addressed Maya, as he stood bowed forward, his hands suppliantly
joined before him :
8. listen with concentrated attention to the ancient and
exalted science, which has been spoken, in each successive Age, to
the Great Sages (maharshi), by the Sun himself.
9. This is that very same original text-book which the Sun
of old promulgated : only, by reason of the revolution of the Ages,
there is here a difference of times.
According to the commentary, the meaning of these last verses is that,
in the successive Great Ages, or periods of 4,320,000 yearg (see below,
under vv. 15-17), there are slight differences in the motions of the heavenly
bodies, which render necessary a new revelation from time to time on the
part of the Sun, suited to the altered conditions of things; and that when,
moreover, even during the continuance of the same Age, differences of
motion are noticed owing to a difference of period, it is customary to
apply to the data given a correction, which is called bija. All this is
very suitable for the commentator to say, but it seems not a little curious
to find the Sun’s superhuman representative himself insisting that this his
revelation is the same one as had formerly been made by the Sun, only
with different data. We cannot help suspecting in the ninth verse, rather,
a virtual confession on the part of the promulgators of this treatise, that —
there was another, or that there were others, in existence, claiming to be _
the Sun’s revelation, or else that the data presented in this were different
from those which had been previously current as revealed by the Sun.
We «hall have more to say hereafter (see below, under vv. 29-84) of the P ‘
probable existence of more than one version of the Sirya-Siddhinta, of
the correction called bija, and of its incorporation into the text of the
om? is

it
ms
er
f ft
Mean Motions of the Planets 5
_ treatise itself. The repeated revelation of the system in each successive
Great Age, as stated in verse 8, presents no difficulty. It is the Puranic
doctrine (sce Wilson's Vishnu Purina, p. 269, etc.) that during the Iron
Age the sources of knowledge become either corrupted or lost, so that
@ new revelation of scripture, law, and science becomes necessary during
the Age succeeding.
. 10. Time is the destroyer of the worlds; another Time has
for its nature to bring to pass. This latter, according as it is
gross or minute, is called by two names, real (mitrta) and unreal
(amirta).
ra There is in this verse a curious mingling together of the poetical, the
theoretical, and the practical. To the Hindus, as to us, Time is, in &
metaphorical sense, the great destroyer of all things; as such, he is identified with Death, and with Yama, the ruler of the dead. Time, again, in
the ordinary acceptation of the word, has both its imaginary, and its appreciable and practically useful divisions: the former are called real (marta,
literally ‘' embodied °’), the latter umreal (amiirta, literally ‘* unembodied "'). The following verse explains these divisions more fully.
The epithet kalandtmaka, applied to actual time in the first half
of the verse, is not easy of interpretation. The commentary translates
jt ‘‘ is an object of knowledge, is capable of being known,”’ which does
not seem satisfactory. It evidently contains a suggested etymology (kdla,
** time,"’ from kalana), and in translating it as above we have seen in it
also an antithesis to the epithet bestowed upon Time the divinity. Perhaps
it should be rather “* has for its office enumeration.”’
‘41. That which begins with respirations (préna) is called
real; that which begins with atoms (truti) is ealled unreal. Six
respirations make a vinddi, sixty of these a nddi;
12. And sixty nidis make a sidereal day and night.........
The manuscripts without commentary insert. as the first half of
i>. 5 10 len Ilables (gurcakshara) = 1 respiration (préva, period of four seconds):
‘ Pe ay i (9 = 1 vinddt (period of twenty-four seconds) ;
an aie = teow (period of twenty-four minutes) ;
= | day.
od of division usually adopted in the astronomical
convenient property that its lowest subdivision,

6 Stirya-Siddhénta
the respiration, is the same part of the day as the minute is of the circle,
so that a respiration of time is equivalent to a minute of revolution of the
heavenly bodies about the earth. The respiration is much more frequently
called asu, in the text both of this and of the other SiddhAdntas. The vinidi
is practically of small consequence, and is only two or three times ‘made
use of in the treatise; its usual modern name is pala, but as this term
nowhere occurs in our text, we have not felt justified in substituting it for
vinidi. For nidialso, the more common name is danda, but this, too,
the Strya-Siddhanta nowhere employs, although it uses instead of nadi, and
quite as often, nédikd and ghatika. We shall uniformly make use m our
translation of the terms presented above, since there are no English
equivalents which admit of being substituted for them.
The ordinary Puranic division of the day is slightly different from
the astronomical, viz. :
15 twinklings (nemesha)
30 bite
80 minutes
20 hours
1 bit (A@slethA) ;
1 minute (kal) ;
1 hour (muhdrta) ;
1 day.
Manu (i. 64) gives the same, excepting that he makes the bit ‘to
consist of 18 twinklings. Other authorities assign different values ‘to the
lesser measures of time, but all agree in the main fact of the division of
the day into thirty hours, which, being perhaps an imitation of the division
of the month into thirty days, is unquestionably the ancient and original
Hindu method of reckoning time.
The Sirya-Siddhanta, with commendable moderation, refrains from
givmg the imaginary subdivisions of the respiration, which make up ‘* um:
real '’ time. They are thus stated in Bhaskara’'s Siddhanta- (iromani
(i. 19, 20), along with the other, the astronomical, table:
100 atome (truts) ~~ 1 speck (tatpara) ;
30 specks 1 twinkling (nimesha) ;
18 twinklings —~ 1 bit (k@shthé);
30 bits — 1 minute (kalé);
30 minutes —™ 1 half-hour (ghattkd) ;
2 half-hours = 1 Wour (ksfhava) ;
30 houre = 1 day.
This makes the atom equal to gg—re-tus—aooth of a day, or <s—yenth
efasecond. Some of the Puranas (see Wilson's Vish. Pur., p. 22) give a
different division, which makes the atom about yy*;,th of a second; but
they carry the division three steps farther, to the subtilissima (paramdnu),
which equals x—reu-ton-wosth of a day, or very nearly + ;—gp th of a
d.
ee have introduced here a statement of these minute subdivisions,
because they form a natural counterpart to the immense periods which we
shall soon have to consider, and are, with the latter, curiously illustrative
of a fundamental trait of Hindu character: a fantastic imaginativeness,

Mean Motions of the Planets 7
which delights itself with arbitrary theorizings, and is unrestrained by, and
careless of, actual realities. Thus, having no instrumenta by which they
could measure even seconds with any tolerable precision, they vied with
one another in dividing the second down to the farthest conceivable limit
of minuteness; thus, seeking infinity in the other direction also, while
they were almost destitute of a chronology or a history, and could hardly
fix with accuracy the date of any event beyond the memory of the living
generation, they devised, and put forth as actual, a frame-work of chronology reaching for millions of millions of years back into the past and forward
into the future.
12,...Of thirty of these sidereal days 1s composed a month;
a civil (sévana) month consists of as many sunrises;
13. A lunar month, of as many lunar days (tithi); a solar
(sdura) month is determined by the entrance of the sun into a sign
of the zodiac : twelve months make a year.......-----
We have here described days of three different kinds, and months
and years of four; since, according to the commentary, the last clause
translated means that twelve months of each denomination make up 8
year of the same denomination. Of some of these, the practical use and
value will be made to appear later; but as others are not elsewhere
referred to in this treatise, and as several are merely arbitrary divisions
of time, of which, so far as we can discover, no use has ever been made,
it may not be amiss briefly to characterize them here.
Cy é
a)
Ly
=e
° Of the measures of time referred to in the twelfth verse, the day is
evidently the starting-point and standard. The sidereal day is the time of
below, in v. 34, but it does not enter as an element into the later processes. Nor is a sidereal month of thirty sidereal days, or a sidereal year
six and a quarter sidereal days), elsewhere mentioned in
- w, made account of in any Hindu method of
J . in India, from sunrise to sunrise (see below, v. 936), and is accordingly of
bose variable length: it is, of course, an important element in all computations
such days, are supposed to have formed the basis of the earliest Hindu
the earth's revolution on its axis; data for determining its length are given
r of three hundred and sixty such days (being less than the true sidereal
The civil (sé@vana) day is the natural day: it is counted.
: of time. A month of thirty, and a year of three hundred and sixty,
nology, an intercalary month being added once in five years. This
is long since out of use, however, and the month and year referred
in the text, of thirty and three hundred and sixty natural days
tively without intercalations, are elsewhere assumed and made use
only in determining, for astrological purposes, the lords of the month
oO ~~
. Neconod
*. Saar
wm ale + ra a
Sp eye.
ge
> “sat :
pag

8 - - Stirya-Siddhanta ;
The standard of the lunar measure of time is the lunar month, the
period of the moon’s synodical revolution. It is reckoned either from
new-moon to new-moon, or from full-moon to full-moon; generally, the
former is called mukhya, ** primary,’’ and the latter géuna, " secondary *’:
but according to our commentator, either of them may be denominated
primary, although in fact, in this treatise, only the first of them is s0
regarded; and the secondary lunar month is that which is reckoned from
any given lunar day to the next of the same name. This natural month,
containing about twenty-nine and a half days, mean solar time, is then
divided into thirty lunar days (tithi), and this division, although of so
unnatural and arbitrary a character, the lunar days beginning and ending
at any moment of the natural day and night, is, to the Hindu, of the most
prominent practical importance, since by it are regulated the performance
of many religious ceremonies (se¢ below, xiv. 13), and upon it depend the
chief considerations of propitious and unpropitious times, and the like.
Of the lunar year of twelve lunar months, however, we know of no use
made in India, either formerly or now, except as it has been introduced
and employed by the Mohammedans.
Finally, the year last mentioned, the solar year, is that by which time
is ordinarily reckoned in India. It is, however, not the tropical solar year,
which we employ, but the sidereal, no account being made of the precession of the equinoxes. The solar month is measured by the continuance
of the sun in each successive sign, and varies, according to the rapidity of
his motion, from about twenty-nine and a third, to a little more than
thirty-one and a half, days. There is no day corresponding to this measure
of the month and of the year.
In the ordinary reckoning of time, these elements are variously combined. Throughout Southern India (see Warren 's Kala Sankalita, Madras:
1825, p. 4, etc.), the year and month made use of are the solar, and the
day the civil; the beginning of each month and year being counted, in practice, from the sunrise nearest to the moment of their actual commencement. In all Northern India the year is lunisolar; the month is lunar, and
ic divided into both lunar and civil days; the year is composed of a variable
number of months, either twelve or thirteen, beginning always with the
lunar month of which the commencement next precedes the true commencement of the eidereal year. But, underneath this division, the division of the actual sidereal year into twelve solar months is likewise kept
up, and to maintain the concurrence of the civil and lunar days, and the
lunar and solar months, is a process of great complexity, into the details
of which we need not enter here (see Warren, as above, p. 57, ete.). It
will be seen later in this chapter (vv. 48-51) that the Sdtrya-Siddhainta
reckons time by this latter system, by the combination of civil, lunar, and
sidereal elements. 7
13....This is called a day of the gods.
oT *

ae uP :
ee Mean Motions of the Planets 9
4 14. The day and night of the gods and of the demons are
mutually opposed to one another. Six times sixty of them are a
year of the gods, and likewise of the demons.
. ‘‘ This is called,’’ etc.: that is, as the commentary explains, the year
composed of twelve solar months, as being those last mentioned; the
sidereal year. It appears to us very questionable whether, in the first
instance, anything more was meant by calling the year a day of the gods
_ than to intimate that those beings of a higher order reckoned time upon 4
grander scale: just as the month was said to be a day of the Fathers, or
Manes (xiv. 14), the Patriarchate (v. 15), a day of the Patriarchs (xiv. 21),
and the Aton (v. 20), a day of Brahma; all these being familiar Puranic
designations. In the astronomical reconstruction of the Puranic
system, however, & physical meaning has been given to this day of the
gods: the gods are made to reside at the north pole, and the demons at
the south - and then, of course, during the half year when the sun is north
of the equator, it is day to the gods and night to the demons; and during
_ the other half-year, the contrary. The subject is dwelt upon at some
length in the twelfth chapter (xii. 45, etc.). To make such a division
accurate, the year ought to be the tropical, and not the sidereal; but the
author of the Sarya-Siddhanta has not yet begun to take into account the
precession. See what is said upon this subject in the third chapter
ae. che year of the gods, or the divine year, 1s employed only in desee 4 _eribing the immense periods of which the statement now follows.
Yn 15. Twelve thousand of these divine years are denominated
a Quadruple Age (caturyuga); of ten thousand times four hundred
ny and thirty-two solar years
16. +Is composed that Quadruple Age, with its dawn and
me twilight. The difference of the Golden and the other Ages, as
a measured by the difference in the number of the feet of Virtue
The tenth part of an Age, multiplied successively
ur, three, two, and one, gives the length of the Golden and
sof other Ages, in order : the sixth part of each belongs to its dawn
rap an The: period of 4,820,000 years is ordinarily styled Great Age
fi n shdyuga), or, as above in two instances, Quadruple Age (caturyuga).
| In th » Sirya-Siddhanta, however, the former term is not once found, and
_ the latter occurs only in these verses; elsewhere, Age (yuga) a is
employed to denote it, and always denotes it, unless expressly limit by
the name of t' ne Golden (krta) Age.
i tah ee
; ge.
j a” o
mis A

Stirya-Siddhdnta a
The composition of the Age, or Great Age, is then as follows:
Dicine years Solar yveare
Golden Age (krta yuga), 4,000 1,440,003
Twilight, 400 144,000
Total duration of the Golden Age, 4.800 1,728,000
Silver "Age (treta yuga), 3,000 1,( 80,000
Twilight, 300 108,000
Total duration of the Silver Age, 3,600 1,296 ,000
Brasen a (de@para yuga), 2,000 726,000
Twilight 200 72,000
Total duration of the Brazen Age, 2,400 864 000
Iron Age (kali yuga), 1,000 $60,000
Twilight, 100 36,000
Total duration of the Iron Age, 1,200 432,000
Total duration of a Great Age, 12,000 4,320,000
Neither of the names of the last three ages is once mentioned in the
Sirya-Siddhinta. The first and last of the four are derived from the game
of dice: krita ‘‘ made, won,’ is the side of the die marked with four dots—
the lucky, or winning one; kali is the side marked with one dot only—the
unfortunate, the losing one. In the other names, of which we do not know
the vriginal and proper meaning, the numerals tri, “* three."" and dvd,
‘‘two,”” are plainly recognizable. The relation of the numbers four, three,
two, and one, to the length of the several periods, as expressed in divine
years, and also as compared with one another, is not less clearly apparent.
The character attached to the different Ages by the Hindu mythological
and legendary history so closely resembles that which is attributed to the
Golden, Silver, Brazen, and Iron Ages, that we have not hesitated to
transfer to them the latter appellations. An account of this character is
given in Manu i. 81-86. During the Golden Age, Virtue stands firm upon
four feet, truth and justice abound, and the life of man is four centuries ;
in each following Age Virtue loses a foot, and the length of life is reduced
by a century, so that in the present, the Iron Age, she has but one left to —
hobble upon, while the extreme age attained by mortals is but a hundred
years. Sce also Wilson's Vishnu Purina, p. 622, etc., for a description of
the vices of the Iron Age. |
This system of periods is not of astronomical origin, although the
fixing of the commencement of the Iron Age, the only possibly historical
point in it, is, as we shall see hereafter, the result of astronomical computetion, Its arbitrary and artificial character is apparent. It ia the pape >

Mean Motions of the Planets ii
f the Puranas and of Manu, a part of the received Hindu cosmogony, to
ps astronomy was compelled to adapt itself. We ought to remark,
however, that in the text itself of Manu (i. 68-71) the duration of the
. Great Age, called by him Divine Age, is given as twelve thousand years
Can and Saat it is his commentator who, » by sors: these to be divine
=~ oe gt
all as this sates is, gatas it is far from Lined yind the Hindu craving
Lose infinity. We are next called upon to construct a new period by
> Moultiplying it by a thousand.
‘i te 18. One and seventy Ages are styled here a Patriarchate
— (manvantara); ; at its end is said to be a twilight which has the
_ Bumber of years of a Golden Age, and which is a deluge.
19. Im an Mon (kalpa) are reckoned fourteen such
. ~ Patriarchs (manu) with their respective twilights; at the comES _mencement of the A®on is a fifteenth dawn, having the length
aa _ of a Golden Age.
The AZon is accordingly thus composed :
ae ‘ Divine years. Solar years.
pis i “phe introda troductory dawn, 4,000 | 1,728,000
Yo. Pai verty coe Great Ages, 852,000 306,720,000
; eel i .
= ” Duration of one Patriarchate, 856,800 308,448,000
‘Total duration of an on,
2 hy the factors fourteen and seventy-one were thus used in making
ou » Hon is not obvious; unless, indeed, in the division by fourteen
is > lyse niet the influence of the number seven, while at the same
such a division furnished the equal twilights, or intermediate periods
of transi ion, which the Hindu theory demanded. The system, however,
is st eceae the Puranas (see Wilson's Vish. Pur., p. 24, ete.); and Manu
? slanted ts virtually the same, although he has not the term Aton
but states simply that a thousand Divine Ages make up a day of
ae and seventy-one a Patriarchate. The Nerrn manvantara, ‘* patri-
} means literally “< another Manu.”’ or, “* the interval of a Manu.
a wo on | identical in origin and meaning with our ‘‘ man,” became
indu 1s a the name of a being personified as son of the Sun (Vivasvant)
cee hae human race. In each Patriarchate there arises &
> becomes for his own period the progenitor of mankind (see
1mm Rn

12 Strya-Siddhanta -
20. The Afton, thus composed of a thousand Ages, and
which brings about the destruction of all that exists, is styled a
day of Brahma; his night is of the same length.
21. His extreme age is a hundred, according to this valuation of a day and a night
We have already found indications of an assumed destruction of
existing things at the termination of the lesser periods called the Age and
the Patriarchate, in the necessity of a new revelation of virtue and knowledge for every Age, and of a new father of the human race for every
Patriarchate. These are left, it should seem, to show us how the system
of cosmical periods grew to larger and larger dimensions. The full development of it, as exhibited in the Puranas and here, admits only two kinds
of destruction: the one occurring at the end of each A@on, or day cf
Brahma, when all creatures, although not the substance of the world
undergo dissolution, and remain buried in chaos during his night, to be
created anew when his day begins again; the other taking place at the
end of Brahma’s life, when all matter even is resolved into its ultimate
eource,
According to the commentary, the “' hundred’ in verse 21 means
a hundred years, each composed of three hundred and sixty days and
nights, and not a hundred days and nights only, as the text might be understood to signify; since, in all statements respecting age, years are
necessarily understood to be intended. The length of Brahma’s life would
be, then, 864,000,000,000 divine years, or 311,040,000,000,000 solar years.
This period is also called in the Purinas a para, “* extreme period,’’ and
its half a pardrdha (see Wilson's Vish. Pur., p. 25); although the latter
term has obtained also an independent use, as signifying a period still more
enormous (ibid. p. 630). It is curious that the commentator does not seem
to recognize the affinity with this period of the expression used in the text,
param dyuh, *‘ extreme age,’ but gives two different explanations of it,
both of which are forced and unnatural.
The author of the work before us is modestly content with
the number of years thus placed at his disposal, and attempts nothing
farther. So is it also with the Purinas in general; although some of
them, as the Vishnu (Wilson, p. 637), assert that two of the greater pardrdhas constitute only a day of Vishnu, and others (ibid. p. 25) that
Brahma’'s whole life ig but a twinkling of the eye of Krshna or of | ‘y iva.
21...The half of his life is past; of the remainder, this is
the first Aon.
22. And of this Aon, six Patriarchs (manu) are past, with
their respective twilights; and of the Patriarch Manu son_ of
Vivasvant, twenty-seven Ages are past;

Mean Motions of the Planets 13
| = 93. Of the present the twenty-eighth, Age, this Golden Age
is past: from this point, reckoning up the time, one should compute
_ together the whole number.
Paes The designation of the part already elapsed of this immense period
seems to be altogether arbitrary. It agrees in general with that given in
_ the Puranas, and, so far as the Patriarchs and their periods are concerned,
- with Manu also. The name of the present Zion is Vdréha, ‘‘ that of the
boar,” because Brahma, in performing anew at its commencement the
x act of creation, put on the form of that animal (see Wilson’s Vish. Pur.,
p. 27, etc.). The one preceding is called the Pddma, ‘‘ that of the lotus.”’
aa This nomenclature, however, is not universally accepted: under the
word kalpa, in the Lexicon of Béhtlingk and Roth, may be found another
i system of names for these periods. Manu (i. 61, 62) gives the names of
cate the Patriarchs of the past Patriarchates; the Puranas add other particulars
. and also respecting those which are still to come (see
eS
not ~_= ‘The end of the Golden Age of the current Great Age is the time at
which the Sirya-Siddhanta claims to have been revealed, and the epoch
-—s- from. which its calculations profess to commence. We will, accordingly,
———a-lhlU Uw
‘ a as the Sun directs, compute the number of years which are supposed to
ae _ have elapsed before that period.
Viewer a
r : ate
| Dicine years. Solar years.
| i Me Rib Peunarchstes: | 5,140,800 1,850,488,000
4 _ Twenty-seven Great Ages, 324,000 116,640,000
"tL “Total till commencement of present Great Age, 5,469,600 1,969,056 ,000
Golden Age of present Great Age, 4,800 1,728,000
Petal time elapsed of > 5.474.400 1.970,784,000
precy dial time elapsed from beginning of ras
| es ahinats life to end of last Golden Age, t 492,005,474,400 155,521,970,754,000
from the commencement of the current
JE , second of the above totals is the only one with which the Surya-
“Siddhanta henceforth has anything to do.
“ We are next informed that the present 0
“gan at a period less distant than the commencement of the Zon.
-——-s- 94. ~=One hundred times four hundred and seventy-four
ears passed while the All-wise was employed in creating
gods, demons,
PS Wey * ee et
div ne yCe —
th + animate and inanimate creation, plants, stars,
v> Soa a pees
and the rest. =| i
a" was bs eee 5a
=i
oo
a 4 o

14 Strya-Siddhanta
That ig to say:
Divine years. Solar years.
From the total above given, 5,474,400 1,070,784,000
deduct the time occupied in creation, 47,400 17,064,000
the remainder is 5,427,000 1,953,720,000
This, then, is the time elapsed from the true commencement of the
existing order of things to the epoch of thig work. The deduction of this
period as spent by the Deity in the work of creation is a peculiar feature
of the Strya-Siddhanta. We shall revert to it later (see below, under
vv. 29-34), as ite significance cannot be shown until other data are before us.
25. The planets moving westward with exceeding velocity,
but constantly beaten by the asterisms, fall behind, at a rate precisely equal, proceeding each in its own path.
26. Hence they have an eastward motion. From the
number of their revolutions is derived their daily motion, which
is different according to the size of their orbits; in proportion to
this daily motion they pass through the asterisms.
27. One which moves swiftly passes through them in a
short time; one which moves slowly, in a long time. By their
movement, the revolution is accounted complete at the end of the
asterism Revati.
We have here presented a part of the physical theory of the planetary
motions, that which accounts for the mean motions: the theory is supplemented by the explanation given in the next chapter of the disturbing
forces which give rise to the irregularities of movement. The earth is a
sphere, and sustained immovable in the centre of the universe (xii. 32),
while all the heavenly bodies, impelled by winds, or vortices, called provectors (ii. 3), revolve about it from east to west. In this general westward movement, the planets, as the commentary explains it, are, owing
to their weight and the weakness of their vortices, beaten by the asterisms (nakshatra or bha, the groups of stars constituting the lunar mansions [see below, chapter viii], and used here, as in various other places,
to designate the whole firmament of fixed stars), and accordingly fall behind
(lambante=labuntur, delabuntur), as if from shame: and this is the explanation of their eastward motion, which is only apparent and relative,
although wont to be regarded as real by those who do not understand the
erue causes of things. But now a new element is introduced into the
theory, which does not seem entirely consistent with this view of the
merely relative character of the eastward motion. It is asserted that the
planets lag behind equally, or that each, moving in its own orbit, loses an
equal amount daily, as compared with the asterisms. And we et a
“aie
Po
= Zz.

} Mean Motions of the Planets 16
farther on (xii. 73-89) that the dimensions of the planetary orbits are consPe tructed upon this sole principle, of making the mean daily motion of each
: planet eastward to be the same in amount, namely 11,858,717 yojanas:
the amount of westward motion being equal, in each case, to the difference
. between this amount and the whole orbit of the planet. Now if the Hindu
idea of the symmetry and harmony of the universe demanded that the
© movements of the planets should be equal, it was certainly a very awkss ward and unsatisfactory way of complying with that demand to make
| the relative motions alone, as compared with the fixed stars, equal, and the
real motions so vastly different from one another. We should rather ex-
| pect that some method would have been devised for making the latter
come out alike, and the former unlike, and the result of differences in the
. weights of the planets and the forces of the impelling currents. It looks
3 as if this principle, and the conformity to it of the dimensions of the
| orbits, might have come from those who regarded the apparent daily mo-
- tion as the real motion. But we know that Aryabhatta held the opinion
that the earth revolved upon its axis, causing thereby the apparent westward motion of the heavenly bodies (see Colebrooke’s Hindu Algebra,
p. xxxviii; Essays, ii. 467), and so, of course, that the planets really moved
eastward at an equal rate among the stars; and although the later astrono-
‘mers are nearly unanimous against him, we cannot help surmising that
the theory of the planetary orbits emanated from him or his school, or
from some other of like opinion. It is not upon record, so far as we are
~~ aware, that any Hindu astronomer, of any period, held, as did some of
the Greek philosophers (see Whewell’s History of the Inductive Sciences,
_ B.V. ch. i), a heliocentric theory.
‘The absolute motion eastward of all the planets being equal, their
apparent motion is, of course, in the (inverse) ratio of their distance, or of
___ the dimensions of their orbits.
: A The word translated ‘* revolution “ is bhagana, literally ‘* troop of
_asterisms; *’ the verbal root translated ‘" pass through "’ is bhuj, ‘‘ enjoy,”
ss
ginning of Acvini (see chapter vill,
Ita situation is most nearly marked
by tha of the principal etar of Revati, which, according to the SdryaSC c hi x ta, is 10/ to the west of it, but according to other authorities exactly
coincides with it. That star is by all authorities identified with ¢ Piscium,
of whic 1 the longitude at present, as reckoned by us, from the vernal
oq inox, s 17° 64 - Making due allowance for
eis 7
—s
VS >t:

ip - e Ps. A ; ? ¥ Pe
Sttrya-Siddhanta
the sixth century, or about A.D. 570. As such coincidence was the occasion of the point being fixed upon as the beginning of the sphere, the time
of its occurrence marks approximately the era of the fixation of the sphere,
and of the commencement of the history of modern Hindu astronomy.
We say approximately only, because, in the first place, as will be shown
in connection with the eighth chapter, the accuracy of the Hindu observations is not to be relied upon within a degree; and, in the second place,
the limits of the asterisms being already long before fixed, it was necessary
to take the beginning of some one of them as that of the sphere, and the
Hindus may have regarded that of Acvini as sufficiently near to the equinox
for their purpose, when it was, in fact, two or three degrees, or yet more,
remote from it, on either side; and each degree of removal would correspond to a difference in time of about seventy years.
In the most ancient recorded lists of the Hindu asteriems (in the
texts of the Black Yajur-Veda and of the Atharva-Veda), Krttika, now the
third, appears as the first. The time when the beginning of that asterism
coincided with the vernal equinox would be nearly two thousand years
earlier than that given above for the coincidence with it of the first point
of Acvini.
28. Sixty seconds (vikala) make a minute (kald); sixty of
these, a degree (bhdga); of thirty of the latter is composed a sign
(rdci); twelve of these are a revolution (bhagana).
The Hindu divisions of the circle are thus seen to be the same with
the Greek and with our own, and we shall accordingly make use, in translating, of our own familiar terms. Of the second (vikala) very little practical use is made: it is not more than two or three times alluded to in all
the rest of the treatise. The minute (kald) is much more often called
lipta (or liptikd); this is not an original Sanskrit word, but was borrowed
; ar
from the Greek Aerrov, The degree is called either bhdga or anga; both
words, like the equivalent Greek word pops, mean a " part, portion,’’ The
proper signification of rdc¢i, translated ‘‘sign,”’ is simply “heap, quantity ;’" it
is doubtless applied to designate a sign as being a certain number, or sum,
of degrees, analogous to the use of gana in bhagana (explained above, in the
last note), and of rdaci itself in dinaraci, ** sum of days ” (below, v. 53).
In the Hindu description of an arc, the sign is as essential an element as
the degree, and no arcs of greater length than thirty degrees are reckoned
in degrees alone, as we are accustomed to reckon them. The Greek usage
was the same. We shall hereafter see that the signs into which any
circle of revolution is divided are named Aries, Taurus, etc., beginning from
the point which is regarded as the atarting point; so that these names
are applied simply to indicate the order of succession of the arcs of thirty
degrees. |

Mean Motions of the Planets 17
_ 29. Inan Age (yuga), the revolutions of the sun, Mercury,
a and Venus, and of the conjunctions (cighra) of Mars, Saturn, and
Jupiter, moving eastward, are four million, three hundred and
twenty thousand;
34). Of the moon, fifty-seven million, seven hundred and
fifty-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-six; of Mars, two
million, two hundred and ninety-six thousand, eight hundred and
thirty-two; .
31. Of Mercury’s conjunction (gighra), seventeen million,
nine hundred and thirty-seven thousand, and sixty; of Jupiter,
three hundred and sixty-four thousand, two hundred and twenty;
. 99 Of Venus’s conjunction (¢ighra), seven million,
twenty-two thousand, three hundred and seventy-six; of Saturn,
one hundred and forty-six thousand five hundred and sixty-eight;
: 33 Of the moon's apsis (ucca), in an Age, four hundred
and eighty-eight thousand, two hundred and three; of its node
(pdta), in the contrary direction two hundred and _ thirty-two
thousand, two hundred and thirty-eight;
34 Of the asterisms, one billion, five hundred and eightytwo million, two hundred and thirty-seven thousand, eight hundred and twenty-eight....
These are the fundamental and most important elements upon which
is founded the astronomical system of the Sirya-Siddhanta. We present
. them below in a tabular form, but must first explain the character of some
= of them especially of some ef those contained in verse 29, which we have
emitted from the table.
Pir ‘The revolutions of the sun, and of Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, require
no remark, save the obvious one that those of the sun are in fact sidereal
revolutions of the earth about the sun. To the sidereal revolutions of the
moon we add also her synodical revolutions, anticipated from the next
= - following passage (see v- 85). By the moon's ** apsis "" is to be understood her apogee; uecca is literally ‘* height,” i.e., © extreme distance :"
: the commentary explains it by mandocca, “* apex of slowest motion: “" as
the same word is used to designate the aphelia of the planets, we wer
: obliged to take in translating it the indifferent term apsis, which applies
ec ually to both geocentric and heliocentric motion. The ‘* node "Is the
: scen l node (see ii. 7); the dual ‘‘ nodes "* is never employed in this
work. 1 But the apparent motions of the planets are greatly complicated ‘by
fact, unknown to the Greek and the Hindu, that they are revolving
t a centre about which the earth also is revolving. When any planet
. opposite side of the sun from us, and ig accordingly moving 10

18 Stirya-Siddhanta
space in a diftection contrary to ours, the effect of our change of place is
to increase the rate of its apparent change of place; again, when it is upon
our side of the sun, and moving in the same direction with us, the effect
of our motion is to retard its apparent motion and even to cause it to
seem to retrograde. This explains the ** revolutions of the conjunction "’
of the three superior planets: their “‘ conjunctions *’ revolve at the same
rate with the earth, being always upon the opposite side of the sun from
ue; and when, by the combination of its own proper motion with that of
its conjunction, the planet gets into the latter, its rate of apparent motion
is greatest, becoming less in proportion as it removes from that Poeihicn:
The meaning of the word which we have translated *' conjunction © is
‘‘ swift, rapid:"’ a literal rendering of it would be ‘* swift-point,”” or
apex of swiftest motion ;'’ but, after much deliberation, and persevering
trial of more than one term, we have concluded that *’ conjunction "" was
the least excéptionable word by which we could express it. In the case
of the inferior planets, the revolution of the conjunction takes the place
of the proper motion of the planet itself. By the definition given in verse
27, a planet must, in order to complete a revolution, pass through the
whole zodiac; this Mercury and Venus are only able to do as they accompany the sun in his apparent annual revolution about the earth. To the
Hindus, too, who had no idea of their proper movement about the sun, the
annual motion must have seemed the principal one; and that by virtue of
which, in their progress through the zodiac, they moved now faster and
se
now slower, must have appeared only of secondary importance. The term _
‘* conjunction *" as used in reference to these planets, must be restricted,
of course, to the superior conjunction. The physical theories by which
the effect of the conjunction (cighra) is explained, are given in the next
chapter. In the table that follows we have placed opposite each planet
its own proper revolutions only.
It is farther to be oliserved that all the numbers of revolutions, excepting those of the moon's apsis and node, are divisible by four, so that,
properly speaking, a quarter of an Age, or 1,080,000 years, rather
than «a whole Age, is their common period. This is a point of so
much importancé in the system of the Sirya-Siddhanta, that we have
added, in a second column, the number of revolutions in the lesser
period,
Tn the third column, we add the period of revolution of each planet,
as found by dividing by the number of revolutions of each the number of
civil — in an Age (which is equal to the number of sidereal days, given
fm v. 34, dimiriehed by the number of revolutions of the sun; see below,
v. ee: they are expressed in days, nadis, vinidis, and respirations ; the
latter may be converted into sexagesimals of the third order by moving
the decimal point one place farther to the right.
Tn thé fourth column are given the mean daily motions,

Mean Motions of the Planets 19
ss Wee shall present later some comparison of these clementse with those
adopted in other systems of astronomy, ancient and modern.
ites
ie Mean Motions of the Planets.
er a Number of, Nomber of Length of a revolution
Ay P ae gestie’ Way nyse iv nanan aclar time. (eam daily mation. |
J
a
va
| Moon: |
mrt EE a
% The arbitrary and artificial method in which the fundamental elements of the golar system are here presented is not peculiar to the Sarya-
. _ Siddh&nta; it is also adopted by all the other text-books, and is to be
= al regarded as a characteristic feature of the general astronomical system of
the Hindus. Instead of deducing the rate of motion of each planet from
at least two recorded observations of its place, and establishing a genuine
be *vk® och, with the ascertained position of each at that time, they start with
ie J Ae, assumption that, at the beginning of the present order of things, all
the planets, with their apsides and modes, commenced their movement
aes e heavens (near { Piscium, as explained above,
a as the initial point of the sidereal sphere, and
at certain fixed intervals, to a universal conjunction at
‘ea t recurrence of the conjunction, and the date of
of the current Iron Age (kali yuga); at that epoch the
n conjunction for the last time
a jnitial point of the sphere, the former conjunctions having taken
“7 Ace ‘at intervals of 1,080,000 years previous. The instant at which the
‘Awe i¢ made to commence is midnight on the meridian of Ujjayini (see
» under v. 62), at the end of the 588.465th and beginning of the
(civ : the Julian Period, or between the 17th
under vv. 45-55,
588 AC sth day (civil reckoning) of
nd 18th of February 1612 J.P., or 8102 B.C. (see below,
© the computation of the number of days since elapsed). Now, although
ja —.
- Nee ‘.
a
for th
am i aS

¥ ee ihe
sf f .
od A
” tod re ,
Stirya-Siddhdanta
no such conjunction as that assumed by the Hindu astronomers ever did
or ever will take place, the planets were actually, at the time stated, approximating somewhat nearly to a general conjunction in the neighborhood of the initial point of the Hindu sphere; this is shown by the next
table, in which we give their actual mean positions with reference to that
point (including also those of the moon's apogee and node); they have been
obligingly furnished us by Prof. Winlock, Superintendent of the American
Ephemeris and Nautical Almanac. The positions of the primary planets
are obtained by LeVerrier’s times of sidereal revolution, given in the
Annales de l’Observatoire, tom. ii (also in Biot’s Astronomie, 8"™* edition, tom. v. 1857), that of the moon by Peirce’s tables, and those of its
apogee and node by Hansen's Tables de la Lune. Tha origin of the
Hindu sphere is regarded as being 18°5’'8” east of the vernal equinox of
Jan. 1, 1860, and 50°22'29" west of that of Feb. 17, 3102 B.C., the precession in the interval being 68°27/87". We add, in a second column, the
mean longitudes, as reckoned from the vernal equinox of the given date,
for the sake of comparison with the similar data given by Bentley (Hind
Ast., p. 125) and by Bailly (Ast. Ind. et Or., pp. 111, 182), which we also
subjoin.
Positions of the Planets, midnight, at Uijayini, Feb. 17-18, 3102 B. C,
| —- Planet. yer yencin ty Longitude. Bentley. Bailly.
a 7 id
Mercurv, — 41 3 26
Jupiter, + 8 38 386
Saturn — 25 1 ils
The want of agreement between the results of the three different
investigations illustrates the difficulty and uncertainty even yet attending
inquiries into the positions of the heavenly bodies at so remote an epoch.
It is very possible that the calculations of the astronomers who were the
framers of the Hindu system may have led them to suppose the approach
to a conjunction nearer than it actually was; but, however that may be, it’
seems hardly to admit of a doubt that the epoch was arrived at by astronomical calculation carried backward, and that it was fixed upon as the
date of the last general conjunction, and made to determine the commencement of the present Age of the world, because the errors of the
assumed positions of the planets at that time would be so small, and the
number of years since clapsed so great, as to make the errors in the mean
@cyY B3o

SLL ar Says: --
Mean Motions of the Planets 21
motions into which those positions entered as an element only trifling in
arnount.
The moon’s apsis and node, however, were treated in a different
qianner. Their distance from the initial point of the sphere, ag shown by
the table, was too great to be disregarded. They were accordingly
exempted from the general law of a conjunction once in 1,080,000 years,
and such a number of revolutions was assigned to them as should make
their positions at the epoch come out, the one a quadrant, the other a half-
‘revolution, in advance of the initial point of the sphere.
We can now see why the deduction spoken of above (v. 24), for time
spent in creation, needed to be made. In order to bring all the planets
to a position of mean conjunction at the epoch, the time previously elapsed
must be an exact multiple of the lesser period of 1,080,000 years, or the
quarter-Age; in order to give its proper position to the moon's apsis, that
time must contain a certain number of whole Ages, which are the periods
of conjunction of the latter with the planets, together with a remainder of
three quarter-Ages; for the moon's node, in like manner, it must contain
a certain number of half-Ages, with a remainder of one quarter-Age. Now
the whole number of years elapsed between the beginning of the ‘on
. and that of the current Iron Age is equal to 1826 quarter-Ages, with an
| odd surplus of 864,000 years: from it subtract an amount of time which
shall contain this surplus, together with three, seven, eleven, fifteen, or
‘the like (any number exceeding by three a multiple of four), quarter-Ages,
and the remainder will fulfil the conditions of the problem. The deduction actually made is of fifteen periods + the surplus.
_ This deduction is a clear indication that, as remarked above (under
Ae v. 17), the astronomical system was compelled to adapt itself to an al-
— ready established Puranic chronology. It could, indeed, fix the previously
-—s undetermined epoch of the commencement of the Iron Age, but it could
‘not alter the arrangement of the preceding periods.
{ It is evident that, with whatever accuracy the mean positions of the
* planets may, at a given time, be ascertained by observation by the Hindu
aod astronomers, their false assumption of a conjunction at the epoch of 3102
a B.C. must introduce an element of error into their determination of the
“E “| _ planetary motions. The annual amount of that error may indeed be
oe small owing to the remoteness of the epoch, and the great number of years
; among ~which the errors of assumed position are divided, yet it must in
ae. me grow to an amount not to be ignored or neglected even by observers
; ‘so inaccurate, and theorists so unscrupulous, as the Hindus. This 1s ac-
‘tually the case with the elements of the Sarya-Siddhanta; the positions of
a
a me!
he planets, as calculated by them for the present time, are in some cases
nearly 9° from the true places. ‘The later astronomers of India, however,
have known how to deal with such difficulties without abrogating their
*. ancient text-books. As the Sutrya-Siddhdnta is at present employed in
3 a at > c OSS a " J

astronomical calculations, there are introduced into its planctary elements
certain corrections, called bija (more properly vija; the word means literally *‘ seed *"; we do not know how it arrived at its present significations
in the mathematical language), That this was so, was known to Davis
(As. Res., ii. 236), but he was unable to state the amount of the corrections, excepting im the case of the moon’s apsis and node (ibid., p. 275).
Bentley (Hind. Ast., p. 179) gives them im full, and upon his authority
we present them in the annexed table. They are in the form, it will be
noticed, of additions to, or subtractions from, the number of revolutions
given for an Age, and the numbers are all divisible by four, in order not
to interfere with the calculation by the lesser period of 1,080,000 years.
We have added the corrected number of revolutions, for both the greater
and lesser period, the corrected time of revolution, expressed in Hindu
divisions of the day, and the corrected amount of mean daily motion.
These corrections were first applied, according to Mr. Bentley
(As. Res., viii. 220), about the beginning of the sixteenth century; they
are presented by several treatises of that as well as of later date, not
having been yet superseded by others intended to secure yet greater correctness.
Mean Motions of the Planets aa corrected by the bija.
| = (Corrected number of revolu-
~ ions | Corrected time of Corrected daily
Planet z in 4,320,000 | in 1,080,000) revolution mo
| oS years years |
) | d n v p ec ‘ or OF ore
Ree | =| Mamet | Sees) Sie | fab as ee
Bem au, | — 9 | S7ReReS | MARRBRA ons eas oar | 1S 35s aa
We need not. however, rely on external testimony alone for informaticn as to the period when this correction was made. If the attempt to
modify the elements in such a manner as to make them give the true positions of the planets at the time when they were so modified was in any
tolerable degree successful, we ought to be able to discover by calculation
the date of the alteration. If we ascertain for any given time the positions of the planets as given by the system, and compare them with the
true positions as found by our best modern methods, and if we then divide

Mean Motions of the Planets 25
> Pat
Sa differences of position by the differences in the mean motions, we shall
. a discover, in each separate case, when the error was or will be reduced to
ae nothing. The resulta of such a calculation, made for Jan. 1, 1860, are
given below under v. 67. We see there that, if regard is had only to the
f ae absolute errors in the positions of the planets, no conclusion of value can
| be arrived at: the discrepancies between the dates of no error are al-
. _ together too great to allow of their being regarded as indicating any definite
epoch of correction. If, on the other hand, we assume the place of the
sun to have been the standard by which the positions of the other
+ planets were tested, the dates of no error are seen to point quite distinetly to the first half of the sixteenth century as the time of the correction, their mean being A.D. 1541. Upon this assumption, also, we see
. _ why no correction of bija was applied to Mars or to the moon: the former
had, at the given time, only just passed his time of complete accordance
with the sun, and the motion of the moon was also already so closely adjusted to that of the sun, that the difference between their errors of posiTr
ty tion is even now less than 10’. Nor is there any other supposition which
: will explain why the serious error in the position of the sun himself was
overlooked at the time of the general correction, and why, by that correction, the absolute errors of position of more than one of the planets are
3S made greater than they would otherwise have been, as is the case. It is,
pie ah in short, clearly evident that the alteration of the elements of the Sirya-
‘Siddhanta which was effected early in the sixteenth century, was an adaptation of the errors of position of the other planets to that of the sun,
eke _ assumed to be correct and regarded as the standard.
Fam, Now if it is possible by this method to arrive approximately at the
yy date of a correction applied to the elements of a SiddhAnta, it should be
ss ';possible im Tike manner to arrive at the date of those elements themselves.
7 For, owing to the false assumption of position at the epoch, there is but
ome point of time at which any of the periods of revolution will give the
ae rue place of its planet : if, then, as is to be presumed, the true places were
ss qearly determined when any treatise was composed, and were made to enter
ss «#8 an element into the construction of its system, the comparison of the
dates of no error will point to the epoch of its composition. The method,
- gndeed, as is well known to all those who have made any studies in the
st ry of Hindu {in 1a stronomy, has already been applied to this purpose, by
‘Mr. Bentley. It was first originated and put forth by him (in vol. vi. of
the Asiatic Researche ) at a time when the false estimate of the age and
Hindu astronomy presented by Bailly was still the prevailing
one in Pe ; he strenuously defended it against more than one attack
(Aa. R s., viii, and Hind. Ast.), and finally employed it very extensively
in ume on the History of Hindu Astronomy, as a means of deter-
= ame of the different Siddhantas. We present below the table
e work (p. 126), he deduces the age of the Sarye:
Ted e
s
be
Mes Ps, >
i Nhe = .

>. ae - Starya-Siddhanta
Siddhanta ; the column of approximate dates of no error we have ourselves
added.
Bentley's Table of Errors in the Positions of the Planets, as calculated,
for successive periods, according to the Stirya-Siddhdnta.
ee ee ie re | ce
From an average of the results thus obtained, Bentley draws the
conclusion that the Starya-Siddhanta dates from the latter part of the
eleventh century ; or, more exactly, A. D. 1091.
The general soundness of Bentley's method will, we apprehend, be
denied at the present time by few, and he is certainly entitled to not a
little credit for his ingenuity in devising it, for the persevering industry
shown in its application, and for the zeal and boldness with which he propounded and defended it. He succeeded in throwing not a little light upon
an obscure and misapprehended subject, and his investigations have contributed very essentially to our present understanding of the Hindu systems
of astronomy. But the details of his work are not to be accepted without
careful testing, and his general conclusions are often unsound, and require
essential modification, or are to be rejected altogether. This we will
attempt to show in connection with his treatment of the Sirya-Siddhanta.
In the first place, Bentley has made a very serious error in that part
of his calculations which concerns the planet Mercury. As that planet was,
at the epoch, many degrees behind its assumed place, it was necessary,
of course, to assign to it a slower than its true rate of motion. But the
rate actually given it by the text is not quite enough slower, and, instead of
exhausting the original error of position in the tenth century of our era, as
stated by Bentley, would not so dispose of it for many hundred years yet
to come. Hence the correction of the bija, as reported by Bentley himself,
instead of giving to Mercury, as to all the rest, a more correct rate of motion,
is made to have the contrary effect, in order the sooner to run out the
original error of assumed position, and produce a coincidence between the
calculated and the true places of the planet.
In the case of the other planets, the times of no error found by Bentley —
agree pretty nearly with those which we have ourselves obtained, both by
calculating backward from the errors of A.D. 1860, and by calculating —
it:
. ee al

. Mean Motions of the Planets 5
downward from those of B.C. 8102, and which are presented in the table
_ given under verse 67. Upon comparing the two tables, however, it will be
geen at.once that Bentley's conclusions are drawn, not from the sidereal
errors of position of the planets, but from the errors of their positions as
- compared with that of the sun, and that of the sun’s own error he makes
mo account at all. This is a method of procedure which certainly requires
i a much fuller explanation and justification than he has seen fit anywhere
to give of it. The Hindu sphere is a sidereal one, and in no wise bound to
>. the movement of the sun. The sun, like the other planets, was not in the
position assumed for him at the epoch of 3102 B.C., and consequently the
rate of motion assigned to him by the system is palpably different from
the real one: the sidereal year is about three minutes and a half too long.
Why then should the sun’s error be ignored, and the sidereal motions of
the other planets considered only with reference to the incorrect rate of
motion established for him? It is evident that Bentley ought to have
taken fully into consideration the sun’s position also, and to have shown
- either that it gave a like result with those abtained from the other planets,
or, if not, what was the reason of the discrepancy. By failing to do so,
he has, in our opinion, omitted the most fundamental datum of the whole
calculation, and the one which leads to the most important conclusions.
an We have seen, in treating of the bija, that it has been the aim of the
a modern Hindu astronomers, leaving the sun’s error untouched, to amend
bh 4 _ those of the other planets to an accordance with it. Now, as things are
sae wont to be managed in the Hindu literature, it would be no matter for suree pri if such corrections were incorporated into the text itself: had not the
| Wh | Strya-Siddhanta been, at the beginning of the sixteenth century, 50 widely
rat distributed, and its data so universally known, and had not the Hindu
Sa “science outlived already that growing and productive period of its history
ae 207) 1en a school of astronomy might put forth a corrected text of an ancient
- guthority, and expect to see it make its way to general acceptance, crowdiz out, and finally causing to disappear, the older version—such a process
f alteration might, in our view, have passed upon it, and such a text
‘might have been handed down to our time as Bentley would have pronounced, upon internal evidence, to have been composed early in the
‘SIX eenth century ; while, nevertheless, the original error of the sun would
Em emain, untouched and increasing, to indicate what was the true state of
4 ea
= cr
Si eo
o <a id ‘7. rl 4
Re | os f, > fi ad
a 4. = he wae a
' ° . by f ihe my
: ) 8) €1 ree tard?
‘c tel - 4
nee sometime

SS a
y wa ~
‘ oo : - = . Sees
26 “ : Stirya-Siddhanta
precise time is very doubtful, the discrepancies of the times of no error
being far too great to give a certain result. Now it is as certain as anything
in the history of Sanskrit literature can be, that there was a SidryaSiddhanta in existence long before that date; there is also evidence in the
references and citations of other astronomical works (see Colebrooke,
Essays, ii. 484; Hind. Alg., p. 1) that there have been more versions than
one of a treatise bearing the title; and we have seen above, in verse 9, a
not very obscure intimation that the present work does not present precisely
the same elements which had been accepted formerly as those of the SiryaSiddhanta. What can lie nearer, then, than to suppose that in the tenth
or eleventh century a correction of bija was calculated for application to
the elements of the Siddhinta, and was then incorporated into the text,
by the easy alteration of four or five of its verses; and accordingly, that
while the comparative errors of the other planets betray the date of the
correction, the absolute error of the sun indicates approximately the true
date of the treatise?
In our table the time of no error of the sun is given as A.D. 250.
The correctness of this date, however, is not to be too strongly insisted
upon, being dependent upon the correctness with which the sun's place
was first determined, and then referred to the point assumed as the origin
of the sphere. It was, of course, impossible to observe directly when the
sun's centre, by his mean motion, was 10’ east of ; Piscium, and there are
grave errors in the determination by the Hindus of the distances from that
point of the other points fixed by them in their zodiac. And a mistake
of 1° in the determination of the sun’s place would occasion a difference
of 425 years in the resulting date of no error. We shall have occasion to
recur to this subject in connection with the eighth chapter.
There is also an alternative supposition to that which we have made
above, respecting the conclusion from the date of no error of the sun. If
the error in the sun's motion were a fundamental feature of the whole Hindu
system, appearing alike in all the different text-books of the science, that
date would point to the origin rather of the whole system than of any
treatise which might exhiibt it. But although the different SiddhAntas
nearly agree with one another respecting the length of the sidereal year,
they do not entirely accord, as is made evident by the following statement,
in which are included all the authorities to which we have access, either
in the original, or as reported by Colebrooke, Bentley, and Warren:
Authority. Length of siderval yesr, Error.
Pauli¢a-Siddhinta, 865 12 86 +3 25
fricgera-Siddhinta, SAG 6 12 $1.50 +8 20.75 me
rya-Siddhints, 3°6 f #12 80 +3 19.26 set.
Aota-Qiromagi, 5 6 12 4 +2 658,25

Mean Motions of the Planets 27
The first five of these might be regarded as unimportant variations of
4 e same error, but it would seem that the last is an independent determipe tion, and one of later date than the others; while, if all are independyer Birr es the Stirya-Siddhanta has the appearance of being the most
ancient. Such questions as these, however, are not to be too hastily decided,
_ nor from single indications merely ; they demand the most thorough invessae igation of each different treatise, and the careful collection of all the
fs evide ace which can be brought to bear upon them.
> yee _ Here lies Bentley's chief error. He relied solely upon his method
ee OF examining the elements, applying even that, as we have seen, only
“pean and uncritically, and never allowing his rseults to be controlled
Penk OF corrected by evidence of any other character. He had, in fact, no philology, an he was deficient in sound critical judgment. He thoroughly misPs apprehended the character of the Hindu astronomical literature, thinking
“48 it to be, in the main, @ mass of forgeries framed for the purpose
i of deceiving the world respecting the antiquity of the Hindu people. Many
pOe > ‘ig most confident conclusions have already been overthrown by evide ce 0 whi h not even he would venture to question the verity, and
ting B we are persuaded that but little of his work would stand the test of o
— i thorough examination.
\ oe 7 The annexed table presents a comparison of the times of mean sidereal
in revolution of the planets assumed by the Hindu astronomy, as re presented
iN + , by two of its principal text-books, with those adopted by the great Greek
astronomer, and those which modern science has established. The latter
ez _ are, for the primary planets, from Le Verrier; for the moon, from Nichol
(Cyclopedia of the Physical Sciences, London: 1857). Those of Ptolemy
are deduced from the mean daily rates of motion in longitude given by
. him in the Syntaxis, allowing for the movement of the equinox according
to t xe false rate adopted by him, of 36” yearly.
te
er
hs :
ie." Comparative Table of the Sidereal Revolutions of the Planets.
a.
Siddhinta- Ptolemy. Moderns.
| Strya-Siddhints. Qiromagi.
h ™m ” d h m s d bh mm ~ d h m ’
a
. wn

28 — _ Sitrya-Siddhénta
In the additional notes at the end of the work, we shall revert to
the subject of these data, and of the light thrown by them upon the origin
and age of the system.
34....The number of risings of the asterisms, diminished by
the number of the revolutions of each planet respectively, gives the
number of risings of the planets in an Age.
35. The number of lunar months is the difference between
the number of revolutions of the sun and of the moon. If from it
the number of solar months be subtracted, the remainder is the
number of intercalary months.
36. Take the civil days from the lunar, the remainder is
the number of omitted lunar days (ttthikshaya). From rising to
rising of the sun are reckoned terrestrial civil days;
37. Of these there are, in an Age, one billion, five hundred
and seventy-seven million, nine hundred and seventeen thousand,
eight hundred and twenty-eight; of lunar days, one billion, six
hundred and three million, and eighty;
38. Of intercalary months, one million, five hundred and
ninety-three thousand, three hundred and thirty-six; of omitted
lunar days, twenty-five million, eighty-two thousand, two hundred
and fifty-two;
39. Of solar months, fifty-one million, eight hundred and
forty thousand. The number of risings of the asterisms, diminished by that of the revolutions of the sun, gives the number of
terrestrial days.
40. The intercalary months, the omitted lunar days, the
sidereal, lunar, and civil days—these, multiplied by a thousand,
are the number of revolutions, etc., in an Avon.
The data here given are combinations of, and deductions from, those :
contained in the preceding passage (vv. 20-34). For convenience of reference, we present them below in a tabular form.
In 4,320,000 years. In 1,080,000 years.
deduct solar revolutions, 4,920,000 1,080,
Natural, or civil days, 1,577 017,828 394,479,467
Sideral solar years, 4,320,000 1,080,000
multiply by no. of solar months in 5 year, 12 . 5 12

Mean Motions of the Planets 29
=, Moon's sidereal revolutions, 57.753, 3395 14,438,334
| deduct solar revolutions, 4.420 ,000 1,080,000
, Synodical revolutions, lunar months, 63 483,326 13,358 334
deduct solar months, 51,840,000 * 123,960,000
Interealary months, 1,593,326 398,334
= multiply by no. of lonar days in a month, 30 30
adi Omitted lunar days, 25,082,252 6,270,563
thee We add a few explanatory remarks respecting some of the terms employed in this passage, or the divisions of time which they designate.
£ The natural day, nycthemeron, is, for astronomical purposes, reckoned
in the Sarya-Siddhanta from midnight to midnight, and is of invariable
-_ ength; for the practical uses of life, the Hindus count it from sunrise to
‘sunrise; which would cause its duration to vary, in a latitude as high as
ea our own, sometimes as much as two or three minutes. As above noticed,
= the system of Brahmagupta and some others reckon the astronomical day
also from sunrise.
a For the lunar day, the lunar and solar month, and the general cons-
——-‘ titution of the year, see above, under verse 13. The lunar month, which
7 is the one practically reckoned by, is named from the solar month in which
ae it commences. An intercalation takes place when two lunar months begin
-—s i’ the same solar month: the former of the two is called an intercalary
rat month (adhimdsa, or adhimdsaka, ** extra month °'), of the same nume #s
coy
that which succeeds it.
a ¢ | mi i ' (tithiksha aa | f a lunar day}
g The term ‘* omitted lunar day (fithikshay«, O35 O a dey’,
be iyi explained by the method adopted in the calendar, and in practice, of
r te a i: of the month. The civil day receives the name of the
: gost “est ig the days ~ * dad i the same solar day
oe - lunar day which ends in it; but if two lunar days end in the sam LET cE
fat rmer of them is reckoned as loss (kshaya), and is omitted, the cs
41. «=9'The revolutions of the sun's apsis (manda), moving
eastward, in an Son, are three hundred and eighty-seven; of that
er. iC Mars, two hundred and four; of that of Mercury, three hundred
ive hundred and thirty-five; of the a
a
vy
s Pe
Nee ie, a se © .
and sixty-eight; ye
a a 42. Of that of Jupiter, nine hundred; of that of Venus,
rae F. psis of Saturn, thirty-nine.
“Farther, the revolutions of the nodes, retrograde, are :
aA Of that of Mars, two hundred and fourteen; of that of
ye See i -e} - of that of Jupiter, one
“Mercury, four hundred and eighty-eight; o p
Ss
E
o
a
é

re A CY 4tal =,
«ee J AS ea =
4 Ih ot = eal and
= a ae
of Venus, 1 nine handed” and al
a.
ees F 44. a the node of Saturn, the revolutions in an fon are ; |
| ix hundred and sixty-two : the revolutions of the moon's apsis
and node have been given here already. 2 ad Nd
In illustration of the curious feature of the Hindu system of astronomy presented in this passage, we first give the annexed table ; which
shows the number of revolutions in the Afon, or period of 4,820,000,000
years, assigned by the text to the apsis and node of each planet, the result- =
ing time of revolution, the number of years which each would require to
pass through an arc of one minute, and the position of each, according
to the system, in 1850; the latter being reckoned in our method, from the
vernal equinox. Farther are added the actual positions for Jan. 1, 1850, as
given by Biot (Traité d’ Astronomie, tom. v. 529); and finally, the errors”
of the positions as determined by this Siddhanta.
i al
Table of Revolutions and Present Position of the Apsides and Nodes of: ah ?
the Planets. i
No. af
| No. of lan: ; Resulting True Error of
Planet. | rev. in i revolution, | Years t0 | position, | position, | Hindu
an Kon. y ; sea ES 4.D. 1850. | A.D. 1850.) position.
Ee = —— ET nt CQtHHi ’ 4
Apsides : | L-] , ¢ , o ; Ld ,
827.586 oy os ||! on ba | oe ab
Ju iter, 7. 2 a 4 eal) axe” . — a <
A mere inspection of this table is sufficient to show that the Bind | AR
astronomers did not practically recognize any motion of the apsides and
nodes of the planets; since, even in 1 the case of those to which they assigned =
the most rapid motion, two thousand years, at the least, would be requ ed ae
te to produce such a change of place as they, with their imperfect means | |
observation, would be able to detect. |
‘This will, however, be made still more clearly Becgen by the ext
following table, oan os ages, eetnee ote roe

Mean Motions of the Planets 31
as determined by four different text-books of the Hindu science, for the
commencement of the Iron Age.
Positions of the Apsides and Nodes of the Planets, according to Different
Authorities, at the Commencement of the Iron Age, 5102 B. C.
@: Siddbinta# a s then ‘Para -araPlanet. | Sdrya-Siddhinta. Giromat i. Arya-Siddhinta. | Sid ahanta.
les : (rey.) & -« 2 a8 (rev.) Ss °o [ear (rev.) Ss « , ew. | (rev.) s os # “
Seturn, | (900-) 3 10 87 12 | (267—) 3 13 23 31 | (283-) 3 10 48 0 | (288-) 3 10 26 24
The data of the Arya and Pardcara Siddhintas, from which the positions given in the table are calculated, are derived from Bentley (Hind.
Ast. pp. 139, 144). To each position is prefixed the number of completed
revolutions ; or, in the case of the nodes, of which the motion is retrograde,
the number of whole revolutions of which each falls short by the amount
expressed by its position.
The almost universal disagreement of these four authorities with
respect to the number of whole revolutions accomplished, and their general
agreement as to the remainder, which determines the position,” prove that
the Hindus had no idea of any motion of the apsides and nodes of the
planets as an actual and observable phenomenon; but, knowing that the
moon's apsis and node moved, they fancied that the symmetry of the uni-
:. verse required that those of the other planets should move also; and they
| constructed their systems accordingly. They held, too, as will be seen at
F the beginning of the second chapter, that the nodes and apsides, as well as
at the conjunctions (gighra), were beings, stationed in the heavens, and exeee reising a physical influence over their respective planets, and, as the con-
-—s junctions revolved, so must these also. In framing their systems, then, they
assigned to these points such a number of revolutions in an 22on as should,
q Be itho ut attributing to them any motion which admitted of detection, make
_ their positions what they supposed them actually to be. The differences
air
ee mt * It is altogether probable that, in the two cases where the Arya-Siddhinta sceme
‘bot aay e with the others, its data were either given incorrectly by Bentley's authority,

<s = peapeok to the number of eevelations were in part rendered necessary by
oa the differences of other features of the systems; thus, while that of the
4 “ tw aa ee i te, 1 J ; “. S -
Lai > ; , "Ao The ort! Cs Lr re - a.
_ Siddhanta Ciromani makes the planetary motions commence at the begin-
| “+ ning of the AZon, by that of the Sirya-Siddhénta they commence 17,064,000
years later (see above, v. 24), and by that of the Arya-Siddhanta, 3,024,000
years later (Bentley, Hind. Ast. p. 139): in part, however, they are merely
arbitrary ; for, although the Paracara-Siddhinta agrees with the SdidhantaCiromani as to the time of the beginning of things, its numbers of revolutions correspond only in two instances with those of the latter.
It may be farther remarked, that the close accordance of the different
astronomical systems in fixing the position of points which are so difficult
of observation and deduction as the nodes and apsides, strongly indicates,
either that the Hindus were remarkably accurate observers, and all arrived
independently at a near approximation to the truth, or that some one of
them was followed as an avthority by the others, or that all alike derived
their data from a common source, whether native or foreign. We reserve
to the end of this work the discussion of these different possibilities, and
the presentation of data which may tend to settle the question between
them.
45. Now add together the time of the six Patriarchs
(manu), with their respective twilights, and with the dawn at the
commencement of the Avon (kalpa); farther, of the Patriarch
Manu, son of Vivasvant,
46. The twenty-seven Ages (yuga) that are past, and likewise the present Golden Age (krta yuga); from their sum subtract
the time of creation, already stated in terms of divine years,
47. In solar years: the result is the time elapsed at the
end of the Golden Age; namely, one billion, nine hundred and
fifty-three million, seven hundred and twenty thousand solar
years.
We have already presented this computation, in full, in the notes to
verses 23 and 24.
As the Strya-Siddhinta professes to have been revealed by the Sun
about the end of the Golden Age, it is of course precluded from
any notice of the divisions of time posterior to that period : there is no- a
where in the treatise an allusion to any of the eras which are actually made —
use of by the inhabitants of India in reckoning time, with the paderne= 4
of the cycle of sixty years, which, by its nature, is bound to sti a
a. ni ‘
“ui bs ~
48. To this, add the number of years of the time since

oa,
Mean Motions of the Planets 33
es period (see below, v. 55). The astronomical era is the commencement of
the Iron Age, the epoch, according to this Siddhinta, of the last general
coincides, as stated above (under vv. 29-34)
conjunction of the planets; this
with Feb. 18, 1612 J. P., or 3102 B.C. From that time will have elapsed,
pril, 1859, the number of 4960 complete sidereal
upon the eleventh of A
years of the Iron Age. The computation of the whole period, from the
beginning of the present order of things, is then as follows:
Pay From end of creation to end of last Golden Age, 1,953,720 ,000
Silver Age, 1,296,000
Brazen Age,
' a7 Of Iron Age,
| Total from end of creation to April, 1859,
7 _ Since the Sirya-Siddhanta, as will appear from the following verses,
_ reckons by luni-solar years, it regards as the end of I.A. 4960 not the end
_ of the solar sidereal year of that number, but that of the luni-solar year,
which, by Hindu reckoning, is completed upon the third of the same
month (see Ward, Kala Sankalita, Table, p. xxxii).
48....Reduce the sum to months, and add the months expired
of the current year, beginning with the light half of Caitra.
ae. 49. Set the result down in two places; multiply it by the
om number of intercalary months, and divide by that of solar months,
and add to the last result the number of intercalary months thus
_ found; reduce the sum to days, and add the days expired of the
a
current month;
50. Set the result down in two places; multiply it by the
and divide by that of lunar days;
e number of omitted lunar days
at midnight, on the meridian of
ae number of omitted lunar days,
eee eal
btract from the last result th
ts thus obtained : the remainder is,
Lanka,
. 51. The sum of days, in civil reckoning.....-.---
sd es “In these verses is taught the method of one of the most important
Pe ee 1 frequently recurring processes in Hindu Astronomy, the finding, namef the number of civil or natural days which have elapsed at anv given
reckoning either from the beginning of the present creation, or (see
vy. 56) from any required epoch since that time. In the modern
al an; 1 age, the result is uniformly styled the ahargana, ** sum of
ever, does not once occur in the text of the
-Siddt inta: in the present passage we have dyugana, which means
| in , and in verse 59 dinardgi, “' heap or quantity of days.”
a if —_ ee
am

‘ => ty + eq <q ye «
sma | ten oe ry f ea
- arya-S iddhanta
Let it be paral to find the sum of days to the Pisetohing of Jan. 1, 1860.
RP Tt is first necessary to know what date corresponds to this in Hindu —
_ reckoning. We have remarked above that the 4960th year of the Iron “
Age is completed in April, 1859; in order to exhibit the place in the next
following year of the date required, and, at the same time, to present the: S4--:
_ mames and succession of the months, which in this treatise are assumed =
as known, and are nowhere stated, we have constructed the following skeleton of a Hindu calendar for the year 4961 of the Iron Age, . :
Solar Year. aa.
month. Gret day. shea
(I. A. 4960.) Luni-solar Year.
12, Chitra Mar. 13, 1859. mouth. firat day.
1. Véicikha, Apr. 12, do. 1. Céitra, Apr. 4, 1859.
A 2, Jytishths, May 138, do. 2. Viiigakha, May 3, do.
8. Ashadha, June 14, do. 8 Jykishths, June 2, do. :
4. Qrivana, July 15, do. 4. Ashidha, July 1, do.
5. Bhb&drapada, Aug. 16, do. 5. QOrdvana, July 81, do.
6. Aocvine, Bept. 16, do. 6. Bbidrapada Aug. 29, do.
7. Earttika, Oct. 16, do. 7. Aovina, Sept. 28, do.
6. Margacirsha, Nov. 15, do. 5. Kiirttika, Oct. 27, do. ‘
® Piushsa, Dec. 15, do. 9. Miargactrsha, Nov. 26, do. =
10. Magba, Jan. 13, 1860. 10. Pd&usha, Dec. 25, do.
ll. Philguna, Feb. ll, do. ll. Macha, Jan. 24, 1860.
12. Ciitra, _ Mar. 12, do. 12. Phalguna, Feb. 22, do. :
1. C&itra, Mar. 23, do. ~
The names of the solar months are derived from the names of the
asteriams (see below, chap. viii.) in which, at the time of their being first
so designated, the moon was full during their continuance. The same
names are transferred to the Junar months. Each lunar month is divided x
into two parts; the first, called the light half (cukla paksha, a bright rs
side '’), lasts from new moon to full moon, or while the moon is. waxing; ‘~
the other, called the dark half (Krshna paksha, ‘* black side ""), lasts: from x $
full moon to new moon, or while the moon is waning. Bp
The table shows that Jan. 1, 19860, is the eighth day of meee “a
month of the 496lst year of the Iron Age. The time, then, for which we
have to find the sum of days, is 1,955,884,960 y., 9 m., 7 d.
Number of complete yeare elapsed,
multiply by number of 80 ar months in & year,
Number of months, — “:
add months elapsed of current year,
‘Whole namber of padi nee. =
a™ Ce
"4 ’ —_ a a o dons 5

~ ne — ae ger ie ‘= 7.
0) ag eae ae |
Sig t a ; oa gts oF
ree - are Mean Motions of the Planets 35
ee " . _ Now a proportion is made: as the whole number of solar months in
y an Age is to the number of intercalary months in the same period, so is
= the number of months above found to that of the corresponding intercalary
months: or,
Te Whole number of months, as above, ' 23,470,610,529
| — , . add intercalary months, 721,384,703
. a.” Whole number of lunar months, 24,192,004 2352
ite ss snultiply by number of luoar days in a month, 30
Number of lunar days, 725,760,126 ,960
, ss add lunar days elapsed of current month, 7
3 aS her _ Whole number of lunar days elapsed, 725,760,126, 067
a ‘Po reduce, again, the number of lunar days thus found to the corresponding number of solar days, a proportion is made, as before: as the whole
number yf lunar days in an Age is to the number of omitted lunar days in
the same period, so is the number of lunar days in the period for which
_ the sum of days is required to that of the corresponding omitted lunar days:
be “Whole number of lunar days, as above, 725,760,126 067
Ww jeduct omitted lunar days, 11366 018,395
des
a aie | |
a? ‘Total number of civil days from end of creation to
beginning of Jan, 1, 1560, |
bi
From this may be found the lords of the day, the
ath, &€ i the year, counting from the sun. If the number be
ide d by sev ven, the remainder marks the lord of the day, begineee ie Reese oh 4 PAs ;
> 52. Divide the same number by the number of days in
a month ni | in ‘a year, multiply the one quotient by two and the
other by ; wree , add one to each product, and divide by seven; the
1a] indicate the lords of the month and of the year.
if - erse ; explain the method of ascertaining, from the sum of days
ady found, 7 planet which is accounted to preside over the day, and
‘un e] whose charge are placed the month and year in which
J ua 4 vy
day is to find the day of the week, since the
name from the former. The week, with the mames and

ate ee
ide
nas he be Stirya-Siddhanta —
succession of its days, is the same in India as with us, having been derived
both from a common source. The principle upon which the assignment
of the days to their respective guardians wus made has been handed down
by ancient authors (see Ideler, Handbuch d. math. u. tech, Chronologie,
i. 178, etc.), and is well known. It depends upon the division of the day
into twenty-four hours, and the assignment of each of these in succession
to the planets, in their natural order; the day being regarded as under the
dominion of that planet to which its first hour belongs. Thus, the planets
being set down in the order of their proximity to the earth, as determined
by the ancient systems of astronomy (for the Hindu, see below, xii. 84-88),
beginning with the remotest, as follows: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, sun, Venus,
Mercury, moon, and the first hour of the twenty-four being assigned to the
sun, as chief of the planets, the second to Venus, etc., it will be found that
the twenty-fifth hour, or the first of the second day, belongs to the moon ;
the forty-ninth, or the first of the third day, to Mars, and so on. Thus is
obtained a new arrangement of the planets, and this is the one in which
_this Siddhinta, when referring to them, always assumes them to stand
(see, for instance, below, v. 70; ii. 35-37): it has the convenient property
that by it the sum and moon are separated from the other planets, from
which they are by so many peculiarities distinguished. Upon this order
depend the rules here given for ascertaining also the lords of the month and
of the year. The latter, as appears both from the explanation of the commentator, and from the rules themselves, are no actual months and years,
but periods of thirty and three hundred and sixty days, following one
another in uniform succession, and supposed to be placed, like the day,
under the guardianship of the planets to whom belong their first subdivisions: thus the lord of the day is the lord of its first hour; the
lord of the month is the lord of its first day (and so of its first hour); the
lord of the year is the lord of its first month (and so of its first day and
hour). We give below this artificial arrangernent of the planets, with the
order in which they are found to succeed one another as lords of the periods
of one, thirty, and three hundred and sixty days; we add their natural
order of succession, as lords of the hours; and we farther prefix the ordinary names of the days, with their English equivalents. Other of the
numerous names of the planets, it is to be remarked, may be put before
the word vdra to form the name of the duy: vdra itself means literally
*‘ successive time,’’ or “* turn,’’ and is not used, so far as we are aware,
in any other connection, to denote a day.
Name of day Prosiding Planet sean a Oe
day, month, sear, hour,
Ravivara, Bunday, Sun, AS ok 1 1
Bomavire, Monday, Moon, 2 5 6 4
Mangalavira, Toesday, Mars, 8 3 4 7
Budhavéra, Wednesday, Mercury, = | 6 2 8
Guruviars, Thursday, Jupiter, 5 3a ni 6
raviéra, Priday, Venus, 6 7 5 2 oe.
vara, y: Saturn, ,. «4 J®@ .se eee

Mean Motions of the Planets 37
As the first day of the subsistence of the present order of things is
supposed to have been a Sunday, it is only necessary to divide the sum of
, days by seven, and the remainder will be found, in the first column, opposite
. ‘the name of the planet to which the required day belongs. Thus, taking
the sum of days found above, adding to it one, for the first of January
itself, and dividing by seven, we have:
The first of January, 1860, accordingly, falls on a Sunday by Hindu
oak reckoning, as by our own.
» , On referring to the table, it will be seen that the lords of the months
~~ follow one another at intervals of two places. To find, therefore, by a
Pot summary process, the lord of the month in which occurs any given day,
" first divide the sum of days by thirty ; the quotient, rejecting the remainder, is the number of months elapsed; multiply this by two, that
hott each month may push the succession forward two steps, add one for the
er to get rid of whole series, and
oe current month, divide by seven in ord
f ‘the remainder is, in the column of lords of the dav, the number of the
f ‘a
— regent of the month required. Thus:
p Pxte
y e
a
47 Cs aah
e month in question is therefore Saturn.
rd of the year, saving that, as the
ervals of three places, the
tiplication is by three instead of by two. Upon working out the pro-
: ainder is five, which designates
parallel passage xii. 77, 78, no reference is
to the week, or to the names of its days.
eak of the week at all in connection with
ever to have regarded it as 4 division
they knew only of a certain order
placed under the regency of the
as remarked above (under vv. Il,
the day into twenty-four hours upon
it follows that the whole system was
re) - gucce sion, |
oC» 2 ee eee c .
eave aie planets. And since, moreover,
12), they never made that division of
Reicks the 0 der of regency depends,
ea a

: ; Sates: «aii. and. re ola into Yodan ‘sions with other Serena =
a
e modern sciences of astronomy and astrology, to which it belonged. Its —
a i see foundation, the lordship ‘of the successive hours, is shown by the | a
ther passage (xii. 78) to have been also known to the Hindus; and the
z" name by which the hours are there called (hord=Gea) indicates beyond ;
8 7 a the source whence they derived it.
53. Multiply the sum of days (dinardgi) by the number of
revolutions of any planet, and divide by the number of civil days;
the result is the position of that planet, in virtue of its mean
motion, in revolutions and parts of a revolution.
By the number of revolutions and of civil days is meant, of course,
their number, as stated above, in an Age. For ** position of the planet,"’
ete., the text has, according to its usual succinet mode of expression,
simply ‘* is the planet, in revolutions, ete."’ There is no word for "* posi- _
tion “ or“ place "’ in the vocabulary of this Siddhanta. ;
This verse gives the method of finding the mean place of the plancts
at any given time for which the sum of days has been ascertained, by |
a simple proportion: as the number of civil days in a period is to the ©
number of revolutions during the same period, so is the sum of days to
Sy
the mumber of revolutions and parts of a revolution accomplished down ~~
to the given time. Thus, for the sun: ne
1,577,917,828 > 4,320,000 ©: 714,404,108,572 ; 1,955,854,060™" 6* 17° 48° 7” tos
The mean longitude of the sun, Looe Jan. Ist, 1860, at midnight aM -
on the meridian of Ujjayini, is 257° 48’ 7". We have caleulated in this ©
manner the positions of all the planets, and of the moon’s apsis and. node— Pees
availing ourselves, however, of the permission given below, in verse 56, , &
and reckoning only from the last epoch of conjunction, the beginning of the > ©
Iron Age (from which time the sum of days is 1,811,945), and also employing the numbers afforded by the lesser period of 1,080,000 years—and — La
present the results in the following table. hey fi
Mean Places of the Planets, Jan, 1st, 1860, midnight at Li jjayini, =
“According to the The same
Planet. Sdrya-Siddbinta, correoted by the bfya.
Sie, ht ee ee
Jupiter, (ais) 2 ae 2 22 41 41°

Mean Motions of the Planets 39
_ The positions are given as deduced both from the numbers of revolu_ tions stated in the text, and from the same as corrected by the bija:
prefixed are the numbers of complete revolutions accomplished since the
epoch. = In the cases of the moon’s apsis and node, however, it was
necessary to employ the numbers of revolutions given for the whole Age,
ae these not being divisible by four, and also to add to their ascertained
i amount of movement their longitude at the epoch (see below, under vv.
5am
oe, 54. Thus also are ascertained the places of the conjunction
(cighra) and apsis (mandocca) of each planet, which have beer
mentioned as moving eastward; and in like manner of the nodes,
which have a retrograde motion, subtracting the result from a
_ whole circle.
. -_ The places of the apsides and nodes have already been given above
(under vv. 41-44), both for the commencement of the Iron Age, and
for A.D. 1850. The place of the conjunctions of the three superior planets
ie.
Pe ae is, of course, the mean longitude of the sun. In the case of the inferior
__-— planets, the place of the conjunction is, in fact. the mean place of the
planet itself in its proper orbit, and if is this which we have given for
2 Mercury and Venus in the preceding tnble: while to the Hindu apprehen-
"i sion, the mean place of those planets is the same with that of the sun.
S ieiaahtgiaet
OP by cw
55. Multiply by twelve the past revolutions of Jupiter, add
= the signs of the current revolution. and divide by sixty: the
remainder marks the year of Jupiter’s cycle, counting from
m eo Vijaya.
aon
_————*—sS his is thee rule for finding the current year of the cycle of sixty vears,
which is in use throughout all India. and which ts called
~ = slanet, by its mean motion, through one sign of the zodiac. According
sf this period with the true
pe a ; the evele of
~~ . Jupiter, because the length of its years is measured by the passage of that
f this Siddhanta, the length of Jupiter’s year
nakes it about 12m longer. Tt was
f time: but it has not been
where the evele arioimated,
os
: vy ei M4
stiefactor ily ascertained, so far as we are aware,
et. There was, indeed, also in use a evele
ty the time of one sidereal revolution: see
low, x 209, etc.) and Warren (Kala Sankalita.
197, ete.) length of the greater cycle, and of the

“Sarya-Siddhtnta.
La
> war ’
eae
Le, ‘different modes of reckoning and naming its years usual in the different
ge provinces of India.
S- In illustration of the rule, let us ascertain the year of the cycle corresponding to the present year, A.D. 1859. It is not necessary to make
the calculation from the creation, as the rule contemplates; for, since
the number of Jupiter's revolutions in the period of 1,080,000 years is
divisible by five, a certain number of whole cycles, without a remainder,
will have elapsed at the beginning of the Iron Age. The revolutions of
the planet since that time, as stated in the table last given, are 418, and
it is in the Srd sign of the 419th revolution; the reduction of the whole
amount of movement to signs shows us that the current year is the
5019th since the epoch: divide this by 60, to cast out whole cycles, and
the remainder, 39, is the number of the year in the current cycle. This
treatise nowhere gives the names of the years of Jupiter, but, as in the
ease of the months, the signs of the zodiac, and other similar matters,
assumes them to be already familiarly known in their succession: we
accordingly present them below. We take them from Mr. Davis's paper,
alluded to above, not having access at present to any original authority
which contains them.
- > ° > a ‘ese Ff esr ee ™, Gee _ >
1. Vijaya. 91. PramA&din. 41. Senet
2. Jaya. 22, Ananda. 42. Ava.
‘ 3. Manmaths 23. Hékshasa, 49. Yuvan.
; 4. Durmukha 24. Ansle. 44. Dhitar.
| 5. Hemalamba 95. Pingola. 45. Tovara.
: 6. Vilambe 26. KA&layukta. 46. Bahudbanys.
7. WVik&rin 27. Siddbdrthin. 47. PramAthin.
? 8. Qarvart 28. RaAndra. : 48. Vikrams.
9. va. 29. Darmati. 49. Bbrcya.
10. Qubhaokrt. 80. Wundubhi. 50. Citrabhanu.
ll. GQobhana. 81. Rudhirodgdrin. 61. Subhfnn.
12. Krodhin. $2. Raktdksha. 52. Thrapa.
13. Vicvivasu 33, Krodhans. 53. Pirthivwa.
14. Paribhavs 34. Kahaya. 54. Vyaya.
15. Pilavanga 35. Prabhava. 55. Sarvajit. —
16. Kilaka 36, Vibhava. 56. Sarvadhfirin.
17. SAumya 87. Qoklea. 57. Virodhin.
18. SAidbirana 38. Pramoda. 58. Vikrta. tia Si;
19. Viredha 39. PrajApati. 59. Khara.
20. Paridhivin. 40, Angiras. 60. Nandans
; It appears, then, that the current year of J upiter’s ‘eycle | ia named |
raiApati: upon dividing by the planet’s mean daily motion the part of
Be cceens sli already passed over, it will be found that, according to
the text, that year commenced on the twenty-third of February, 1859;
or, if the correction of the bfia be admitted, on the third of April. , | a:
Although it is thus evident that the Strya-Siddhanta regards both —
the existing order of things and the Tron Age as having begun with Vijaya, ins
that year is not generally accounted as the first, but as the twenty-seventh, —
a
of the cycle, _ which: is thus made to commence with Prabhava, An oie! ) ae

meee
oe:
————s Mean Motions of the Planets AL
£ Sa of this discrepancy might perhaps throw important light upon
he origin or history of the cycle.
‘This method of reckoning time is called (see below, xiv. 1, 2) the
_bérhaspaty mana, ‘' measure of Jupiter.’
| a a 56. The processes which have thus been stated in full detail,
: e practically applied in an abridged form. The calculation of
a r
ao the | mean place of the planets may be made from any epoch
yuga) that may be fixed upon.
BT. Now, at the end of the Golden Age (krta yuqa), all the
planets by their mean motion—excepting, however, their nodes
nd apsides (mandocca)—are in conjunction in the first of Aries.
s in the first of Capricorn, and
ry i its eo is in the first of Libra; and the rest, which have been
33h stated! above to have a slow motion—their position cannot be
one in whole signs.
’ oe
Tt is curious to observe how the Sarya
; = E gamit a later origin than that which it claims in the second verse of
‘she chapter, ig compelled to ignore the real astronomical epoch, — the
a ae tse ginning of the Iron Age; and also how it avoids any open recognition
cate of e lesser cycle of 1, 080,000 years, by which its calculations are 80
ey idently. intended to be made.
t wz, iz ‘The words at the end of verse 56 the commentator interprets to mean:
: ec: ro m the beginning of the current, i.e-, the Silver, Age.” In me he
“ re jis or ly helping: to keep up the pretence of the work to. ey ae
_ tiqui y even going therein beyond the text itself, which expressly says:
om
oats Orr ey, desired (ishtatas) yuga. Possibly, however, we have taken
_ too gre it a liberty in rendering yuga by © epoch,"* and it should rather
eae Tae ae The word yuga comes from
be Age. i @., * * beginning of an Age."’ i
as ray - the word itself
t)
" (Latin, junga; Greek, lev youn
seems to have been originally applied
is ithe: eee ugum, tvyév), and
ae hee a th jus or od, by means of which the conjunction or
anere por rdence of discordant modes of reckoning time was kept up; thus
‘signifies also the tustrum, or” evele of five years, which, with an
5" f the year
int -anci entl maintained the correspondenc 3,°
inter lated age ene ently From such uses it was transferred
he indu chronolory.
riods ee 5 . re accounted to have
the Iron
iy
ion
: ge 68. The moon’s apsis (ucca) |
-SiddhAnta, lest it should seem
fli
tp Pale nh
— es
rT oy Uo +t 7 +r
a . \ ne

Sitrya-Siddhdnta 2
Age, the planets, at the latter epoch, have again returned to a position
of mean conjunction: the moon’s node, also, is still in the first of Libra,
but her apsis has changed its place half a revolution, to the first of Cancer —
(see above, under vy 29-34). The positions of the apsides and nodes
of the other planets at the same time have been given already, under
verses 41-44.
The Hindu names of the signs correspond in signification with our
own, having been brought into India from the West.
There is nowhere in
this work any allusion to them as constellations, or as having any fixed
position of their own in the heavens: they are simply the names of the
successive signs (rdgi, bha) into which any circle is divided, and it is left
to be determined by the connection, in any case, from what point they
shall be counted. Here, of course, it is the initial point of the fixed
Hindu sphere (see above, under v. 27). As the signs are, in the sequel,
frequently cited by name, we present annexed, for the convenience of
reference of those to whose memory they are not familiar in the order
of their succession, their names, Latin and Sanskrit, their numbers, and
the figures generally used to represent them. Those enclosed in brackets
do not chance to occur in our text.
1. Aries, | mesha, aja. 7. Libra, <~ tuld.
2 Taurus, 6 ershan. 8. Scorpio, m [ercecika,] ali.
8. Gemini, [TT mithuna. 9. Sagittarius, f dhanus,
4. Cancer, mw “karka, karkata,. 10. Capricornus, VP makara, myrga.
5. Leo, © [einha). 11. Aquarius, =: kumbha.
6. Virgo, TT kanyd. 12. Pisces, 3% [mina],
In the translation given above of the second half verse 58, not no
little violence is done to the natural construction. This would seem to
require that it be rendered: ‘‘ and the rest are in whole signs (have come
to a position which is without a remainder of degrees); they, being of
slow motion, are not stated here."" But the actual condition of things
at the epoch renders necessary the former translation, which is that of
the commentator also. We cannot avoid conjecturing that the natural
rendering was perhaps the original one, and that a subsequent alteration
of the elements of the treatise compelled the other and forced interpretation to be put upon the passage.
The commentary gives the positions of the apsides and nodes (those
of the nodes, however, in reverse) for the epoch of the end of the. Golden
Age, but, strangely enough, both in the printed edition and in our
script, commits the blunder of giving the position of Saturn's node a
second time, for that of his apsis, and also of making the seconds of the
position of the node of Mars 12, instead of 24. We thoefore ad thers
below, in thejr correct form.
pe

ane Mean Motions of the Planets | 43
aa |
Fil Motion of the Apsides and Nodes of the Planets, to the End of the last
ae Golden Age.
ey 4
: 7 % ¥ Planet. Apsis.
Soe ' =
ja. | Mercury, ove 6 4 4 48
— Jupiter, 407) 0 9 O QO
oe :
; The method of finding the mean places of the planets for midnight
rime meridian having been now fully explained, the treatise
on the p
show how they may be found for other places, and for other
proceeds to
- _ times of the day. To this the first requisite is to know the dimensions
é of the earth.
: eo! 59. Twice eight hundred yojanas are the diameter of the
. earth - the square root of ten times the square of that is the earth's
# circumference.
--—S«@0..«SThis, multiplied by the sine of the co-latitude
and divided by radius (trijivd), is the
corrected (sphuta) circumference of the earth at that place....
_~—s- There is the same difficulty in the way of ascertaining the exactness
f the earth as of the Greek; the uncerloyed. The yojana is
h a certain
‘* bow-lengths,"’ or danda,
' By its origin, the latter
ought not to vary far from eighteen inches; but the higher measures
differ greatly in their relation to it. The usual reckoning makes the
- -yojana equal 32,000 cubits, but it is also sometimes regarded as com:
posed of 1 5,000 cubits ; and it is accordingly estimated by different authoriSs fcrn four and o half to rather more than ten miles English. This
‘tainty is no merely modern condition of things: Hivien-Thsang,
monk who visited India in the middle of the seventh cenreport: ; (see Stanislas Julien’s Mémoires de Hiouen-Thsang, i. 5%,
at in ne ia *‘ according to ancient tradition « yojana equals forty
maining to. hi customary use of the Indian kingdoms, it is thirty
ne mentioned | in the sacred books contuims only sixteen
tae ’
avi
o~
ad ”
Aa ry
bees | pen.. *

cine
li;"’ this smallest yojana, according to the value of the Li given by Williams (Middle Kingdom, ii. 154), being equal to from five to six English
miles. At the same time, Hiuen-Thsang states the subdivisions of the
yojana in a manner to make it consist of only 16,000 cubits. Such
being the condition of things, it is clearly impossible to appreciate the
value of the Hindu estimate of the earth’s dimensions, or to determine
how far the disagreement of the different astronomers on this point may
be owing to the difference of their standards of measurement. Aryabhatta (see Colebrooke’s Hind. Alg. p. xxxviii; Essays, ii. 468) states the
earth’s diameter to be 1050 yojanas; Bhaskara (Siddh.-Cir. vii. 1) gives
it as 1581: the latter author, in his Lilavati (i. 5, 6), makes the yojana
consist of 32,000 cubits..
The ratio of the diameter to the circumference of a circle is here
made to be 1:/10, or 1: 3,1625, which is no very near approximation.
It is not a little surprising to find this determination in the same treatise
with the much more accurate one afforded by the table of sines given in
the next chapter (vv. 17-21), of 3488:10,8000, or 1:3.14136; and then
farther, to find the former, and not the latter, made use of in calculating
the dimensions of the planetary orbits (see below, xii. 83). But the
same inconsistency is found also in other astronomical and mathematical
authorities. Thus Aryabhatta (see Colebrooke, as above) calculates the
earth's circumference from its diameter by the ratio 7:22, or 1:3.14286,
but makes the ratio 1: ~ 10 the basis of his table of sines, and Brahmagupta and Cridhbara also adopt the latter. Bhaskara, in stating the
earth's circumference at 4967 yojanas, is very near the truth, since
1581 :4967::1:3.14168; his Lilavati (v. 201) gives 7:22, and also,
as more exact, 1250:3927, or 1:3.1416. ‘This subject will be reverted
to in connection with the table of sines.
The greatest circumference of the earth, as calculated according to
the data and method of the text, is 5059.556 yojanas. The astronomical
yojana must be regarded ag an independent standard of measurement,
by which to estimate the value of the other dimensions of the solar
system stated in this treatise. To make the earth’s mean diameter correct as determined by the Strya-Siddhanta, the yojana should equal
4.94 English miles; to make the circumference correct, it should equal
4.91 miles. :
The rule for finding the circumference of the earth upon a parallel of
latitude is founded upon a simple proportion, viz., rad.: cos. latitude: :
circ. of earth at equater : do. at the given parallel; the cosine of the
latitude being, in effect, the radius of the circle of latitude. Radius and
cosine of latitude are tabular numbers, derived from the table to be given
afterward (see below, ii. 17-21). ‘This treatise is not accustomed to employ
cosines directly in its calculations, but has special names for the complements of the different arcs which it has occasion to use. Terrestrial

Mean Motions of the Planets 45
latitude is styled aksha, ‘‘ axle,’" which term, as appears from xii. 42, is
employed elliptically for akshonnati,‘* elevation of the axle,’’ i.e. “ of the
pole: lamba, co-latitude, which properly signifies “ lagging, dependence
falling off," is accordingly the depression of the pole, or its distance from
PR zenith. Directions for finding the co-latitude are given below (iii. 15,
The latitude of Washington being 38°54’, the sine of its co-latitude
is 2675'; the proportion 3438:2675: :-§059.64-3936.75 gives us, then,
the earth's circumference at Washington as 3936.75 yojanas.
60....Multiply the daily motion of a planet by the distance
in longitude (degdntara) of any place, and divide by its corrected
circumference;
61. The quotient, in minutes, subtract from the mean
position of the planet as found, if the place be east of the prime
meridian (rekhd) ; add, if it be west ; the result is the planet's mean
position at the given place.
The rules previously stated have ascertained the mean places of the
planets at a given midnight upon the prime meridian; this teaches us
how to find them for the same midnight upon any other meridian, or,
how to correct for difference of longitude the mean places already found.
The proportion is: 4s the circumference of the earth at the latitude of
the point of observation is to the part of it intercepted between that
point and the prime meridian, so is the whole daily motion of each
planet to the amount of its motion during the time between midnight
‘on the one meridian and on the other. The distance in longitude
(degdantara, literally “* difference of region *") is estimated, it will be observed, neither in time nor in arc, but in yojanas. How it is ascertained
is taught below, in verses 63-65.
The geographical position of the prime meridian
‘* line "') is next stated. :
62. Situated upon the line which passes through the
haunt of the demons (rdkshasa) and the mountain which is the
seat of the gods, are Rohitaka and Avanti, as also the adjacent
(rekhd, literally
=. Lanka, the fabled seat of Ravana, the
whom of Riama‘s wife, with
The *' haunt of the demons
* chief of the Rakshasas, the abduction by
the expedition to Lanka of her heroic husband for her rescue, its accompl hx ent, and the destruction of Ravana and his people, form the
31 bject of the epic poem ealled the Ramayana. In that poem, and to
‘on of the Hindus, Lanka is the island Ceylon; in

a. a‘
aie OR
‘Stirya-Siddhdnta
a Deed An
al me | «
Ae the astronomical geography, however (see below, xii. 39), it is a city,
Pe ‘situated upon the equator. How far those who established the meridian
may have regarded the actual position of Ceylon as identical with that
assigned to Lank&é might not be easy to determine. The ‘‘ seat of the
gods "' is Mount Meru, situated at the north pole (see below, xii. 34, etc.).
The meridian is usually styled that of Lanka, and “* at Lanki'"’ is the
ordinary phrase made use of in this treatise (as, for instance, above, v.
50; below, ili. 43) to designate a situation either of no longitude or of
no latitude.
But the circumstance which actually fixes the position of the prime
meridian ig the situation of the city of Ujjayini, the Om, of the Grecks,
the modern Ojein. Tt is called in the text by one of its ancient names,
Avanti. It is the capital of the rich and populous province of Malava,
occupying the platesu of the Vindhya mountains just north of the
principal ridge and of the river Narmada (Nerbudda), and from old
time a chief seat of Hindu literature, science, and arts. Of all the
centres of Hindu culture, it lay nearest to the great ocean-route by which,
during the first three centuries of our era, so important a commerce was
carried on between Alexandria, as the mart of Rome, and India and the
countries lying still farther east. That the prime meridian was made
to pass through this city proves it to have been the cradle of the Hindu
science of astronomy, or its principal seat during its early history. Its
actual situation is stated by Warren (Kala Sankalita, p. 9) as lat. 23°
1l’ 30” N., long. 75° 53’ E. from Greenwich: a later authority, Thornton's Gazetteer of India (London: 1857), makes it to be in lat. 23° 10’ N,.
long. 75° 47! E.; in our farther calculations, we shall assume the latter
position to be the correct one.
The situation of Rohitaka is not so clear; we have not succeeded in
finding such a place mentioned in any work on the ancient geography of
India to which we have access, nor is it to be traced upon Lassen’s map
of ancient India. A city called Rohtuk, however, is mentioned by Thornton
(Gazetteer, p. 836), as the chief place of a modern British district of the
same name, and its situation, a little to the north-west of Delhi, in the
midst of the ancient Kurukshetra, leads us to regard it as identical with the
Rohitaka of the text. ‘That the meridian of Lanké was expressly recognized ms passing over the Kurukshetra, the memorable site of the great
battle described by the Mahabharata, seems clear. Bhaskara (Siddh.-Cir.,
Gan., vii. 2) describes it as follows: ‘‘ the line which, passing above Lanka
and Ujjayini, and touching the region of the Kurukshetra, ete., goes
through Meru—that line is by the wise regarded as the central meridian
(madhyarckhd) of the earth.’" Our own commentary also explains
sannihitam sarah, which we have translated * adjacent lake," as signifyin ae
“Kurukshetra, Warren (as above) takes the same expression to be the
i | ae . eae Tey Wu rr ei cet y cn IRS
name of a city, which seems to us highly improbable; nor do we see that =
to “4 y?

Mean Motions of the Planets 47
the word saras\ can properly be applied to a tract of country: we have
therefore thought it safest to translate literally the words of the text, confessing that we do not know to what they refer.
Tf Rohitaka and Rohtuk signify the same place, we have here a
measure of the accuracy of the Hindu determinations of longitude; Thornton
oir gives its longitude as 76° 38’; or 51’ to the east of Ujjayini,
| The method by which an observer is to determine his distance from
the prime meridian is next explained
63. When, in a total eclipse of the moon, the emergence
(unmilana) takes place after the calculated time for its occurrence,
then the place of the observer is to the east of the central meridian.
64. When it takes place before the calculated time, his place
is to the west : the same thing may be ascertained likewise from
the immersion (nimilana). Multiply by the difference of the two
times in nfdis the corrected circumference of the earth at the
place of observation.
65. ‘And divide by sixty, the result, in yojanas, indicates
the distance of the observer from the meridian, to the east or to
the west, upon his own parallel ; and by means of that is made the
correction for difference of longitude.
, Choice is made, of course, of 4 lunar eclipse, and not of a solar, for
the purpose of the determination of longitude, because its phenomena,
2 ‘being unaffected by parallax, are seen everywhere at the sarne instant of
—s absolute time; and the moments of total disappearance and first. reappear:
Mets ance of the moon in 4 total eclipse are farther selected, because the precise
PAE instant of their occurrence 15 observable with more accuracy than that of
the first and last contact of the moon with the shadow. For the explanation of the terms here used see the chapters upon eclipses (below, iv-vi).
The interval between the computed and observed time being «ssceran a tained, the distance in longitude (decdntara) is found by the simple propor-
| a tion: as the whole number of nadis in a day (sixty) is to the interval of
time in nidis, so is the circumference of the earth at the latitude of the
te point of observation to the distance of that point from the prime meridian,
: 2d on the parallel. Thus, for instance, the distance of Ujjayvini from
i : from
a en .
NGvsenwich, in time, being 5b Sm 6s, and that Washington
Greenwich 5h 8m Ils (Am. Naut. Almanne), that of Ujiayint from
Washington ia 10b 11m 19+, or, in Hindu time 250 28 Ip.8, oF 250.4718:
Beet thal proportion 00:25.4718: :2996.75:1071.28, ve Sunn
471.28 yojanas as the distance in lonzitude (degiantara) of Washington
jie “3 ,du meridian, the constant quantity to be employed in finding
ean places of the plancts at Washington,
; » ES eee
‘ Pr?

Tae? Sree 2, > aa Pi Sot
een ae | | tre se
3 pe aot neers, « vote -
7 6 Te S PF “oa fo dit ; ;
Satrya-Siddhanta
We might have expected that calculators so expert as the Hindus
would employ the interval of time directly in making the correction for
difference of longitude, instead of reducing it first to its value in yojanas.
That they did not measure longitude in our manner, in degrees, ete., is
owing to the fact that they seem never to have thought of applying to the
globe of the earth the system of measurement by circles and divisions of
circles which they used for the sphere of the heavens, but, even when
dividing the earth into zones (see below, xii. 59-66) reduced all their distances laboriously to yojanas.
66. The succession of the week-day (vdra) takes place, to
the east of the meridian, at a time after midnight equal to the
difference of longitude in nadis ; to the west of the meridian, at a
corresponding time before midnight.
This verse appears to us to be an astrological precept, asserting the
regency of the sun and the other planets, in their order, over the successive
portions of time assigned to each, to begin everywhere at the same instant
of absolute time. that of their true commencement upon the prime
meridian: so that, for instance, at Washington, Sunday, as the day placed
under the guardianship of the sun, would really begin at eleven minutes
before two on Saturday afternoon, by local time. The commentator, however, sees in it merely an intimation of what moment of local time, in
places east and west of the meridian, corresponds to the true beginning of
the day upon the prime meridian, and he is at much pains to defend the
verse from the charge of being superfluous and unnecessary, to which it is
indeed liable, if that be its only meaning.
The rules thus far given have directed us only how to find the mean
places of the planets at a given midnight. The following verse teaches
the method of ascertaining their position at any required hour of the day.
67. Multiply the mean daily motion of a planet by the number of nidis of the time fixed upon, and divide by sixty : subtract
the quotient from the place of the planet, if the time be before
midnight ; add, if it be after: the result is its place at the given
time.
sporti 7 in n day (sixty)
The proportion is as follows: as the number of nadis in # (sixty
is to sbikes iat the interval between midnight and the time for which the
mean place of the planet is sought, so is the whole daily motion of the
planet to its motion during the interval; and the result is additive or
eiberasstve’ of course according as the time fixed upon is after or before

Mean Motions of the Planets 49
- an 5 In order to furnish a practical test of the accuracy of this text-book
ee astronomy, and of its ability to yield correct results at the present time,
Ye fre have calculated, by the rule given in this verse, the mean longitudes of
ay 7 ene planets for a time after midnight of the first of January, 1860, on the
py, oak eridian of Ujjayini, which is equal to the distance in time of the meridian
eee veshington, viz., 250 28v 1p.8, or 04.42453; and we present the results
ae im the annexed table. The longitudes are given as reckoned from the vernal
sal equinox of that date, which we make to be distant 18° 5’ 8".25 from the
ia _ point established by the Sarya-Siddhanta as the beginning of the Hindu
-sidereal sphere; this is (see below, chap. viii) 10 east of ¢ Piscium, We
have ascertained the mean places both as determined by the text of our
‘Siddhanta, and by the same with the correction of the bija. Added are
the actual mean places at the time designated : those of the primary planets
have been found from Le Verrier’s elements, presented in Biot’s treatise,
as cited above ;* those of the moon, and of her apsis and node, were kindly
‘furnished us from the office of the American Nautical Almanac, at CamAe bridge.
~Gae
‘Mean Longitudes of the Planets, Jan. 1st, 1860, midnight, at Washington.
i 5 ee e
es ae According to Stirya-Siddhanta : According to
> Planet. text. with bfja. moderns.
Be
* 7 Pa | 6 ad ot > ¢ oe a) Us o
' atk r Sy ‘A ry — :
‘ew of the errors of the
ae oh PEED In the next following table is further given av
ero bite u determinations—both the absolute eérrors, 45 compared with the
: actua mean place of each planet, and the relative, as compared with the
the Hindu astronomical systems
—?P g se of the sun, to which it is the aim of
to adapt the elements of the other planets. Annexed to each error 15
the approximate date at which it was nothing, or at which it will hereafter
disappear, ascertained by dividing the amount of present error by the
preser t year y loss or gain, absolute or relative, of each planet; excepting
in the case of the moon, where we have made allowance, according to the
Ve v oul i warn our readers, however of me serious error of the press in the
giver by Bist; ae the ‘yearly motion of the carth, read 1,295 977.38, inatead

| | - See | sii oe wh cs soe : iN . RS |
| Je a en a: - Strya-Si dhénta #3
formula used by the American Nautical Almanac, for the acceleration of
her motion.
Errors of the Mean Longitudes of the Planets, as calculated according to
the Stirya-Siddhdnta.
Errors according to text : e same, with bija -
Planet. sbeotute| | wh
rel.tosuon.
Ne fates when en
absolute, rrect. et to sun. | correct. correct,
To
To complete the view of the planetary motions, and the statement
of the elements requisite for ascertaining their position in the sky, it only
remains to give the movement in latitude of each, its deviation from the
general planetary path of the ecliptic. This is done in the concluding verses of the chapter.
68. The moon is, by its node, caused to deviate from the ~
limit of its declination (kraénti), northward and southward, to a
distance, when greatest, of an eightieth part of the minutes of a
circle;
69. Jipiter, to the ninth part of that multiphed by two;
Mars, to the same amount multiplied by three; Mercury, Venus,
and Saturn are by their nodes caused to deviate to the same amount
multiplied by four.
70. So also, twenty-seven, nine, twelve, six, twelve, and
twelve, multiplied respectively by ten, give the number of minutes |
of mean latitude (vikshepa) of the moon and the rest, in their es
order.
The deviation of the planets from the plane of the ecliptic is here
stated in two different ways, which give, however, the same results ; thus: $s

Mean Motions of the Planets 51
Jupiter, ae x2= 60° or 6x10 60°=1
The subject of the latitude of the planets is completed in verses 6-8,
and verse 57, of the following chapter; the former passage describes the manner, and indicates the direction, in which the node produces its disturbing
effect; the latter gives the rule for calculating the apparent latitude of a
planet at any point in its revolution.
F There is a little discrepancy between the two specifications presented
in these verses, as regards the description of the quantities specified: the
one states them to be the amounts of greatest (parama) deviation from the
ecliptic; the other, of mean (madhya) deviation. Both descriptions are
also somewhat inaccurate. The first is correct only with reference to the
moon, and the two terms require to be combined, in order to be made applcable to the other planets. The moon has its greatest latitude at 90° from
ts node, and this latitude is obviously equal to the inclination of its orbit
to the ecliptic ; for although its absolute distance from the ecliptic at this
point of its course varies, a5 does its distance from the earth, on account of
the eccentricity of its orbit, and the varying relation of the line of its apsides
to that of its nodes, its angular distance remains unchanged. So, to an observer stationed at the sun, the greatest latitude of any one of the primary
planets would be the same in its successive revolutions from node to node,
and equal to the inclination of its orbit. But its greatest Jatitude as seen from
the earth is very different in different revolutions, both on account of the
difference of its absolute distance from the ecliptic when at the point of
greatest removal from it in the two halves of its orbit, and, much more, on
account of ite varying distance from the earth. The former of these two
¢eauses of variation was not recognized by the Hindus: in this treatise, at
least, the distance of the node from the apsis (mandocca) is not introduced
as an element into the process for determining a planet's latitude, The other
bert eause of variation is duly allowed for (see below, ii. 57). Its effect, m
‘the case of the three superior planets, is to make their greatest latitude
‘e0r 1¢ imes greater, and sometimes less, than the inclination of their orbits,
] - accor¢ ing as the planet is nearer to us than to the sun, or the contrary ;
_ henee the values given in the text for Mars, Jupiter, and Saturn, as they
“represent the mean apparent values, 45 latitude, of the greatest distance o!
x ach planet from the ecliptic, should nearly equal the inclination. In the
case of “Mere ry and Venus, also, the quantities stated are the mean of
re v fm "4
o
co
aay Bi

Ey) —- Stirya-Siddhanta
the different apparent values of the greatest heliocentric latitude, but this
mean is of course less, and for Mercury very much less, than the inclination.
Ptolemy, in the elaborate discussion of the theory of the latitude contained
in the thirteenth book of his Syntaxis, has deduced the actual inclination
of the orbits of the two inferior planets: this the Hindus do not seem to
have attempted.
We present below a comparative table of the inclinations of the orbits
of the planets as determined by Ptolemy and by modern astronomers, with
those of the Hindus, so far as given directly by the Sirya-Siddhanta.
Inclination of the Orbits of the Planets, according to Different Authorities.
| Planet.
Mercory, | lau: indba evi | 7 7 0 8
Venus. ran herananne 3 30 3 28 §$i1
The verb in verses 68 and 69, which we have translated ‘‘ caused to
deviate,’ is vi kshipyate, literally *‘ is hurled away,”’ disjicitur; from it is
derived the term used in this treatise to signify celestial latitude, vikshepa,
““ disjection."" The Hindus measure the latitude, however, as we shall
have occasion to notice more particularly hereafter, upon a circle of declination, and not upon a secondary to the ecliptic. Im the words chosen to
designate it is seen the influence of the theory of the node’s action, as
stated in the first verses of the next chapter. The forcible removal is
from the point of declination (kranti, “‘gait,’’ or apakrama, ‘‘withdrawal,”’
i.@., from the celestial equator) which the planet ought at the time to
occupy. a
The title given to this first chapter (adhikdra, ‘‘ subject, heading "’)
is madhyamddhikdra, which we have represented in the title by ‘* mean
motions of the planets,’’ although it would be more accurately rendered by
“mean places of the planets;'’ that is to say, the data and methods
requisite for ascertaining their mean places. Now follows the spashtddhikdra, ‘* chapter of the true, or corrected, places of the planets.'’

wee hy
om tes
at v->
a
ne ay
gin: CHAPTER II.
» Or roe ‘TRUE PLACES OF THE PLANETS.
> rian x
~ Coxtests :—1-3, causes of the irregularities of the planctary motions; 4-5, disturbing in-
‘aa fluence of the apsis and conjunction; 6-8, of the node: 9-11, different degree of
irregularity of the motion of the different planets; 12-13, different kinds of planetary
| motion; 14, purpose of this chapter; 15-16, rule for constructing the table of sines;
17-22, table of sines; 22-27, table of versed «ines: 28, inclination of the ecliptic, and
rule for finding the declination of any point in it; 29-30, to find the sine and cosine of
ae! the anomaly; 31-32, to find, by interpolation, the sine or versed sine corresponding
Sree 2 to any given arc; 33, to find, in like manner, the are corresponding to a given sine
al or versed sine; 34-37, dimensions of the epicycles of. the planets; 38, to find the
en u dimensions of the epicycle at any point in the orbit; 3, to find the equation of
or the apsis, or of the centre; 40-42, to find the equation of the conjunction, or the
t's" annual equation; 43-45, application of these equations in finding the true places of
| the different planets; 46, correction of the place of a planet for difference between
mean and apparent solar time: 47-49, how to correct the daily motion of the planets
= for the effect of the apsis; 50-51, the same for that of the conjunction; 51-55, retrogradation of the lesser planets; 56, correction of the place of the node; 57-58,
“ to find the celestial latitude of a planet, and its declination as affected by latitude;
< 59, to find the length of the day of any planet; 60, to find the radius of the
i‘ diurnal circle; 61-63, to find the day-sine, and the respective length of the day and
night; 64, to find the number of aasterisms traversed by a planct, and of days
elapsed, since the commencement ef the current revolution; 65, to find the yoga;
66, to find the current lunar day, and the time in it of a given instant: 67-69, of
the divisions of the lunar month called karana.
1. Forms of Time, of invisible shape, stationed in the
ac (bhagana), called the conjunction (¢gighrocca), apsis (manwe
J
ca), and node (pdta), are causes of the motion of the planets.
. 2. The planets, attached to these beings by cords of air,
: ward
‘ =i are drawn away by them, with the right and left hand, for
or backward, according to nearness, toward their own place.
«8. ~=A wind, moreover, called provector (pravaha) impels
a pe
ie ae
awn away forward
24 hem toward their own apices (ucca); being dr
and backward, they proceed by a varying motion.
Sy" ‘The so-called apex (ucca), when ip the half-orbif im
ay
fron of the planet, draws the planet forward; 1 like manner,
tt Au © 7 aANe. | L TH; 4 z |
w 1en in the half-orbit behind the planet, it draws it backward.
aiyonig . When the planets, drawn away by their apices (ucca),
wove. ‘orwi ard in their orbits, the amount of the motion so caused
ae aes Mas a z - :
¥ ae,
“is i]
a
ae

oe <3
a i eon fs es “ES | BES)
y - aly realled their excess PAS when iy move odie ‘we
May called their deficiency (rna).
a “A In these verses is laid before us the Hindu theory of the general
. nonture of the forces which produce the irregularities of the apparent motions,
regarded as being the real motions, of the planets. The world-wide difference
between the spirit of the Hindu astronomy and that of the Greek is not
less apparent here than in the manner of presentation of the elements in
the last chapter: the one is purely scientific, devising methods for representing and calculating the observed motions, and attempting nothing farther ;
the other is not content without fabricating a fantastic and absurd theory
respecting the superhuman powers which occasion the movements with
which it is dealing. The Hindu method has this convenient peculiarity,
that it absolves from all necessity of adapting the disturbing forces to one
another, and making them form one consistent system, capable of geometrical representation and mathematical demonstration; it regards the planets
as actually moving in circular orbits, and the whole apparatus of epicycles
given later in the chapter, as only a devise for estimating the amount of
the force, and of its resulting motion, exerted at any given point by the
disturbing cause.
The commentator gives two different explanations of the provector
wind, spoken of in the third verse: one, that it is the general current,
mentioned below, in xii. 73, as impelling the whole firmanent of stars, and
which, though itself moving “westward, drives the planets, in some unexplained way, towards its own apex of motion, in the east; the other,
‘that a separate vortex for cach planet, called provector on account of its
analogy with that general current, although not moving in the same direction, carries therm around in their orbits from west to east, leaving only
the irregularities of their motion to be produced by the disturbing forces.
This latter we regard as the proper meaning of the text; neither is very
consistent with the theory of the lagging behind of the planets, given
above, in i. 25, 26, as the explanation of their apparent castward motion.
The commentary also states more explicitly the method of production of
the disturbance: a cord of air, equal in length to the orbit of each planet —
less the disk of the latter itself, is attached to the extremities of its diameter,
and passes through the two hands of the being stationed at the point of
disturbance; and he always draws it toward himself by the shorter of
two parts of the cord. The term ucca, which we have translated *’ spew,"
applies both to the apsis (manda, mandocca, ** apex of slowest motion ss
the apogee in the case of the sun and moon, the aphelion, though | not
recognized as such, in the case of the other planets), and to the con]
(cgighra, cighrocea, ** apex of swiftest motion *"), The statement made of
: e like effect of the two upon the motion of the planet is liable to cause
‘i - difficulty, if it be not distinctly kept in mind that the ‘Hindus | understa
: site
— re a -
t oe 2
a? okt ces , ge
, had a
hol ‘J a * o-1 + - Ms - a ss F- ;
Pa mf ‘ ~_ « . fe a
‘fea! 7 2 4 Sh Sa ee = a ae 2. _¥

True Places of the Planets 55
by the influence of the disturbing cause, not ts acceleration and retardation
of the rate of the planet's motion, but its effect in giving to the planet
a position in advance of, or behind, its mean place. It may be well, for
the sake of siding scme of our readers to form a clearer apprehension wt
the Hindu view of the planetary motions, to expand and illustrate a little
this statement of the effect upon them of the two principal disturbing
forces.
First, as regards the apsis. This is the remoter extremity of the
major axis of the planet's proper orbit, and the point of its slowest motion.
Upon passing this point, the planet begins to fall behind its mean place,
but at the same time to gain velocity, so that at the quadrature it is
farthest behind, but is moving at its mean rate ; during the next quadrant
it gains both in rate of motion and in place, until at the perigee, or perihelion, it is moving most rapidly, and has made up what it before lost, so
that the mean and true places coincide. Upon passing that point again,
it gains upon its mean place during the first quadrant, and loses what it thus
gained during the second, until mean and true place again coincide at the
apsis. Thus the equation of motion is greatest at the apsides, and nothing
at the quadratures, while the equation of place is greatest at the
quadratures, and -nothing at the apsides; and thus the planet is
always behind its mean place while passing from the higher to the lower
apsis, and always in advance of it while passing from the lower to the
higher; that is, it is constantly drawn away from its mean place toward
the higher apsis, mandocca.
In treating of the effect of the conjunction, the gighrocea, we have toy
distinguish two kinds of cases. With Mercury and Venus (see above,
i. 29, 31, 32), the revolution of the conjunction takes the place, in the
: Hindu system as in the Greek, of that of the planet itself, the conjunction
being regarded as making the circuit of the zodiac in the same time, and
in the same direction, as the planet really revolves about the sun; while
the mean place of these planets is always that of the sun itself. While,
therefore, the conjunction is making the half-tour of the heavens eastward
, from the sun, the planet is making its eastward elongation and returning
to the sun again, being all the time in advance of its mean place, the sun,
unction reaches a point in the heavens opposite to the sun,
its inferior conjunction, or at its mean place; during the
: other half of the revolution of the conjunction, when it is nearest the planet
on ‘or is behind its mean place. Accordingly as stated in the text, the
jlanet is constantly drawn away from its mean place, the sun, toward that
a d e of the heavens in which the eonjunction 1s.
wal Once more, as concerns the superior planets. The revolutions 45signed to these by the Hindus are their true revolutions ; their mean places
ire sir mean heliocentric longitudes ; and the place of the conjunction

Stirya-Siddhdanta
(gighrocea) of each is the mean place of the sun. Since they move but
‘slowly, as compared with the sun, it is their conjunction which approaches,
overtakes, and passes thern, and not they the conjunction. Their time of
slowest motion is when in opposition with the sun; of swiftest, when in
conjunction with him: from opposition on to conjunction, therefore, or
while the sun is approaching them from behind, they are, with constantly
increasing velocity of motion, all the while behind their mean places, or
drawn away from them in the direction of the sun; but no sooner has the
sun overtaken and passed them, than they, leaving with their most rapid
motion the point of coincidence between mean and true place, are at once
in advance, and continue to be so until opposition is reached again; that
is to say, they are still drawn away from their mean place in the direction
of the conjunction.
The words used in verse 5 for “‘ excess "' and ‘ deficiency,’ or for
additive and subtractive equation, mean literally ‘‘ wealth "’ (dhana) and
“* debt ’’ (rma).
6. In like manner, also, the node, Raihu, by its proper
force, causes the deviation in latitude (vikshepa) of the moon and
the other planets, northward and southward, from their point of
declination (apakrama).
7. When in the half-orbit behind the planet, the node
causes it to deviate northward: when in the half-orbit in front, it
_draws it away southward.
8. In the case of Mercury and Venus, however, when the
node is thus situated with regard to the conjunction (¢ighra), these
two planets are caused to deviate in latitude, in the manner
stated, by the attraction exercised by the node upon the conjunction. :
The name R&hu, by which the ascending node is here designated, is
properly mythological, and belongs to the monster in the heavens, which,
by the ancient Hindus, as by more than one other people, was believed
to occasion the eclipses of the sum and moon by attempting to devour
them. The word which we have translated ‘‘ force "* is ranhas, more
properly ‘* rapidity, violent motion:*’ in employing it here, the text evidently intends to suggest an etymology for réliu, as coming from the root
rah or ranh, ‘‘ to rush on“: with this same root Weber (Ind. Stud. i.
272) has connected the group of words in which réhu seems to belong.
For the Hindu fable respecting Rahu, see Wilson's Vishnu Purina, p. 78.
The moon’s descending node was also personified in a similar way, under
the name of Ketu, but to thie no reference ie made jn the present treatise.

oe
5 z True Places of the Planets 57
p< ea,
te
P 5 The description of the effect of the node upon the movement of the
eh. planet is to be understood, in a manner analogous with that of the effect
ars of | jhe apices in the next preceding passage, as referring to the direction
| # opK in which the planet is made to deviate from the ecliptic, and not to that
“r “in which it is moving with reference to the ecliptic. From the ascending
i a node around to the descending, of course, or while the node is nearest to
the planet from behind, the latitude is northern; in the other half of the
revolution it is southern.
ag tear For an explanation of some of the terms used here, see the note to the
last passage of the preceding chapter.
ss As, in the ease of Mercury and Venus, the revolution of the conjunction takes the place of that of the planet itself in its orbit, it is necessary,
i Pin order to give the node its proper effect, that it be made to exercise
As
ra _ its influence upon the planet through the conjunction. The commenstator gives himself here not a little trouble, in the attempt to show why
-_‘Mereury and Venus should in this respect constitute an exception to the
general rule, but without being able to make out a very plausible case.
Ps, * 9. Owing to the greatness of its orb, the sun is drawn away
only a very little; the moon, by reason of the smallness of its orb,
he «
a!
Pa cn aria). Mars and the rest, on account of their small size, are,
=! wd
ap t
TT 0
F
; | ence the excess (dhana) and deficiency (rna) of these
r is very great, according to their rate of motion. Thus do
1 | 1e quire nents of the sense than the better-supported rendering
“ca d to move with exceeding velocity.’ In so doing, we have assumed
that | he 4 SsuD vega, of which the word in question is a denominative, reee ike eg a ** from
oe
pl... The motion of the planets 1s of eight kinds : retrograde
(wakra), somewhat retrograde (anuvakra), transverse (hutila),
ba
tga ——-
me i —— my =

slow (manda), very slow (mandatara) , even (sama); also, very
swift (cighratara), and swift (cighra).
13. Of these, the very swift (aticighra), that called swift,
the slow, the very slow, the even—all these five are forms of the
motion called direct (rjw):; the somewhat retrograde is retrograde.
This minute classification of the phases of a planet's motion is quite
gratuitous, so far as this Siddhanta is concerned, for the terms here given
do not once occur afterward in the text, with the single exception of
vakra, which, with its derivatives, is in not infrequent use to designate
retrogradation. Nor does the commentary take the trouble to explain
the precise differences of the kinds of motion specified. According to
Mr. Hoisington (Oriental Astronomer [Tamil and English], Jaffna: 1848,
p. 183), anuvakra is applied to the motion of a planet, when, in retrograding, it passes into a preceding sign. From the classification given in
the second of the two verses it will be noticed that kufila is omitted: according to the commentator, it is meant to be included among the forms
of retrograde motion; we have conjectured, however, that it might possibly be used to designate the motion of a planet when, being for the
moment stationary in respect to longitude, and accordingly neither advancing nor retrograding, it is changing its latitude; and we have translated the word accordingly.
14. By reason of this and that rate of motion, from day
to day, the planets thus come to an accordance with their observed
places (dr¢)—this, their correction (sphutikarana), I shall carefully explain.
Having now disposed of matters of general theory and preliminary
explanation, the proper subject of this chapter, the calculation of the true
(sphuta) from the mean places of the different planets, is ready to be
taken up. And the first thing in order is the table of sines, by means of
which all the after calculations are performed.
15. The eighth part of the minutes of a sign is called the
first sine (jydrdha); that, increased by the remainder left after subtracting from it the quotient arising from dividing it by itself, is
the second sine.
16. Thus, dividing the tabular sines in succession by the
first, and adding to them, in each case, what is left after subtracting the quotients from the first, the result is twenty-four tabular
sines (jydrdhapinda), in order, as follows ;

True Places of the Planets 59
oe - o> RSS
17. Two hundred and twenty-five; tour hundred and fortynine; six hundred and seventy-one; eight hundred and ninety,
eleven hundred and five; thirteen hundred and fifteen;
18. Fifteen hundred and twenty; seventeen bundred and
nineteen; nineteen hundred and ten; two thousand and ninetythree; a i oth
19. Two thousand two hundred and sixty-seven; two
thousand four hundred and thirty-one; two thousand five hundred
and eighty-five; two thousand seven hundred and twenty-eight;
20. Two thousand eight hundred and fifty-nine; two thousand nine hundred and seventy-eight; three thousand and eightyfour; three thousand one hundred and seventy-seven;
21. Three thousand two hundred and fifty-six; three thousand three hundred and twenty-one; three thousand three hundred
and seventy-two; three thousand four hundred and nine;
92. Three thousand four hundred and thirty-one; three
thousand four hundred and thirty-eight. Subtracting these, in reversed order, from the half-diameter, gives the tabular versedsines (utkramajydrdhapindaka) -
23. Seven; twenty-nine; sixty-six; one hundred and seventeen; one hundred and eighty-two; two hundred and sixty-one;
three hundred and fifty-four;
24 Four hundred and sixty; five hundred and seventy-nine;
seven hundred and ten; eight hundred and fifty-three; one
thousand and seven; eleven hundred and seventy-one;
25. Thirteen hundred and forty-five; fifteen hundred and
twenty-eight; seventeen hundred and nineteen; nineteen hundred and eighteen;
9%. Two thousand one hundred and twenty-three; two
thousand three hundred and thirty-three; two thousand five hundred and forty-eight; two thousand seven hundred and sixty-seven;
ie 97. Two thousand nine hundred and eighty-nine; three
thousand two bundred and thirteen; three thousand four hundred
___ and thirty-eight : these are the versed sines.
ay ts, We first present, in the following table, in a form eonvenient for refer-
- ence and use, the Hindu sines and versed sines, with the ares to which
= Ute
ne

A
ja
bey eloges Rede viel both in minutes and in degrees and
P xoinutes. To facilitate the practical use of the table in making calcula-
- tions after the Hindu method, we have added a column of the differences
+ of the sines, and have farther turned the sines themselves into decimal
| parts of the radius. For the purpose of illustrating the accuracy of the
table, we have also annexed the true values of the sines, in minutes, as
found by our modern tables. Comparison may also be made of the decimal column with the corresponding values given in our ordinary tables of
natural sines.
. Table oF; Sines and Versed Sines.
ae i hen Lae Versed
Arcs, Hindu Sines, True Sines, |
Bin. ini} * | in : | in * Diff. jin parte of | in Se
The rule by which the sines are, in as text, directed to be found, may
be illustrated as follows. Let ¢, »’, »", #'", s'’’, etc., represent the successive sines. The first of the series, «, is assumed to be equal to its are, or
225', from which quantity, as is shown in the table above, it differs only
by an amount much smaller than the table takes any account of. Then
e f ee iia:
. tet eet id
s 7 s
; s ;' a” wee
» ; z =a" eee ene =e
hd
oa T* Lu 1 pelle y ere

True Places of the Planets 61
and so on, through the whole series, any fraction larger than a half being
counted as one, and a smaller fraction being rejected. In the majority of
cases, as is made evident by the table, this process yields correct resulte :
we have marked in the column of “ true sines ‘' with a plus or minus sign
such modern values of the sines as differ by more than half a minute
from those assigned by the Hindu table.
It is not to be supposed, however, that the Hindu sines were originally
obtained by the process described in the text, That process was, in all
probability, suggested by observing the successive differences in the values
of the sines as already determined by other methods. Nor is it difficult
to discover what were those methods; they are indicated by the lmuitation of the table to ares differing from one another by 3° 45’, and by
what we know in general of the trigonometrical methods of the Hindus.
The two main principles, by the aid of which the greater portion of all
the Hindu calculations are made, are, on the one hand, the equality of the
square of the hypothenuse in 4 right-angled triangle to the sum of the
squares of the other two sides, and, on the other hand, the proportional
relation of the corresponding parts of similar triangles. The first of these
principles gave the Hindus the sine of the complement of any are of
which the sine was already known, it being equal to the square root of
the difference between the squares of radius and of the given sine. ‘This
led farther to the rule for finding the versed sine, which is given above in
the text: it was plainly equal to the difference between the sine complement and radius. Again, the comparison of similar triangles showed that
. the chord of an arc was @ mean proportional between its versed sine and
the diameter; and this led to a method of finding the sine of half any
arc of which the sine was known: it was equal to half the square root
of the product of the diameter into the versed sine. That the Hindus
had deduced this last rule does not directly appear from the text of this
Siddhianta, nor from the commentary of Ranganatha, which is the one
: given by our manuscript and by the published edition; but it 1s distinctly
stated in the commentary which Davis had in his hands (As. Res. ii. 247);
and it might be confidently assumed to be known upon the evidence of
the table itself; for the principles and rules which we have here stated
would give a table just such as the one here constructed. The sine
of 90° was obviously equal to radius, and the sine of 30° to half radius:
from the first could be found the sines of 45°, 22° 30’, and 11° 15’;
from the latter, those of 15°, 7° 30’, and 3° 45’. The sines thus obtained
would give those ef the complementary ares, OF of 86° 15’, 82° 30’,
78" 45/, 75°, etc.; and the sine of 76°, again, would give those of 37° 30’
= and 18° 45’. By continuing the same processes, the table of sines \ ould soon
be made complete for the twenty-four divisions of the quadrant; but these
proc &! x8 could yield nothing farther, unless by imtroducing fractions 0!
minutes ; which was undesirable, because the symmetry of the table would

Strya-Siddhanta
thus be destroyed, and no corresponding advantage gained; the table
was already sufficiently extended to furnish, by interpolation, the sines
intermediate between those given, with all the accuracy which the Hindu
calculations required.
If, now, an attempt were made to ascertain a law of progression for
the series, and to devise an empirical rule by which its members might
be developed, the one from the other, in order, nothing could be more
natural than to take the differences of the successive sines, and the differences of those differences, as we have given them under the headings A’
and ,”’ in the annexed table.
Hindu Sines, with their Firat and Second Differences.
With these differences before him, an acute observer could hardly fail
to notice the remarkable fact that the differences of the second order increase as the sines; and that each, in fact, is about the y}xth part of the
corresponding sine. Now let the successive sines be represented by 0, 3,
a’, 3”, 8", s'"’, andso on; and let q equal rhs; OF 5 let the first differences be d=s—0, d'=s’—s, d"=s’—s', d=s"—s", etc. The second
differences will be: —sq=d'—d, —e'q=d"—d', —s" q=d"—a", etc. These
last expressions ia
pr es Sy a SN 2
.” = dd” —s"q=a—8q—s8 ‘q—a" q, ete
Hence, also,
ao ome +d =e +8—aq
oa +d ee" +a —aq—s' ges 4,
and so on, according to the rule given in the text.
That the second differences in the values of the sines were proportional
to the sines themselves, was probably known to the Hindus only by observation. Had their trigonometry sufficed to demonstrate it, they might
easily have constructed a much more complete and accurate table of sines.

f= us we True Places of the Planets 63
We add the demonstration given by Delambre (Histoire de l’Astronomie
Ancienne, i. 458), from whom the views here expressed have been substantially taken.
ca Let a be any are in the series, and put 3° 45’=n. Then sin (a—n).
sin a, sin (a+n), will be three successive terms in the series: sin a—
sin (a—n), and sin (a+n)—sin a, will be differences of the first order; and
their difference, sin (a+n)+sin (a—n)— 2 sin a, will be a difference of the
second order. But this last expression, by virtue of the formula
i. Oe i ee
R sin (a+n)=sin acos n+ cos a sin n, reduces to 2 sin a cos n
+R—2 sin a, or 2(°°"—1) Sin a. That 1s to say, the
second difference is equal to the product of the sine of the are a into a
certain constant quantity, or it varies as the sine. When n equals 3° 45!,
as in the Hindu table, it is easy to show, upon working out the last expression by means of the tables, that the constant factor is, as stated by
Delambre, yyi-s, instead of being ers, 95 empirically determined by
the Hindus.
It deserves to be noticed, that the commentary of Ranganatha recognizes the dependence of the rule given in the text upon the value of the
second differences. According to him, however, it is by describing a
. circle upon the ground, laying off the ares, drawing the sines, and determining their relations by inspection, that the method is obtained. The
differences of the sines, he says, will he observed to decrease, while the
| differences of those differences increase; and it will be noticed that the
3" last second difference is 15’ 16” 48". A proportion is then made: tf at
the radius the second difference is of this value, what will it be at any
sme? or, taking the first sine as an example, 3488/: 15’ 16" 48’: :225:1.
Nothing can be clearer, however, than that this pretended result of
; inspection is one of calculation. merely. It would be utterly impossible
iy to estimate by the eye the value of a differencé with such accuracy, and,
were it possible, that difference would be found very considerably removed
from the one here given, being actually only about 14/ 45". The value
. :' La 16" 48’ is assumed only in order to make its ratio to the radius
exactly ~i+-
jus!
_—“‘e: earliest substitution of the sines, in calculation, for the chords,
he « which were employed by the Greeks, is generally attributed (see Whewell's
History of the Inductive Sciences, B. Il. ch. iv. 8) to the Arab astronomer Albategnius (al-Battani), who flourished in the latter par! of the
a ninth century of our era. It can hardly admit of question, however,
' s ir had already at that time been long employed by the Hindus.
tf sines had a
And considering the derivation by the Arabs from India of their system
notation, ‘and of so many of the elements of their mathematica!
f

— jm no ie hi Pa seat ey oo ed
a. i ) 7 vrs ~ maths a oe ie >
6H Sarya-Sidahanta | aa
aire Son = a
ne _ seience, it would seem not unlikely that the first hint of this so convenisent and practical improvement of the methods of calculation may also
_--—ihave come to them from that country. This cannot be asserted, however,
3 with much confidence, because the substitution of the sines for the chords
seems so natural and easy; that it may well enough have been hit upon
independently by the Arabs; it is a matter for astonishment, as remarked
by Delambre (Histoire de l'Astronomie du Moyen Age, p. 12), that
Ptolemy himself, who came so near it, should have failed of it. If
Albategnius got the suggestion from India, he, at any rate, got no more
than that. His table of sines, much more complete than that of the
Hindus, was made from Ptolemy's table of chords, by simply halving them.
The method, too, which in India remained comparatively barren, led to
valuable developments in the hands of the Arab mathematicians, who
went on by degrees to form also tables of tangents and co-tangents, secants
and co-secants; while the Hindus do not seem to have distinctly appreciated the significance even of the cosine.
In this passage, the sine is called jydrdha, ** half-chord; '’ hereafter,
however, that term does not once occur, but jyd ‘* chord *' (literally ‘* bowstring "’) is itself employed, as are also its synonyms jivd, mdurvikd, to
denote the sine. The usage of Albategnius is the same. The sines of the
table are called pinda, or jyapinda, ** the quantity corresponding to the
sine."" The term used for versed sine, utkramajyd, means “‘ inverse-order _
sine,”" the column of versed sines being found by subtracting that of
sines in inverse order from radius.
a
The ratio of the diameter to the circumference involved in the expression of the value of radius by 3488/ is, as remarked above (under i. 59,
60), 1:3.14186. The commentator asserts that value to come from the
tatio 1250:3927, or 1:3.1416, and it is, in fact, the nearest whole number to the result given by that ratio. If the ratio were adopted which
has been stated above (in i. 59), of 1: 4410, the value of radius would be
only 3415’. It is to be observed with regard to this latter ratio, that it
could not possibly be the direct result of any actual process adopted for
ascertaining the value of the diameter from that of the circumference, or
the contrary. It was probably fixed upon by the Hindus because it
looked and sounded well, and was at the same time a sufficiently near
approximation to the truth to be applied in cases where exactness was
neither attainable by their methods, nor of much practical consequence ;
as in fixing the dimensions of the earth, and of the planetary orbits.
The neture of the system of notation of the Hindus. and their constantly
recurring extraction of square roots in their trigonometrical processes,
would cause the suggestion to them, much more naturally than to the
Greeks, of this artificial ratio, as not far from the truth; and their science
was just of that character to choose for some uses A relation mS a8 essed |
a manner so simple, and of an aspect so syaternatical, even though Ante =

intersection: then AP is the equinoctia
The True Places of the Planets 65
to be inaccurate. We do not regard the ratio in question, although so
generally adopted among the Hindu astronomers, as having any higher
value and significance than this.
28. The sine of greatest declination is thirteen hundred
and ninety-seven ; by this multiply any sine, and divide hy radius ;
the are corresponding to the result is said to be the declination.
; The greatest declination, that is to say, the inclination of the plane of
the ecliptic, is here stated to be 24°, 1397’ being the sine of that angle.
The true inclination in the year 300 of our era, which we may assume
to have been not far from the time when the Hindu astronomy was
established, was a little less than 23° 40’, so that the error of the Hindu
determination was then more than 20’: at present, it is 32 341”. The
value assigned by Ptolemy (Syntaxis, i) to the inclination was between
98° 50’ and 23° 52/ 380"; an error, as compared with its true value in
the time of Hipparchus, of only about 7’.
The second half of the verse gives, in the usual vague and elliptica
language of the treatise, the rule for finding the declination of any given
point in the ecliptic. We have not in this case supplied the ellipses in
our translation, because it could not be done succinctly, or without
introducing an element, that of the precession, which possibly was not
taken into account when the rule was made. See what is said upon this
‘subject under verses 9 and 10 of the next chapter. The ‘‘ sine '" employed
is, of course, the sine of the distance from the vernal equinox, or of the
longitude as corrected by the precession.
The annexed figure will explain t
- demonstration.
. Let ACE represent a quadrant of the plane of the equatorial, and
ACG a quadrant of that of the ecliptic, AC being the line of their
1 colure, PE the solstitial, GE,
or the angle GCE, the inclination of the ecliptic, or the greatest dechimation (paramdpakrama, or paramakrantt), and GD its sine ( parama-
: Fig. 1. krantijyd). Let S be the position
of the sun, and draw the circle of
declination PH; SH, or the angle
SCH, is the declination of the sun
at that point, and SF the sine
declination (krdntijy4). From §S and
F draw SB and FB at right angles
to AC; then SB is the sine of the
arc AS, or of the sun's longitude.
But GCD and SBF are similar
right-angled triangles, having their
angles at C and B each equal to the
inclination. Therefore CG: GD: :
he rule, and the method of its
of

yy
SB: SF; and SF= ea that is, sin decl. = incl. xsin long.
_ The same result is, by our modern methods, obtained directly from
the formula in right-angled spherical trigonometry: sin c=sin a sin C; or,
in the triangle ASH, right-angled at H, sin SH=sin SA sin SAH,
29. Subtract the longitude of a planet from that of its apsis
(mandocca); so also, subtract it from that of its conjunction
(cighra); the remainder is its anomaly (kendra); from that is
found the quadrant (pada); from this, the base-sine (bhujajyd),
and likewise that of the perpendicular (ketz).
30. In an odd (vishama) quadrant, the base-sine is taken
from the part past, the perpendicular from that to come; but in
an even (yugma) quadrant, the base-sine (bahujyd) is taken from
the part to come, and the perpendicular-sine from that past.
The distance of a planet from either of its two apices of motion, or
centres of disturbance, is called its kendra; according to the commentary, its distance from the apsis (mandoceca) is called mandakendra and
that from the conjunction (cighrocea) is called gighrakendra: the Sirya
Siddhanta, however, nowhere has occasion to employ these terms. The
former of the “two corresponds to what in modern astronomy is called
the anomaly, the latter to what is known as the commutation. The
word kendra is not of Sanskrit origin, but is the Greek yerrpoy; it is a
circumstance no less significant to meet with a Greek word thus at the
very foundation of the method of calculating the true place of a planet
by means of a system of epicycles, than to find one, as noticed above
(under i. 52), at the base of the theory of planetary regency upon which |
depend the names and succession of the days of the week. Both
anomaly and commutation, it will be noticed, are, according to this
treatise, to be reckoned always forward from the planet to its apsis and )
conjunction respectively; excepting that, in the case of Mercury and
Venus, owing to the exchange with regard | to those planets of the place
of the planet itself with that of its conjunction, the commutation is
really reckoned the other way. The functions of any are being the
same with those of its negative, it makes no difference, of course,
whether the distance is measured from the planet to the apex (ucea), on ]
from the apex to the planet.
The quantities actually made use of in the calculations which are.
follow are the sine and cosine of the anomaly, or of the comamutigse
‘The terms employed in the text require a little explanation. — Bhi va
means “‘ arm; "' it is constantly applied, os are its synonyms bahu Pi
dos, to designate the base of no right-angled— triangle; koti is Pe ope
Pager ms ae and, nme: 000K nil the perpendic ase a
Sew
a,
oP
be:

The True Places of the Planets 67
such a triangle, is conceived of as being the end of the bhuja, or base,
bent up to an upright position; bhujajyd and kolijyd, then, are literally
the values, as sines, of the base and perpendicular of a right-angled
triangle of which the hypotenuse is made radius: owing to the relation
to one another of the oblique angles of such a triangle, they are respectively as sine and cosine. We have not been willing to employ
these latter terms in translating them, because, as before remarked, the
Hindus do rot seem to have conceived of the cosine, the sine of the
complement, of an arc, as being a function of the arc itself.
To find the sine and cosine of the planet’s distance from either of its
apices (ucca) is accordingly the
object of the directions given in
verse 30 and the latter part of
the preceding verse. The rule
itself is only the awkward Hindu
method of stating the familiar truth
that the sine and cosine of an are and
of its supplement are equal. The
Ss accompanying figure will, it is believed, Ulustrate the Hindu manner
of looking at the subject. Let P be
the place of a planet, and divide its
orbit into the four quadrants PQ, QR,
RS, and SP; the first and third of
these are called the odd (vishama)
quadrants; the second and fourth,
the even (yugma) quadrants. Let A, B, C, and D, be four positions of
the apsis (or of the conjunction); then the ares PA, PQB, PORC,
PQRSD will be the values of the anomaly in each case. AM, the
base-sine, or sine of anomaly, when the apsis is in the first quadrant, 1s
determined by the arc AP, the arc passed over in reckoning the anom-
~ aly, while AG or EM, the perpendicular-sine, or cosine, is taken from
the are AQ, the remaining part of the quadrant. The same is true in
fo arte other odd quadrant, RS; the sine CH, or EL, comes from KC,
cee - the part of the quadrant between the planet and the apsis; the cosine
ty CL is from its complement. But in the even quadrants, QR and SP,
em) _ the case is reversed; the sines, BH, or EF, and DM, are determined by
ee the arcs BR and DP, the parts of the quadrant not ineluded in the
anomaly, and the cosines, BF and KD, or EM, correspond to the other
’ | 3 "portions of each quadrant respectively.
| Ng This rocess of finding what portion of any are greater than a quadrar t is 4 | employed in determining its sine, is ordinarily ealled im
ix alculations ‘‘ taking the bhuja of an arc.”

31. Divide the am contained in any are by two hundred and twenty-five ; the quotient is the number of the preceding
tabular sine (jydpindaka). Multiply the remainder by the difference of the preceding and following tabular sines, and divide by
two hundred and twenty-five;
42. The quotient thus obtained add to the tabular sine
called the preceding; the result is the required sine. The same
method is prescribed also with respect to the versed sines.
33. Subtract from any given sine the next less tabular
sine; multiply the remainder by two hundred and twenty-five, and
divide by the difference between the next less and next greater
tabular sines; add the quotient to the product of the serial number of the next less sine into two hundred and twenty-five the
result is the required arc.
The table of sines and versed sines gives only those belonging to arcs
which are multiples of 3° 45’; the first two verses of this passage state
the method of finding, by simple interpolation, the sine or versed sinc
of any intermediate arc; while the third verse gives the rule for the
contrary process, for converting any given sine or versed sine in the
same manner into the corresponding arc.
In illustration of the first rule, let us ascertain thé sine corresponding
to an arc of 24°, or 1440’. Upon dividing the latter number by 225,
we obtain the quotient 6, and the remainder 90’. This preliminary step
is necessary, because the Hindu table is not regarded as containing any
designation of the arcs to which the sines belong, but as composed
simply of the sines themselves in their order. The sine corresponding
to the quotient obtained, or the sixth, is 1315’: the difference between
it and the next following sine is 205/. Now a proportion is made: if,
at this point in the quadrant, an addition of 225’ to the are causes an
increase in the sine of 205‘, what increase will be caused by an addition
to the arc of 90’: that is to say, 225: 205: : 90:82, Upon adding the
Eng. 82’, to the sixth sine, the amount, 1397’, is the sine of the given
arc, as stated in verse 28. The actual value, it may be remarked, of
the sine of 24°, is 1898’.26.
The other rule is the reverse of this, and does not require illustration.
The extreme conciseness aimed at in the phraseology of the text, and
not unfrequently carried by it beyond the limit of distinctness, or even
of intelligibility, is well illustrated by verse 83, which, literally translated, reads thus: ‘‘ having subtracted the sine, the remainder, multiplied by 225, divided by its difference, having added to the prodnat of

The True Places of the Planets 69
¢he number and 225, it is called the arc.’’ In verse 31, also, the
important word ‘* remainder "’ is not found in the text.
The proper place for this passage would seem to be immediately after
the table of sines and versed sines: it is not easy to see why verses
28-30 should have been inserted between, or indeed, why the subject of
the inclination of the ecliptic is introduced at all in this part of the
chapter, as no use is made of it for a long time to come,
34. The degrees of the sun’s epicycle of the apsis (mandaparidhi) are fourteen, of that of the moon, thirty-two, at the end
of the even quadrants; and at the end of the odd quadrants,
they are twenty minutes less for both.
35 At the end of the even quadrants, they are seventyfive, thirty, thirty-three, twelve, forty-nine; at the odd (oja) they
are seventy-two, twenty-eight, thirty-two, eleven, forty-eight,
386. For Mars and the rest; farther, the degrees of the epicycle of the conjunction (cighra) are, at the end of the even
quadrants, two hundred and thirty-five, one hundred and thuirtythree, seventy, two hundred and sixty-two, thirty-nine;
97. At the end of the odd quadrants, they are stated to be
two hundred and thirty-two, one hundred and thirty-two,
seventy-two, two hundred and sixty, and forty, as made use of
in the calculation for the conjunction (¢igh rakarman).
38. Multiply the base-sine (bhujajya) by the difference of
the epicycles at the odd and even quadrants, and divide by radius
(trijyd); the result, applied to the even epicycle (vrtta), and
additive (dhana) or subtractive (rna), according as this is less or
greater than the odd, gives the corrected (sphuta) epicycle.
b The corrections of the mean longitudes of the planets for the disss turbing effect of the apsis (mandocca) and conjunetion (cighrocca) of
aoe each—that is to say, for the effect of the ellipticity of their orbits, and
a for that of the annual parallax, or of the motion of the earth in its
- - orbit—are made in Hindu astronomy by the Ptolemaic method of ep!-
ies os upon the circumference of which the planet
. baat e the centre of the epicycle revolves about
| ihe - n. The details of the method, as applied by
the Hi clear by the figures and processes to be presented a little later; in this passage we have only the dimensions of the
-epicycles assumed for each planet. For eonvenience of calculation, they
ire me sured in degrees of the orbits of the planets to which they
r
a
- re
» Yn

70 Strya-Siddhdnta
severally belong; hence only their relative dimensions, as compared
with the orbits, are given us. The data of the text belong to the planets
in the order in which these succeed one another as regents of the days
of the week, viz., Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn (see
above, under i. 51, 52). The annexed table gives the dimensions of
the epicycles, both their circumferences, which are presented directly
by the text, and their radii, which we have calculated after the method
of this Siddhanta, assuming the radius of the orbit to be 3438’.
Dimensions of the Epicycles of the Planets.
___Epicycle of the apsia : | Epicycle of the conjunction :
nae: at even ed tant| at odd quadrant. | at even bina at odd quarant,
cire. | rad. | oire. | rad. | circ. | rad. Fees: ' rad.
Moon, 32° 305° .60 31°40") 302" 42 radaek nareieaval Cuaeeeh tease aes
A remarkable peculiarity of the Hindu system is that the epicycles
are supposed to contract their dimensions as they leave the apsis or the
conjunction respectively (excepting in the case of the epicycles of the
conjunction of Jupiter and Saturn, which expand instead of contracting),
becoming smallest at the quadrature, then again expanding till the lower
apsis, or opposition, is reached, and decreasing and increasing im like
manner in the other half of the orbit; the rate of increase and diminution being as the sine of the distance from the apsis, or conjunction.
Hence the rule in verse 88, for finding the true dimensions of the epieyele at any point in the orbit. It is founded upon the simple proportion: as radius, the sine of the distance at which the diminution (or
increase) is greatest, is to the amount of diminution (or of increase) at
that point, so is the sine of the given distance to the corresponding
diminution (or increase); the application of the correction thus obtained
to the dimensions of the epicycle at the apsis, or conjunction, gives the
true epicycle.
We shall revert farther on to the subject of this change in the dimensions of the epicycle.
The term employed to denote the epicycle, paridhi, moans simply
** circumference,’ or “‘ circle;"’ it is the same which is used elsewhere in
this treatise for the circumference of the earth, etc. In a single instance,
in verse 38, we have vytta instead of paridhi; its signification is the

“The True Places of the Planets 71
fs, . same, and its other uses are closely analogous to those of the more
usual term.
ie - 39. By the corrected epicycle multiply the base-sine
— (bhujajya) and perpendicular-sine (kotijyda) respectively, and
divide by the number of degrees in a circle: then, the arc corres_- ponding to the result from the base-sine (bhujajydphala) is the
ap _ equation of the apsis (manda phala), in minutes, etc.
oe ss ‘ All the preliminary operations having been already performed, this 1s
. ot the final process by which is ascertained the equation of the apsis, or
aa the amount by which a planet is, at any point in its revolution, drawn
away from its mean place by the disturbing influence of the apsis. In
; <r modern phraseology, it is called the first inequality, due to the ellipticity
of the orbit; or, the equation of the centre.
= eh. ‘Figure 3, upon the next page, will serve to illustrate the method of
the process.
oo Let AMM’P represent a part of the orbit of any planet, which is
| supposed to be a true circle, having E, the earth, for ite centre. Along
this orbit the planet would move, in the direction indicated by the
arrow, from A through M and M!’ to P, and so on, with an equable
as motion, were it not for the attraction of the beings situated at the apsis
* -(mandocea) and conjunction (cighrocea) respectively. The general mode
of action of these beings has been explained above, under verses 1-5
of this chapter: we have now to ascertain the amount of the disturb-
“44 nce produced by them at any given point in the planet’s revolution.
-~ SS » method devised is that of an epicycle, upon the circumference of
which the planet revolves with an equable motion, while the centre of the
er cycle traverses the orbit with a velocity equal to that of the planet's
planet. At present, we have to do only with the epicycle which
gents the disturbing effect of the apsis (mandocca). The period of
Pp s revolution about the centre of the epicycle is the time
ich — kes. circuit of the orbit from the apsis
und the period of its anomalistic revolution.
PASE ul ts excepting the moon, since their apsides are regard dl stationary (see above, under i. 41-44): the
moon's motion of more than 40° in a
war: her 2. the moon's anomalistic revolution is very perceptibly
. sil ereal, being 274 18> 18™. The arc of the epicycle
the pla ¢ at any mean point in its revolution is aceordwal to the are of the orbit intercepted between that
cy
Bi
et,
ae

Stirya-Siddhdanta
point and the apsis, or to the mean anomaly, when the latter is reckoned,
in the usual manner, from the apsis forward to the planet. Thus, in the
figure, suppose A to be the place of the apsis (mandocca, the apogee of
the sun and moon, the aphelion of the other planets), and P that of the
opposite point (perigee, or perihelion; it has in this treatise no distinctive name); and let M and M’ be two mean positions of the planet, or
actual positions of the centre of the epicyele; the lesser circles drawn
about these four points represent the epicycle: this is made, in the figure,
of twice the size of that assumed for the moon, or a little smaller than
that of Mars. Then, when the centre of the epicycle is at <A, the
planet’s place in the epicycle is at a; as the centre advances to M, M’,
and P, the planet moves in the opposite direction, to m, m’, and p, the
arc a’m being equal to AM, a” m’ to AM’, and a” p to AP. It is as if,
while the axis Ea revolves about FE, the part of it Aa remained constant in direction, parallel to EA, assuming the positions Mm, M’m’,
and Pp, successively. The effect of this combination of motions is to
make the planet virtually traverse the orbit indicated in the figure by
the broken line, which is a circle of equal radius with the true orbit,
but having its centre removed from E, toward A, by a distance equal to
Aa. the radius of the epicycle. This identity of the virtual orbit with
an eccentric circle, of which the eccentricity is equal to the radius of
the epicycle, was doubtless known to the Hindus, as to Ptolemy: the
latter, in the third book of his Syntaxis, demonstrates the equivalence of
the suppositions of an epicycle and an eccentric, and chooses the latter
to represent the first inequality: the Hindus have preferred the other
supposition, as better suited to their methods of calculation, and as admitting a general similarity in the processes for the apsis and the conjunction. The Hindu theory, however, as remarked above (under vv.
1-5 of this chapter), rejecte the idea of the actual motion of be plane,

a
The True Places of the Planets 73
_ in the epicyclé, or on the eccentric circle: the method is but a device
for ascertaining the effect of the attractive force of tbe being at the
apsis. Thus the planet really moves in the circle AMM, and if the
lines Em, Em’ be drawn, meeting the orbit in o and of, its actual place
is at o and o', when its mean place is at M and M’ respectively. To
ascertain the value of the ares oM and o'M’, which are the amount of
removal from the mean place, or the equation, is the object of the process prescribed by the text.
Suppose the planet's mean place to be M, its mean distance from the
apsis being AM: it has traversed, as above explained, an equal are a’m,
in the epicycle. From M draw MB and MF, and from m draw mn,
at right angles to the lines upon which they respectively fall: then MB
is the base-sine (bhujajya), or the sine of mean anomaly, and MF, or its
equal EB, is the perpendicular-sine (kofijyd), or cosine, and mn and
nM are corresponding sine and cosine in the epicycle. But as the relation of the circumference of the orbit to that of the epicycle is known,
and as all corresponding parts of two circles are to one another as their
‘respective circumferences, the values of mn and nM are found by a
proportion, as follows: as 360° is to the number of degrees in the circumference of the epicycle at M, so is MB to mn, and EB to nM.
‘ Hence mn is called the * result from the base-sine '’ (bhujajydéphala, or,
more briefly, bhujaphala or bihuphala), and nM the ~ result from the
perpendicular-sine " (kotijydphala, or kotiphala): the latter of the two,
however, is not employed in the process for calculating the equation of
the apsis. Now, as the dimensions of the epicycle of the apsis are in
all cases small, mn may without any considerable error be assumed to
be equal to og, which is the sine of the arc oM, the equation: this
assumption is accordingly made, and the conversion of mn, as sine, into
its corresponding arc, gives the equation required.
The same explanation applies to the position of the planet at MM’:
a’m! the equivalent of AMM’, is here the are of the epicycle traversed ;
™ m’/n', its sine, is calculated from M’B’, as before, and is assumed to
equal oq’, the sine of the equation o'M’.
eat ; ~ To give a further and practical illustration of the process, we will
proceed to calculate the equation of the apsis for the moon, at the time
for which her mean place has been found in the notes to the last chap-
"ter, viz., the 1st of January, 1860, midnight, at Washington.
a
ar
all
~¥ ae
‘Moon's mean longitude, midnight, at Ujjayint (i. 53), 11‘ 15° 23° 24
pte dt he equation for difference of meridian (degAntaraphala), 5 35 37
: or for her motion between midnight at Ujj. and Wash. (. 60,61),
ide at required time, ln 20 59 1

; a ane
e p of moon's apeis, midnight, at Ujjsyini (i. 89), 10g 42 0
sis kd for difference of meridian, as above, 2 60
Si aamewets of motn's apels ot required time, 10 8 6M
Pent. deduct moon's mean longitude (ii. 29), 11 2 © 1
Moon's tnean anormely (mendehreadre), 10 618 «4615
The anomaly being reckoned forward on the orbit from the planet,
the position thus found for the moon relative to the apsis is, nearly
enough for purposes of illustration, represented by M in the figure. By
the rule given above, in verse 30, the base-sine (bhujajydj—since the
anomaly is in the fourth, an even, quadrant—is to be taken from the
part of the quadrant not included in the anomaly, or AM; the perpendicular-sine (kofijyd) is that corresponding to its complement, or
MD. That is to ssy:
Prom the ancenaly, 106 18° “ww 15*
dedect three quadrants, 9
ayn -
7 : cs a eee a hy, i
CO sg MT NE 8 er 4

, pT GF .
“ wg ee
ep
4 oy
CENTRAL LIBRARY |
The True Places of the Planets 75
) at the given time: the figure shows it to be subtractive
rule in verse 45 aleo declures it. Henee. from the
wit longitude, li‘ oa ow
| a deduct the equation, ed
ee Moon's true longitude, u 617 we
ses"
al - We present below, in a briefer form, the rowults of a similar calcula.
(i tion made for the sun, at the same time.
Ban's mean longitude, midnight, at Ujjeyimt (), 53), site FT
ae add for difference of meridian (i, &, 61), a 6
its
ss Guns mean longitude at required time, 6 6 1919
Longitude of sun's spsis (i. 41), aw us
™ Sun's mean anomaly (ii. 29), 62 «41
nag subtract from two quadrants (ii. 50), S
a 18" is
lected the seconds. rejecting
. , according as it was
a half. For, considering that this method is followed
‘which lies at the foundation of the whole process.
+ that the sine of the arc in the epicycle is assumed to be
és a
w, in verse 48, the equation thus found i- the only one
t truce longitude of the «un and of tho moon
ethod of making the calculation of the oquation of
un and moon i iMustrated by tho annexed figure

Sarya-Siddhanta
(Fig. 4). The points IE, A, M, a, m, and o, correspond with those similarly marked in the last figure (ig. 3). The centre of the eccentric
_ circle is at e, and Ee, which equals Aa, is the eccentricity, which is given.
Join em; the angle mea equals MEA, the mean anomaly, and Eme
equals MEo, the equation. Extend
Fig. 4. me to d, where it meets Ed, a perpendicular let fall upon it from E.
Then, in the right-angled triangle
Ked, the side Fe and the angles
—since Eed equals mea—are
given, to find the other sides, ed
end dE. Add ed to em, the radius; add the square of the sum
to that of Ed; the square root
of their sum is Em: then, in the
right-angled triangle mEd, all
the sides and the right angle are
given, to find the angle Eme, the
equation.
This process is equivalent to a transfer of the epicycle from M to E;
Ed becomes the result from the base-sine (bhujajydphala), and de that
from the perpendicular-sine (kotijyiphala), and the angle of the equation
is found in the same manner as its sine, ec, is found in the Hindu process
next to be explained; while, in that which we have been considering, Ed
16 assumed to be equal to ec.
Ptolemy also adds to the moon's orbit an epicycle, to account for her
second inequality, the evection, the discovery of which docs him so much
honor, Of this inequality the Hindus take no notice.
40. The result from the perpendicular-sine (kotiphala) of
the distance from the conjunction is to be added to radius, when
the distance (kendra) is in the half-orbit beginning with Capricorn;
but when in that beginning with Cancer, the result from the perpendicular-sine is to be subtracted.
41. To the square of this sum or difference add the square
of the result from the base-sine (bdhuphala); the square root of
their sum is the hypothenuse (karna) called variable (cala).
Multiply the result from the base-sine by radius, and divide by
the variable hypothenuse :
42. The are corresponding to the quotient is, in minutes,
etc., the equation of the conjunction (¢dighrya phala); it is em-

—=—=— ————s ia lt aettt(‘(ai‘
—- The True Places of the Planets 77
bi ae F ‘
> _ ployed in the first and in the fourth process of correction (ka rian)
te : or Mars and the other planets.
__--«-The process prescribed by this passage is essentially the same with
that explained and illustrated under the preceding verse, the only difference
_ being that here the sine of the required equation, instead of being
assumed equal to that of the are traversed by the planet in the epicycle,
ee is obtained by calculation from it. The annexed figure (Fig. 5) will exhibit the method pursued.
; The larger circle, CMM/O, represents, as before, the orbit in which
any one of the planets, as also the being at its conjunetion (¢ighrocca) are
Fig. 6.
7 akin ‘the circuit of the heavens about E, the earth, as a centre, in the
lirection indicated by the arrow, from C through M and M’ to O, and so
on. ‘ But since, in every case, the conjunction moves more rapidly eastward than the planet, overtaking and passing it, if we suppose the conjunction stationary at C, the virtual motion of the planet relative to that
‘poir , is backward, or from O through M’ and M to C, its mean rate of
approach toward C being the difference between the mean motion of the
plan st and that of the sun. As before, the amount to which the planet
is drawn away from its mean place toward the conjunction is calculated
by means of an epicycle. The circles drawn in the figure to represent
evele are of the relative dimensions of that assigned to Mercury,
more than half that of Mars. The direction of the planets
of the ‘apsis,
ber
re
1é
or a li ore th :
motion in the epicycle is the reverse of that in the epicycle
reg actual m otion of the planet in its orbit, being eastward at
eee ——
cy
ern

_ the conjunction; as regards the motion of the planet relative to the conMe junction, it is the same as in the former case, being in the contrary direc-
- tion at the conjunction: its cffect, of course, is to increase the rate of the
s eastward movement at that point. The time of the planet's revolution
about the centre of the epicycle is the interval between two successive
passages through the point C, the conjunction: that is to say, it is equal
to the period of synodical revolution of each planet. These periods are,
according to the elements presented in the text of this Siddhanta,
as
follows :
Jupiter, 308 21 20
Saturn, $78 2 4
The are of the epicycle traversed by the planet, at any point in its revolution, is equal to its distance from the conjunction, when reckoned forward from the planct, according to the method prescribed in verse 29.
Suppose, now, the mean place of the planet, relative to its conjunction
(cighrocca) at C, to be at M: its place in the epicycle is at m, as far from
ec’, in either direction, as M from C. The are of the epicycle already
traversed is indicated in this figure, as in Fig. 3, by the heavier line.
Draw Em, cutting the orbit in o; then o is the planet's true place, and
oM is the equation, or the amount of removal from the mean place by
the attraction of the being at C.
The sine and cosine of the distance from the conjunction, the dimensions of the epicycle, and the value of the correspondents in the epicycle
to the sine and cosine, are found as in the preceding process. Add nM,
the result from the cosine (kotijyaphala), to ME, the radius; the result
is the perpendicular, En, of the triangle Enm. To the square of En
add that of the base nm, the result from the sine (bhujajydphala); the
square root of the sum is the line Em, the hypothenuse: it is termed the
variable hypothenuse (cala karna) from its constantly changing its
length. We have now the two similar triangles Emn and Eog, &
comparison of the corresponding parts of which gives us the proportion
Em: mn:: Eo: og; that is to say, og which is the sine of the equation
oM, equals the product of Eo, the radius, into mn, the result from the
base-sine, divided by the variable hypothenuse, Em.
When the planct’s mean place is in the quadrant DO, as at M’, the
result from the perpendicular-sine (kofijydphala), or M’n', is subtracted
from radius, and the remainder, En’, is employed as before to find the
value of Em’, the variable hypothenuse: and the comparison of the = 3)
similar triangles Em'‘n’ and Eo’g' gives 0’g', the sine of the equation, —

> CENTRAL LIBRARY
The True Places of the Planets 79
SS It is obvious that when the mean distance of a planct from its conjuncba tion is less than a quadrant in either direction, as at M, the base En is
greater than radius; when that distance is more than a quadrant, as at
New -M’, the base En’ is less than radius: the cosine is to be added to radius
. in the one case, and subtracted frox it in the other. ‘This is the meanPa ing of the rule in verse 40: compare the notes to i. 58 and ii. 30.
Dam In illustration of the process, we will calculate the equation of the
. conjunction of Mercury for the given time, or for midnight preceding
femasonuary Ist, 1860, at Washington.
Pes: Since the Hindu system, like the Greek, interchanges in the case of the
_ two inferior planets the motion and place of the planet itself and of the
tha sun, giving to the former as its mean motion that which is the mean
apparent motion of the sun, and assigning to the conjunction (cighrocea)
d a revolution which is actually that of the planet in its orbit, the mean
r position of Mercury at the given time is that found above (under v. 59)
to be that of the sun at the same time, while to find that of its conjunction we have to add the equation for difference of meridian (decdntarafae _phata, i. 60, 61), to the longitude given under i. 53 as that of the planet.
oe
Longitude of Mercury's conjunction (¢gighrocca), midnight, at Ujjayini 4° 15° 13° §”
se ss add for difference of meridian, :- "4a oe
- > _ Longitude of conjunction at required time, 4 1 6&7 22
___- Mean longitude of Mercury, 8 18 13 13
| _ Mean commutation (¢ighrakendra), 7 a3 44 6«(9
ae ‘The position of Mereury with reference to the conjunction is accord-
“<t, ingly very nearly that of M’, in Fig. 5. The are which determines the
: base-sine (bhujajyd), oF OM’, is 58° 44', while MD, its complement,
from which the perpendicular-sine (kotijyd) ig taken, is 31° 16’. The
corresponding sines, M‘B’ and M/G. are 2938’ and 1784’ respectively.
__-—s«'Tihe epicycle of Mercury is one degree less at D than at O. Hence
‘the proportion
A
nt M’,
Rey. . fs
fa - P
Rtaedica ot min’ as 1078), and that of n/M’ as 655’. Ze
tion being more than three and less than nine signs, or in the
: with Cancer, the fourth sign, n/M’ is to be subaio ;
‘ . iis
ssepenel i on ber :
: = Xt se =i,
{ ) oe. oc he ~~
i . ve
td
: Ls +e ne
= ton nooe, F
ie ee

: ih
Lye coe - “7
m™, - 80 Stirya-Siddhanta
_ tracted from FEM’, or radius, 3438’; the remainder, 2783’, is the perpen-
| dicular En’,
To the square of En’, 7,745,089
add the square of n‘m’, 1,162,084
of their sum, 8,907,173
the square root, 2,984
is the variable hypothenuse (cala karna), Em'. The comparison of the
triangles F.im/'‘n’ and Eo'g’ gives the proportion Em!’ : m’n’! :: Eo!’ : o'g', or
The value of o'q', the sine of the equation, is accordingly 1242': the corresponding are, o'M, is found by the process prescribed in verse 33 to be
91° 12’. The figure shows the equation to be subtractive.
The annexed table presents the results of the calculation of the equation of the conjunction (cighrakarman) for the five planets.
Results of the First Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
Mean Longitude Mean Spee Corr. Spree Result! vari. Equat's
Pianet. | DLongi- of Commuta- | ie.) Epi: | p.- | P.- | able} of
tude. (Conjunction. | tion. "jcycle.| | Sine. Hyp.| Con}.
a es ee eS aes or Cho Cc See i,
Mercury8 18 13 13) 4 16 57 22 | 7 28 44 9 | 2938 |192 9 1078 | 655 (2984 |—21 19
Venus, 8 18 13 13/10 21 49 47 | 2 3 36 34 | 3080 [260 13) 2226 | 1104 (5058 |+26 7
Mars, (5 24 30 57) 8 18 13 13 | 2 23 42 16 | 9416 |232 1) 2202 | 295 4974 |+31 2
This is, however, only a first step in the whole operation for finding
the true longitudes of these five planets, as is laid down in the next
passage.
43. The process of correction for the apsis (mdnda karman)
is the only one required for the sun and moon: for Mars and
the other planets are prescribed that for the conjunction ( dighrya),
that for the apsis (mdnda), again that for the apsis, an that for
the conjunction—four, in succession.
44. To the mean place of the planet apply balf the equation
of the conjunction (¢ighraphala), likewise half the equation of
the apsis ; to the mean place of the planet apply the whole equation
of the apsis (mandaphala), and also that of the conjunction,

Ee The True Places of the Planets 81
45. In the case of all the planets, and both in the process of
correction for the conjunction and in that for the apsis, the equation is additive (dhana) when the distance (kendra) is in the half-
+ orbit beginning with Aries; subtractive (rma), when in the halforbit beginning with Libra.
The rule contained in the last verse ‘s a general one, applying to all
the processes of calculation of the equations of place, and has already
been anticipated by us above. Its meaning is, that when the sanomaly
(mandakendra), or commutation (cighrakendra), reckoned always forward
from the planet to the apsis or conjunction, is less than six signs, the
equation of place is additive; when the former is more than six signs,
the equation is subtractive. The reason is made clear by the figures given
above, and by the explanations under verses 1-5 of this chapter.
Tt should have been mentioned above, under verse 2, where the word
kendra was first introduced, that, as employed in this sense by the Hindus, it properly signifies the position (see note to i. 53) of the ~ centre *’
3 of the epicycle—which coincides with the mean place of the planet itself
3 —relative to the apsis or conjunction respectively. In the text of the
Sirya-Siddhanta it is used only with this signification: the commentary
employs it also to designate the centre of any circle.
Since the sun and moon have but a ingle inequality, according to the
_—-s»- Hindu system, the calculation of their true places is simple and easy.
With the other planets the case is different, on account of the exietence
| of two causes of disturbance in their orbits, and the consequent necessity
cre both of applying two equations, and also of allowing for the effect of each
PF cause in determining the equation due to the other. For, to the appreTe hension of the Hindu astronomer, it would not be proper to calculate the
. - two equations from the mean place of the planet; nor, again, to calculate
He ae either of the two from the mean place, and, having applied it, to take
the new position thus found as a basis from which to calculate the other;
~~ since the planet is virtually drawn away from its mean place by the
ng * divinity at either apex (ucca) before it is submitted to the action of the
ie sther. The method adopted in this Siddhanta of balancing the two
Gnfluences, and arriving at their joint effect upon the planet, = stated in
“verde 43 Gnd 44. The phraseology of the text -. not entirely explicit,
ig
si si.
a different interpretation from that which
: y puts upon it, and which the rules to be given later show
i | hia is as follows: first ealculate from the mean
plac he quation of the conjunction, and apply the half
t t ace; from the position thus obtained calculate the
and apply half of it to the longitude ns already
“tities
a | oh
~ =H co
ae hd
a= iim -

" aay by nee Aes ae
Strya-Siddhdnta
once equated; from this result find once more the equation of the apsis,
and apply it to the original mean place of the planet; and finally, calcu-
“at date from, and apply to, this last place the whole equation of the conss junetiion,
We have calculated by this method the true places of the five planets,
and present the results of the processes in the following tables, Those
of the first process have been already given under the preceding passage: the application of half the equations there found to the mean
longitude gives us the longitude once equated as a basis for the next
process.
Results of the Second Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
Disnes: | Equated | Longitude Equated | Base-| Corrected Equation |
Longitude.! of Apsis. | Anomaly, | sine. | Epicycle. Apsis. |
tea re) ate Set al (ed | (ee Ace.
Again, the application of half these equations to the longitudes as
once equated furnishes the data for the third process. The longitudes of
the apsides, being the same as in the second operation, are not repeated
in this table.
Results of the Third Process for finding the True Places of the Planets.
Planet. tonsinaie: hoes ‘ ies Solcpale. cota
Mercury, 1512 20 6=CO7
won si) 8S
The original mean longitudes are now corrected by the resulis of the
: third process, to obtain a position from which shall be once more calecu-
- lated the equation of the conjunction; and the application of this to the ne
position which furnished it yields, as a final result, the true place of each
planet. "ihe
il _— ar «
= eat ,* J
a
a

The True Places of the Planets 83
earcen tte of the Fourth Process for finding the True Places of the Planeta.
Me Fen enAe ‘
| Corr. Kesult Result) Varhea Equated Equated |Base. : [ shad Bp en
Planet. lrongitude.| “MU | sine. ate al Pe Po Hy: pcak gl Parsee’ fe
on. cycle. | B.-sine. | iin g. poth. | Conj. | tude.
4! We cannot furnish a comparison of the Hindu determinations of the
" _ true places of the planets with their actual positions as ascertained by .
our modern methods, until after the subject of the latitude has been dealt
with: see below, under verses 56-58.
Ley Aa : | The Hindu method of finding the true longitudes of the five planets
whose apparent position is affected by the parallax of the earth's motion
eG having thus been fully explained, we will proceed to indicate, as sucAs cinetly as possible, the way in which the same problem is solved by the
oe “( great Greek astronomer. The annexed figure (Fig. 6) will illustrate his
el method : it is taken from those presented in the Syntaxis, but with such
es modifications of form as to make it correspond with the figures previCe ously given here: the conditions which it represents are only hypothetical,
me not according with the actual elements of any of the planetary orbits.
> al «3 Let E be the earth's place, and let the cirele ApC, described. about
oo 3S as. a centre, represent the mean orbit of any planet, EA being the
7x aon oF its line of apsides, and EC that of its conjunction (gig/tra),
a | Fig. 6. called by Ptolemy the apogee
wa a a of its epicyele. Let EX be the
Ss * double eccentricity, or the equivalent to the radius of the Hindu
epicycle of the apsis; and let
EX be bisected in Q. Then, 45
regards the influence of the
eccentricity of the orbit upon
* + the place of the planet, the
centre of equable angular motion
is at X, but the centre of equal
distance is at Q: the planet
ee ; virtually describes the circle
! which Q is the centre, but at the same rate as if it were moving
dot d cirele, of which the centre is at X. The angle of
ly, which increases proportionally to the time, !s
ae
re ate
* Tere — -
aati Thy A
‘a

SO ay led _— ‘ =
a courpal ‘ ’ ) « %
comm cel . ~— e eee
; ne EVE » ®
| tn eee Sak Nae :
us e <b _ a t-4 ,
a oy Weer az een
Stirya-Siddhadnta
XA", but P is the planet’s place, PEA the true anomaly, and EPX the
_ equation of place. The value of EPX is obtained by a process analogous
to that described above under verse 89 (pp. 75, 76); EB and BX, and QD
and DX, are first found; then DP, which, by subtracting DX, gives XP;
XP edded to BX gives BP; and from BP and BE is derived EPB, the
equation required; subtract this from PNA, and the remainder is REA,
the planet's true distance from the apsis. About P describe the epicycle
of the conjunction, and draw the radius PT parallel to EC: then T
is the planet's place in the epicycle, p its apparent position in the mean
orbit and TEP the equation of the epicycle, or of the conjunction.
In order to arrive at the value of this equation, Ptolemy first finds that
of SER, the corresponding angle when the centre of the epicycle is
placed at R, at the mean distance ER, or radius, from E: he then
diminishes it by a complicated process, into the details of which it is not
necessary here to enter, and which, as he himself acknowledges, is not
strictly accurate, but yields results sufficiently mear to the truth. The
application of the equation thus obtained to the place of the planet as
already once equated gives the final result sought for, its geocentric place,
In the case of Mercury, Ptolemy introduces the additional supposition
that the centre of equal distances, instead of being fixed at Q, revolves
in a retrograde direction upon the circumference of a cirele of which X
is the centre, and XQ the radius.
After a thorough discussion of the observations upon which his data
and his methods are founded, and a full exposition of the latter, Ptolemy
proceeds himself to construct tables, which are included in the body of
his work, from which the true places of the planets at any given time
may be found by a brief and simple process. The Hindus are also accustomed to employ such tables, although their construction and use are
nowhere alluded to in this treatise. Hindu tables, in part professing to
be calculated according to the Sirya-Siddhinta, have been published by :
Bailly (Traité de l’Astr. Ind. et Or., p. 385, ete.), by Bentley (Hind.
Ast., p. 219, ete.), by Warren (Kala Sankalita, Tables), by Mr. Hoisington (Oriental Astronomer, p. 61, etc.), and, for the sun and moon, by
Davis (As. Res., ti. 255, 256).
We are now in a condition to compare the planetary system of the
Hindus with that of the Greeks, and to take note of the principal resemblances and differences between them, And it is evident, in the first _
place, that in all their grand features the two are essentially the same. ~
Both alike analyze, with remarkable success, the irregularities of the
apparent motions of the planets into the two main elements of which
they are made up, and both adopt the same method of representing and
calculating those irregularities. Both alike substitute eccentric circles
for the true elliptic orbits of the planets. Both agree in assigning to
haat |
. Re
a, J nt id “ . aa j
* re “Steaks idee ig ee a as Pe oe

‘i ; The True Places of the Planets 85
hahaa and Venus the same mean orbit and motion as to the sun, and
a jm giving them epicycles which in fact correspond to their heliocentric
orbits, making the centre of those epicycles, however, not the true, but
_ the mean place of the sun, and also applying to the latter the correction
_ due to the eccentricity of the orbit. Both transfer the centre of the
i orbits ‘of the superior planets from the sun to the earth, and then assign
ie. to each, as an epicycle, the earth’s orbit; not, however, in the form of
aay an ellipse, nor even of an eccentric, but in that of a true circle; and
- here, too, both make the place of the centre of the epicycle to depend
, _ upon the mean, instead of the true, place of the sun. The key to the
= whole system of the Greeks, and the determining cause both of its numerous
ie accordances with the actual conditions of things in nature, and of its
inaccuracies, is the principle, distinctly laid down and strictly adhered to
by them, that the planetary movements are to be represented by «@
combination of equable circular motions alone, none other being deemed
_-—s- suited to the dignity and perfection of the heavenly bodies. By the
bd ‘Hindus, this principle is nowhere expressly recognized, so far as we are
aware, as one of binding influence, and although their whole system, no
- less than that of the Greeks, seems in other respects inspired by it, 1¢ is
ae in one point, as we shall note more particularly hereafter, distinctly
; abandoned and violated by them (see below, -under vv. 50, 51). We
eannot but regard with the highest admiration the acuteness and industry,
the power of observation, analysis, and deduction of the Greeks, that,
hampered by false assumptions, and imperfectly provided with instruments,
ek. they were able to construct a science containing 50 much of truth, and
> serving a8 4“ secure basis for the improvements of after time: whether
Pt we pay the same tribute to the genius of the Hindu will depend upon
whether we consider him also, like all the rest of the world, to huve
io
amet”
been the pupil of the Greek in astronomical science, or whether we shall
believe him to have arrived independently at a system ‘0 closely the
ss counterpart of that of the West.
pet di The differences between the two system are much less fundamental
> a, and important. The assumption of a centre of equal distance different
iy _ from that of equal angular motion—and, in ihe case of Mercury, itself
also movable—is unknown to the Hindus: this, however, appears to be
‘an innovation introduced into the Greek system by Ptolemy, and unknowr - before his time; it was adopted by him, in spite of its scerming
arbitrariness, because it gave him results according more nearly with his
L The moon's evection, the discovery of Ptolemy, 15 equally
| As regards the combined application
of the equations of the apsis and the conjunction, the two systems are
ce. Ptolemy follows the truer, 45 well as the simpler,
eentricits of the
VALOIS.
v PREV MANADE
wanting in the Hindu astronomy.
- ee galt:
> Pipe te” ey ae <7 > e 4O
omer eel aa ms
+t oew ae » RE - ‘ r Ea
ss Keds he 6 yplies first the whole correction for the ec
Ae a aes
has ad bem a |
; “a és
a ae
ate»

= Stirya-Siddhanta | )
orbit, obtaining as a result, in the case of the superior planets, the
planet’s true heliocentric place; and this he then corrects for thé parallax
of the earth’s position. Here, too, ignorant as he was of the actual
relation between the two equations, we may suppose him to have been
guided by the better coincidence with observation of the results of his
processes when thus conducted. The Hindus, on the other hand, not
knowing to which of the two supernatural beings at the apsis and conjunction should be attributed the priority of influence, conceived them
to act simultaneously, and adopted the method stated above, in verse 44,
of obtaining an average place whence their joint effect should be calculated. This is the only point where they forsook the geometrical method,
and suffered their theory respecting the character of the forces producing
the inequalities of motion to modify their processes and results. The
change of dimensions of the epicycles is also a striking peculiarity of the
Hindu system, and to us, thus far, its most enigmatical feature. The
virtual effect of the alteration upon the epicycles themselves is to give
them a form approximating to the elliptical, But, although the epicycles
of the conjunction of the inferior planets represent the proper orbits of
those planets, and those of the superior the orbit of the earth, it ts not
possible to sec in this alteration an unconscious recognition of the principle
of ellipticity, because the major axis of the quasi-ellipse—or, in the case
of Jupiter and Saturn, the minor axis—is constantly pointed toward the
earth, Its effect upon the orbit described by the planet is, as concerns the
epicycle of the apsis, to give to the eccentric circle an ovoid shape,
Auttened in the first and fourth quadrants, bulging in the second and
third: this is, so far as it goes, an approximation toward Ptolemy's virtual
orbit, a circle described about o centre distant from the earth's place by
only half the equivalent of the radius of the Hindu epicycle (the circle
A'P in figure 6): but the approximation seems too distant to furnish any
hint of an explanation. A diminution of the epicycle also effects a corresponding diminution of the equation, carrying the planet forward where
the equation is subtractive, and backward where it is ndditive : but we
hardly feel justified in assuming that it is to be regarded as an empirical
correction, applied to make the results of calculation agree more nearly
with those of observation, because its amount and place stand in no
relation which we have been able to trace to the true elements of the
planetary orbits, nor is the accuracy of either the Hindu calculations or
observations so great as to make such slight corrections of . appreciable
importance. We are compelled to leave the solution of this difficulty,
if it shall prove soluble, to later investigation, and u more_ extended comparison of the different text-books of Hindu astronomical science.
gards the numerical value of the elements adopted by the two
SO teardar SR relation, and their respective relations to the true

The True Places of the Planets 87
elements established by modern science, are exhibited in the annexed
= table. he first part of it presents the comparative dimensions of the
planetary orbits, or the value of the radius of each in terms of that of
rs the earth’s orbit. In the case of Mercury and Venus, this is represented
a. by the relation of the radius of the epicycle (of the conjunction) to that
of the orbit; in the case of the superior planets, by that of the radius
of the orbit to the radius of the epicycle. For the Hindu system it
was necessary to give two values in every case, derived respectively from
the greatest and least dimensions of the epicycles. Such a relative determination of the moon's orbit, of course, could not be obtained: its
absolute dimensions will be found stated later (see under iv. 3 and xu,
84). The second part of the table gives, as the fairest practicable comparison of the values assigned by each system to the eccentricities, the
greatest equations of the centre. For Mercury and Venus, however, the
ancient and modern determinations of these equations are not at all
comparable, the latter giving their actual heliocentric amount, the former
ik their ‘apparent value, as seen from the earth.
ies - Relative Dimensions and Eccentricitiea of the Planetary Orbits, according
| : to Different Authorities,
Greatest Equation of the C
Radius of ‘the Orbit. entre.
Sorya- Ptolemy. | Moderns.
Ptolemy. | Moderos. |oiagpanta.
a mas = . ” ar 7”
the daily motion (bhukti) of a planet by the
sun’s result from the base-sine (bdhuphala), and divide by the
number of minutes in a circle (bhacakra) ; the result, in minutes,
ap > y to the planet's true place, in the same direction as the
= Multiply
: a pent ea as eis x ,
squation was applied to the sun.
iS ee
, ake y this rule, allowance is made for that part of the
f is ait sronee between mean and apparent solar time,
he cakercnce Lo | em
Terence between the suns mean and true places. T
ee ia n measuring time are described, very
all
bs
equation of time,
which is due
The instrui. > z 2 Se seas yere F
ments employed by the Hindus 1
‘briefly and inauff ciently, in the thirteenth chapter of this work: in
, ate
a a ;
4 ie Ys iF!

ans oe
Rg ~~ é
_ _—s~probability the gnomon and shadow was that most relied upon; at any
we ate, they can have had no means of keeping mean time with any accubee Facy, and it appears from this passage that apparent time alone is re_ garded as ascertainable directly. Now if the sun moved in the equi__-~—s moctial instead of in the ecliptic, the interval between the passage of his
mean and his true place across the meridian would be the same part of
a day, as the difference of the two places is of a circle: hence the proportion upon which the rule in. the text is founded: as the number of
minutes in «a cirele is to that in the sun’s equation (which is the same
with his ** result from the base-sine: "' see above, v. 39), so is the whole
daily motion of any planet to its motion during the interval. And
4ince, when the sun is in advance of his true place, he comes later to
the meridian, the planet moving on during the interval, and the reverse,
the result is additive to the planet's place, or subtractive from it according as the sun’s equation is additive or subtractive,
The other source of difference between true and apparent time, the
difference in the daily increment of the ares of the ecliptic, in which
the sun moves, and of those of the equinoctial, which are the measures
of time, is not taken account of in this treatise. This is the more
strange, as that difference is, for some other purposes, ealculated and
allowed for.
At the time for which we have ascertained above the true places of
the planets, the sun is so near the perigee, and his equation of place is
so small. that it renders necessary. no modification of the . places as
given: even the moon moves but a small fraction of a second during
the interval between mean and apparent midnight.
By bhukti, as used in this verse, we are to understand, of course, not
the mean, but the actual, daily motion of the planet: the commentary
also gives the word this interpretation. How the actual rate of motion
is found at any given time, is taught in the next passage.
To o
47. From the mean daily motion of the moon subtract the
daily motion of its apsis (manda), and, having treated the differ- |
ence in the manner prescribed by the next rule, apply the result, =~
as an additive or subtractive equation, to the daily motion.
48. The equation of a planet's daily motion is to be cal- :
culated like the place of the planet in the process for the apsis=
multiply the daily motion by the difference of tabular sines corresponding to the hase-sine (dorjyd) of anomaly, and then divide by a
two hundred and& twenty-five ; eae
| - 49. Multiply the result by the corresponding epicycle of
the apsis (mandaparidhi), an :
ie!
a
e a
a= ia 1
er © ls
ie
ae” ~—T is , «
P aad

The True Places of the Planets 89
& circle (bhagana) ; the result, in minutes, is additive when in
the half-orbit beginning with Cancer, and subtractive when in
that beginning with Capricorn.
fe [ Only the effect of the apsis upon the daily rate of motion is treated
_ of in these verses; the farther modification of it by the conjunction is
the subject of those which succeed.
| Verse 47 is a separate specification under the general rule given in
the following verse, applying to the moon slone. The rate of a planet’s
motion in its epicycle being equal to its mean motion from the apsis, or
its anomalistic motion, it is necessary in the case of the moon, whose
apsis has a perceptible forward movement, to subtract the daily amount
so ofs this movement from that of the planet in order to obtain the daily
rate of removal from the apsis.
N - Tn the first half of verse 48 the commentary sees only an intimation
(4 that, as regards the apsis, the equation of motion is found in the same
general method as the equations of place, a certain factor being multiplied
‘by the circumference of the epicycle and divided by that of the orbit.
+ Such a direction, however, would be altogether trifling and superfluous,
«and not at all in aecordance with the usual compressed style of the
Tt treatise ; and moreover, were it to be so understood, we should lack any
*] direction as to which of the several places found for a planet in the
_—s« process for ascertaining its true place should be assumed as that for
which this first equation ef motion is to be calculated. The true meaning of the line, beyond all reasonable question, is, that the equation 5
orgs” to be derived from the same data from which the equation of place for
the apsis was finally obtained, to be applied to the planet's mean position, as this is applied to its mean motion; from the data,
the third process, as given above.
\J ns The principle upon which the rule is founded may
follows. The equation of motion for any given time is evidently
to the amount of acceleration. or of retardation effected during that time
the sine of
namely, of
be explained as
equal
Be by the influence of the apsis. Thus, in Fig. 8 (p. 72). mn,
a” atm, is the equation of motion for the whole time during which the
centre of the epicycle has been traversing the «are AM. If that are,
and the are a’m, be supposed to be divided into any number of
po tion -ench equal to a day's motion, the equation of motion for each
succe sive day will be equal to the successive increments of the sines of
. ren ing ares’ in the epicycle ; and these will be equal to the sucincrements from day to day of the sines of mean anomaly, reduced
the dimensions of the epicycle, But the rate at which the sine
crenaing or decreasing at any point in the quadrant is approximately
red by the diffe ence of the tabular sines at that point: and as
equal

Bs Berys Sitsnance
j
oO
a)
“the ares of mean daily motion are generally quite small—being, except
= in the case of the moon, much less than 3° 45/, the unit of the table
-— —Wwo may form this proportion: if, at the point in the orbit occupied by
eT the planet, a difference of 3° 45’ in are produces an increase or decrease
=) of a given amount in sine, what increase or decrease of sine will be
| produced by a difference of are equal to the planet's daily motion? or,
225 : diff. of tab, simes :; planet's daily motion : corresponding diff. of
sine. The reduction of the result of this proportion to the dimensions
of the epicycle gives the equation sought.
We will calculate by this method the true daily motion of the moon
at the time for which her true longitude has been found above.
Moon's mean daily motion (i. 30), - 700° 35”
deduct daily motion of apsis (i, 33), 6 4)
Moon's mean anomalistic motion, 783 54
From the process of calculation of the moon's true place, given above,
we take
Moon's mean anomaly, 10° 18" 4 * 15”
Sine of anomaly (bhujajyd), 2266’
From the table of sines (ii. 15-27), we find
Corresponding difference of tabular sines 174°
Hence the proportion
shows the increase of the sine of anomaly in a day at this point to be
606' 18". The dimensions of the epicycle were found to be 31° 47’. Hence
the proportion
gives us the desired equation of motion, as 53’ 81". By verse 49 it is
subtractive, the planet being less than a quadrant from the apsis, or its
anomaly being more than nine and less than three signs. Therefore,
from the
Moon's mean daily motion, Ta0° 35° ;
subtract the equation, 63 31 :
Moon's true daily motion at given time, 737 «64 |
: The roughness of the process is well illustrated by this example.
| Had the sine of anomaly been but 2/ greater, the difference of sines would a
Bie have been 10’ less, and the equation only about 50’, re; |
eee . The corrected rate of motion of the other planets will be given and
found to be +2! 18", Sah te se oat Ot : : =
Se > | - jee 2 eS te —

- The True Places of the Planets 1
The corrected rate of- motion of the other plancts will be given under
the next following passage.
50. Subtract the daily motion of a planet, thus corrected
for the apsis (manda), from the daily motion of its conjunction
(cighra) ; then multiply the remainder by the difference between
the last hypothenuse and radius, |
51. And divide by the variable hypothenuse (cala karna) :
the result is additive to the daily motion when the hypothenuse 1s
greater than radius, and subtractive when this 1s less ; if, when
subtractive, the equation is greater than the daily motion, deduct
the latter from it, and the remainder is the daily motion in a
retrograde (vakra) direction.
‘The commentary gives no demonstration of the rule by which we are
here taught to calculate the variation of the rate of motion of a planet
occasioned by the action of its conjunction: the following figure, however
(Fig. 7), will illustrate the principle upon which it is founded.
As in a previous figure (Fig. 5, p. 77, CMM!’ represents the mean
orbit of a planet, E the earth, and M the planet’s mean position, at a
given time, relative to its conjunction, C: the circle described about M
is the epicycle of the conjunction: it is drawn, in the figure, of the
ee Fig. 7. relative dimensions of that assumed
F . for Mars. Suppose M’M to be the
amcunt of motion of the centre of
the epicycle, or the (equated) mean
synodical motion of the planet, during
one day m'm is the arc of the ep!-
eycle traversed by the planet in the
same time. As the amount of daily
synodical motion is in every case
small, these ares are necessarily greatly exaggerated in the figure, being
made about twenty-four times too
ereat for Mure. Had the planet
remained stationary in the epicycle
of the epicycle moved from M’ to M. its place at the
en time would be at 4; having moved to m, it is seen at ¢: hence at
Lhe ‘quation of daily motion, of which it is required to ascertain the
galue. Produce Em’ to n, making En equal to Em, and join mn; from
Io at right angles to Em. Then. since the are mm’ is very small
s Emn and Enm, 28 also Mrnon’ and Min’m, may bee regarded
Tae ae
7: in y. n
said
. Ae

i. as ‘right angles; Mmo and nmm! are therefore equal, each being the
ee complement of Emm’, and the triangles mmm’ and Mmn are similar.
Hence
Mm: mo:: mm: mn
tee But EM: Mm:: MM’: mm!
_ Hence, by combining terms, EM: mo::; MM’: mn
But ts: Et:: mn: Em
arapere lira, equals Et, by ; ts: mo:: MM’: Em
end, reducing the proportion to an equation, ts, the required equation
of motion, equals MM’, the equated mean synodical motion in a day,
multiplied by mo, and dvided by Em, the variable hypothenuse. This,
however, is not precisely the rule given above; for in the text of this
Siddhanta, mt, the difference between the variable hypothenuse and
radius, is substituted for mo, as if the two were virtually equivalent: a
highly inaccurate assumption, since they differ from one another by the
versed sine, of, of the equation of the conjuncton, Ml, which equation
is sometimes as much as 40°: and indeed, the commentary, contrary to
its usual habit of obsequiousness to the inspired text with which it has
to deal, rejects this assumption, and says, without even an apology for
the liberty it is taking, that by the word ** radius "' im verse 50 is to be
understood the cosine (kotijyad) of the second equation of the conjunction.
In illustration of the rule, we will calculate the true rate of daily
motion of the planet Mars, at the same time for which the previous
calculations have been made.
By the process already illustrated under the preceding passage, the
equation of Mars’s daily motion for the effect of the apsis, as derived from
the data of the third process for ascertaining his true place, is found to
be—3' 41", the difference of tabular sines beng 151’. Accordingly,
drom the mean daily motion of Mare (1. 54), 81’ 26”
deduct the equation for the apsis, 3 41 ,
Mars's equated daily motion, 27 46
Now. to find the equated daily synodical motion,
from the daily motion of Mars’s conjunction (the sun), 59° 8”
n deduct his equated daily motion, Q7 465
Mars’s equated daily synodical motion, 81 23
The variable hypothenuse used in the last process for finding the true
ha place was 3064/; its excess above radius is 546. The proportion
shows, then, that the equation of motion e conjunction at the #
is ee. given ete a £ nae fe ‘bo sa mayrc a ae 7
Cn a
eee i

P cr — é 4
ny —
ie
7a aS,
ie: The True Places of the Planets 93
Car” that is to say, since the planet is in the half-orbit in which the influence
3 of the conjunction is aecelerative—the equation is additive. Therefore,
| to Mars'’s equated daily motion, 27° 45”
> Pe add the equation for the conjunction, 4 18
i Mars’s true daily motion at the given time, 2 68
ies” In this calculation we have followed the rule stated in the text; had
-_—s—s we ~accepted the amendment of the commentary, and, in finding the
second term of our proportion, substituted for radius the cosine of
83° 44’, the resulting equation would have been more than doubled,
becoming 8’ 51”, instead of 4’ 18"; this happening to be a case where
the difference is nearly as great as possible. We have deemed it best,
however, in making out the corresponding results for all the five planets,
as presented in the annexed table, to adhere to the directions of the
text itself. The inaccuracy, it may be observed, is greatest when the
_—s equation of motion is least, and the contrary; so that, although sometimes very large relatively to the equation, it never comes to be of any
great importance absolutely.
Results of the Processes for finding the True Daily Motion of the Planets.
a ar Diff. Equation 'Equated Equated | Equation True
he - Flanes. of sipes. ot Apel, Motion. Synod. ae Conjunction. Motion.
Ax
Hindus of the principle of equable
ation of the whole system of eeceniS. Seam The final abandonment by the
= ye circular motion, which lies at the found
~ tries and epicycles, 1s, as-ulready pointed out above (under vv. 43-45),
= distinetly exhibited in this process: m’m (Fig. 7), the are in the epicycle
i traversed by the planet during « given interval of time, is no fixed and
| equal quantit _ but is dependent upon the arc M‘M, the value of which,
havir » suffered correction by the result of a triply complicated process,
is altogeth irregular and variable. This necessarily follows from the
of the beings
‘sesumption of simultancous and mutual action on the part
“ye t and the consequent impossibility of constructing ¥ connected geometrical figure which shall represent the jomet
See Ry the Ptolemaic method the
kt) ein & -
7 = =i" ome pel
VT iti \ >ia*
ais ©
: as eS
4 bi
od %
jF

wd f
a laa ae ee etn
See eee Stirya-Siddhanta
is PX; and as the angle «PT like +XA", increases equably. the planet
traverses the circumference of the epicycle with an unvarying motion relative
to the fixed pomt #; although the equation is derived, not from the are
wT, but from eT, the equivalent of CR, ‘ts part er varying with the
varying angle EPX.
In case the reverse motion of the planet upon the half-circumference
of the epicycle within the mean orbit is, when projected upon the orbit,
greater than the direct motion of the centre of the epicycle, the planet
will appear to move backward in its orbit, at a rate equal to the excess
of the former over the latter motion. This is, as the last table shows,
the case with Jupiter and Saturn at the given time. The subject of the
retrogradation of the planets is continued and completed in the next
following passage. .
52. When at a great distance from its - conjunction
(cighrocea), a planet, having its substance drawn to the left and
right by slack cords, comes then to have a retrograde motion.
53. Mars and the rest, when their degrees of commutation
(kendra), in the fourth process, are, respectively, one hundred
and sixty-four, one hundred and forty-four, one hundred and thirty,
one hundred and sixty-three, one hundred and fifteen,
54. Become retrograde (cakrin): and when their respective
commutations are equal to the number of degrees remaining after
subtracting those numbers, in each several case, from a_ whole
circle, they cease retrogradation.
55. In accordance with the greatness of their epicycles of
the conjunction (cighraparidhi), Venus and Mars cease retrograding in the seventh sign, Jupiter and Mercury in the eighth, Saturn
in the ninth.
The subject of the stations and retrogradations of the planets is
rather briefly and summarily disposed of in this passage, although treated
with as much fullness, perhaps, as is consistent with the general method
ef the Siddhinta. Ptolemy devotes to it the greater part of the twelfth
book of the Syntaxis.
‘The first verse gives the theory of the physical eause of the phenormenon: it is to be compared with the opening verses of the chapter,
particularly verse 2. We note here, again, the entire disavowal of the
system of epicycles as a representation of the actual movements of the
planets. How the slackness of the cords by which ench planet is
attached to, and attracted by, the supernatural being at its conjunction,
furnishes an explanation ‘of its retrogradation which should commend

= ce
ee
"a
L UBRARY
‘ a al aa Sse ct
rit a4
aes oe
ne *
aN The True Places of the Planets 95
- itself as satisfactory to the mind even of one who believed in the supernatural being and the cords, we find it very hard to see, in spite of the
explanation of the commentary: it might have been better to omit
verse 52 altogether, and to suffer the phenomenon to rest upon the
- gimple and_ intelligible explanation given at the end of the preceding
ie «verse, which is a true staternent of its cause. expressed in terms of the
_ Hindu system. The actual reason of the apparent retrogradation 1s,
____ indeed, different in the case of the inferior and of the superior planets.
As regards the former, when they are traversing the inferior portion of
— their orbits, or are nearly between the sun and the earth, their helio-
‘centric eastward motion becomes, of course, as seen from the earth,
westward, or retrograde; by the parallax of the earth's motion in the
> . same direction this apparent retrogradation is diminished, both in rate
x and in continuance, but is not prevented, because the motion of the
Se
“a inferior planets is more rapid than that of the earth. The retrogradation of the superior planets, on the other hand, is due to the parallax of
| the earth’s motion in the same direction when between them and the
sun, and is lessened by their own motion in their orbits, although not
done away with altogether, because their motion is less rapid than that
of the earth. But, in the Hindu system, the revolution of the planet in
ss the ~=epicycle of the conjunction represents in the one case the proper
~~ ‘motion of the planet, in the other, that of the earth, reversed; hence,
whenever its apparent amount, in a contrary direction, exceeds that of
the movement of the centre of the epicycle—which is, in the one case,
that of the earth, in the other. that of the planet itself—retrogradation
jis the necessary consequence.
. Werses 53-55 contain a statement of the limits within which retrogradation takes place. The data of verse 53 belong to the different
- planets in the order, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, and Saturn (sce
above, under i. 51, 52). That is to say, Mercury retrogrades, when his
Net?» equated commutation, as made use of in the fourth process for finding
(oe his true place (see above, under vv. 45-45), is more than 144° and less
~ than 216°; Venus, when her commutation, in like manner, is between
<t? 163° and 197°; Mars, between 164° and 196°: Jupiter. between 150°
} and 230°; Saturn, between 115° and 245°. These limits ought not,
- however, ‘even according to the theory of this Siddhanta, to be Ilaid
‘down with such exactness; for the precise point at which the subtractive
aoiation of motion for the conjunction will exceed the proper motion
e hi sla must depend, in part, upon the varying rate of the latter
flected by its eccentricity, and must accordingly differ a little at
on times. We have not thought it worth while to calculate the
it -of this variation, nor to draw up a comparison of the Hindu
Gre ke and the modern determinations of the limits of retro-

al
a FS
= IoD ,. 4 > As ae Lreeig b
Or ar in i «= R, ae or; re -
: Ros = ae Stirya-Siddhant
a sit
ta
gre c ation, since these are dependent for their correctness upon the aceuraey of the elements assumed, and the processes employed, both of which —
have been already sufficiently illustrated.
_ ss The last verse of the passage adds little to what had been already
said, being merely a repetition, in other and less precise terms, of the
specifications of the preceding verse, together with the assertion of a
~~ relation between the limits of retrogradation and the dimensions of the
| respective epicycles; a relation which is only empirical, and which, as
regards Venus and Mars, does not quite hold good.
56. To the nodes of Mars, Saturn, and Jupiter, the equa-_
_ tion of the conjunction is to be applied, as to the planets them-
- selves respectively ; to those of Mercury and Venus, the equation
of the apsis, as found by the third process, in the contrary
direction. :
57. The sine of the are found by subtracting the place of the
node from that of the planet—or, in the case of Venus and Mercury,
from that of the conjunction—being multiplied by the extreme
latitude, and divided by the last hypothenuse—or, in the case of
the moon, by radius—gives the latitude (vtkshepa).
58. When latitude and declination (apakrama) are of like
direction, the declination (kra@nti) is increased by the latitude;
when of different direction, it is diminished by it, to find the
true (spashta) declination: that of the sun remains as already
determined. ee
How to find the declination of a planet at any given point uf the
ecliptic, or circle of declination (krantivrtta), was taught us in verse 28
above, taken in connection with verses 9 and 10 of the next chapter:
here we have stated the method of finding the actual declination of any
planet, as modified by its deviation in latitude from the ecliptic. | .
The process by which the amount of a planet's deviation in latitude
from the ecliptic is here directed to be found is more correct than might
have been expected, considering how far the Hindus were from compreSk « hending the true relations of the solar system. “The three cau:
employed as data in the process ure, first, the angular ere a a }
planet from its node; second, the apparent value, as latitude, o
— ~ as pues
greatest removal from the ecliptic, when seen from the one s rma rae
ss distance, equal to the radius of its mean orbit; and lastly, its actual.
%« : , oR ‘ a a — a >a ar ea . ah,
pry each planet in the concluding verses of the first chapter; the third is
RS 6 cy, cocina g the planet's true place (see above, —
ve .
distance from the carth. Of these quantities, the second is stated for
4 oe ae re so tw nies
| Gorrectly represented by the variable hypothenuse (cala karva) found jn

The True Places of the Planets ~ 97
ae
ah under vv, 43-45); the first is still to be obtained, and verse 56 with the
__ first part of verse 57 teaches the method of ascertaining it. The principle
wee OF this method is the same for all the planets, although the statement
oe of it is so different; it is, in effect, to apply to the mean place of the planet,
a7 before taking its distance fromm the node, only the equation of the apsis,
found as the result of the third process. In the case of the superior planets,
> this method has all the correctness which the Hindu system admits; for
ie by the first three processes of correction is found, as nearly as the Hindus
are able to find it, the true heliocentric place of the planet, the distance
uy from which to the node determines, of course, the amount of removal from
the ecliptic. Instead, however, of taking this distance directly, rejecting
i altogether the fourth equation, that for the parallax of the earth's place,
_ the Hindus apply the latter both to the planet and to the node; their
relative position thus remains the same as if the other method had been
adopted.
Ce Thus, for instance, the position of Jupiter's node upon the first of
January, 1860, is found from the data already given above (see i. 41-44)
Na
te")
“a
to be 2! 19° 40’; his true heliocentric longitude, employed as a datum in
(seo p. 83). i 4 T° BO; Jupiter's heliocentric dis-
‘tance frorn the node is, accordingly, 11° 96/. Or, by the Hindu method,
the planet’s true geocentric place is 3° 4° 11’, and the corrected longi-
? tude of its node is 2* 99° 45/: the distance remains, as before, 11° 26.
, In the case of the inferior planets, a5 the assumptions of the Hindus
ie especting them were farther removed from the truth of nature, so their
- method of finding the distance from the node is more arbitrary and less
— gecurate. In their system the heliocentric position of the planet is represented by the place of its conjunction (¢ighra), and they had, as 1s shown
above (see ii. 8), recognized the fact that it was the distance of the latter
— from the node which determined the amount of deviation from the ecliptic.
Mire. Now, in ascertaining the heliocentric distance of an inferior planet from
re ite node, allowance needs to be made, of course, for the effect upon its
a. position of the eccentricity of its orbit. But the Hindu equation of the
apsis is no true representative of this effect: it is ealeulated in order to
ie applied to the mean place of the sun, the assumed centre of the epicycle
—that is, of the true orbit; its value, as found, is geocentric, and, as
appear ) by the table on p. 93, is widely different from its heliocentric
value; and its sign is plus or minus according as its influence 1s to carry
6 plan : from the earth, eastward or westward; while,
centric effect may be at one time to bring the planet
> another time to carry it farther from the node. The Hindus,
sve lookir x these incongruities, and having, apparently, no
et view ; of th subject to guide them to 4 eorrecter method, follow
romard to Venus and Mercury what seems to them the same rule
the fourth process
eld
in either
' Tp
B wea
: . Vos
a) eee « a hd =
a

“ae Pe et Pig
. arr Poet tne a te al +
Starya-Siddhdanta
as was employed in the case of the other planets—they apply the equation
of the apsis, the result of the third process, to the mean place of the
conjunction; only here, as before, by an indirect process: instead of
applving it to the conjunction itself, they apply it with a contrary sign to
the node, the effect upon the relative position of the two being the same.
Thus, for instance, the longitude of Mercury's conjunction at the
given time is (see p. 80). 4* 16° 57’; from this subtract 2° 2’, the equation of the apsis found by the third process, and its equated longitude
is 4* 14° 55’: now deducting the longitude of the node at the same time,
which is 20° 41', we ascertain the planet’s distance from the node to be
8* 24° 14". Or, by the Hindu method, add the same equation to the
mean position of the node, and its equated longitude is 22° 43/; subtract
this from the mesn longitude of the conjunction, and the distance is, as
The planet's distance from the node being determined, its latitude
would be found by « process similar to that prescribed in verse 28 of
this chapter, if the earth were at the centre of motion; and that rule is
accordingly applied in the case of the moon; the proportion being, as
radius is to the sine of the distance from the node, so is the sine of extreme lntitude (or the latitude itself, the difference between the sine and
the are being of little account when the are is so small) to the latitude
at the given point, In the case of the other planets, however, this proportion is modified by combination with another, namely: as the last
variable hypothenuse (cala karna), which is the line drawn from the eartl
to the finally determined place of the planet, or its true distance, is to
radius, its mean distance, so is its apparent latitude at the mean distance
to its apparent latitude at its true distance. That is, with
R : sin nod. dist. :: extreme Int. : actunl Int. at dist. R
combing var. hyp : R ;: lat. at dist. R : lat. at true dist.
we hove var. hyp. : sin nod. dist. ;: extreme lat. : actual lat. at true dist.
which, turned into an equation, is the rule in the latter half of vy. 57.
The latitude, as thus found, is measured, of course, upon 4& secondary to the ecliptic. By the rule in verse 58, however, it is treated as if
measured upon a circle of declination, and is, without modification, added
to or subtracted from the declination, according as the direction of the two
‘¢ the same or different. The commentary takes note of this error, but
explains it, as in other similar cases, as being, “‘ for fear of giving men
trouble, and on account of the very slight inaccuracy, overlooked by the
blessed Sun, moved with compassion.” . |
We present in the annexed table the results of the processes for calculating the latitude, the declination, and the true declination as affected
by latitude, of all the planets, at the time for which their longitude has
glready been found. The declination is calculated by the rule in verse

at — The True Places of the Planets J9
_—s«- 88 of this chapter, the precession at the given time being, as found under
_* verses 9-12 of the next chapter, 20° 24/ 39". Upon the line for the sup
in the table are given the results of the process for calculating his declinace tion, the equinox itself being accounted os a “* node “": it is, in fact, styled,
in modern Hindu astronomy, Ardntipdta, ** node of declination,” although
that term does not occur in this treatise.
j Resulls of the Process for finding the Latitude and Declination of the
- Planets.
Deelina- Corrected
tion. Declination.
oA We are now able to compare the Hindu determinations of the true
places and motions of the planets with their actual positions and motions,
as obtained by modern science. The comparison is made in the annexed
a table. As the longitudes given by the Sdrya-Siddhanta contain a conCae sti at error of 2° 20’, owing to the incorreet rate of precession adopted
Nee by the treatise, and the false position thence assigned to the equinox, we
fc - give, under the head of longitude, the distance of each planet both from
ee the Hindu equinox, and from the true vernal equinox of Jan. 1, 1860.
(hae ‘The Hindu daily motions are reduced from longitude to right ascension
* the rule given in the next following verse (v. 59). The modern data
aken from the American Nautical Almanac.
cit Tr e Places and Motions of the Planets, Jan. 18st, 1860, midnight, at
Th al shington, according to the Sirya-Siddhinta and to Modern Science
im 7h Daily Motion
Declination. in Right Ascension.
; Sdrya- Sirya- | F
* lgiaahSnte.| “oder™* isidabhnta.| *foder™*- |

dl a al ¢
*s a
P il
Strya-Siddhanta
The proper subject of the second chapter, the determination of the
true places of the planets, being thus brought to a close, we should expect
to sea the chapter concluded here, and the other matters which it contains
put off to that which follows, in which they would seem more properly to
belong. The treatise, however, is nowhere distinguished for its orderly
and consistent arrangement. i
59. Multiply the daily motion of a planet by the time of
rising of the sign in which it is, and divide by eighteen hundred ;
the quotient add to, or subtract from, the number of respirations
in a revolution: the result is the number of respirations in the
day and night of that planet.
In the first half of this verse is taught the method of finding the
increment or decrement of right ascension corresponding to the increment
or decrement of longitude made by any planet during one day. For the
‘time of rising "’ (udayaprdnds, or, more commonly, udaydsavas, literally “* respirations of rising *’) of the different signs, or the time in respirations (see i, 11), cecupied by the successive signs of the ecliptic in passing
the meridian—or, at the equator, in rising above the horizon—see verses
42-44 of the next chapter. The statement upon which the rule is
founded is as follows: if the given sign, containing 1800’ of are (each
minute of are corresponding, as remarked above, under i, 11-12, to a
respiration of sidereal time), occupies the stated number of respirations in
passing the meridian, what number of respirations will be occupied by
the are traversed by the planet on a given day? The result gives the
amount by which the day of each planet, reckoned in the manner of this
Siddbanta, or from transit to transit across the inferior meridian, differs
from a sidereal day: the difference is additive when the motion of the
planet is direct; subtractive, when this is retrograde.
Thus. to find the length of the sun's day, or the interval between two
successive apparent transits, at the time for which his true longitude and
rate of motion have already been ascertained. The sun's longitude, as
corrected by the precession, is 9* 8° 40’; he is accordingly in the tenth
sign, of which the time of rising (udaydsaras), or the equivalent in right
ascension, 181935”. His rate of daily motion in longitude is 61! 26".
Hence the proportion =
shows that his day differs from the true sidereal day by 11° 07.04, As
his motion is direct, the difference is additive: the lerigth of the apparent
day is therefore 60" 11° 9*.04, which is equivalent to 24* 0" 27'.5, mean
solar time, Aceording to the Nautical Almanac, it is 244 0” 28'.6. By
-q similar process, the length of Jupiter's day.at the pag ATE seed i)
t

Ses
: La i ee SS ‘
aa. ihe,
od ad my ae a ee ,
: Ree PUNE True Places of the Planets 101
es ee. . .
hea be 590" 58° 4”, or 23° 55” 307.8. by the Nautical Almanac, it is
A.
aes 60. Calculate the sine and versed sine of declination : then
___ radius, diminished by the versed-sine, is the day-radius: it 1s
either south or north. ; |
oe a
=. ‘the quantities made use of, and the processes prescribed, in this
Ruy and the following verses may be explained and illustrated by means of the
annexed figure (Fig. 8). :
‘ Let the circle ZSZ/N represent the meridian of u given place, ©
= being the centre, the place
of the observer, SN the sec
tion of the plane, of his horizon—S being the south, and
N the north point—Z and Z!
the zenith and its opposite
point, the nadir, P and Pr
the north and south poles,
and E and FE’ the points on
the meridian cut by the
equator. Let ED be the
declination of a planet at 4
given time; then DD’ will
be the diameter of the circle
of diurnal revolution deseribed by the planet, and
BD the radius of that circle -
BD is the line which in
| verse 60 is called the ‘* dayci w DF perpendicular to EC : then it is evident that BD i» equal
1m 1is : ed by EF, which is the versed sine of ED. the declination.
For * radius "" we have hitherto had only the term frijy@ (or its equits, trijiva, tribhajivd. tribhajyd, tribhamdurvika, literally ‘‘the sine
is applicable only
Fig. 8.
a
a
val T
f three signs,’’ that is, of 90°. That term, however,
the radius of a great circle, or to tabular ynadius. In
ve
oe
this verse,
o Sh Oe “ - : Pa * ee
accordingly, we have for ** day-radius "" the word dinavydsadal«, halfdiamete r of the day; * and other expressions synonymous with this are
found used instead of it in other passages. A more frequent |
the same yuantit in modern Hindu astronomy !> dyupua, day-sine -
: the is not found anywhere in
aoe ee q
SS ye oe
tiim, Tite.
ugh employed by the commentary, !
ey)
f
name for
wl ir ooh. Wea, Pe as
USS, ee eee © : rw . av-radius declared
Tt is a matter for surprise that ae not find the day
: simply to the cosine (kotijya) of eclination.
‘a pity 1h 2 uM
St =
a
et
om

br
| ‘Chee & c
Strya-Siddhdnta
In illustration of the rule, it will be sufficient to find the radius of
Bes. the diurnal circle described by the sun at the time for which his place has
been determined. His declination, Ed (Vig. 8) was found to be 28° 41/:
of this the versed sine, EF, is, by the table given above (ii. 22-27), 290’:
the difference between this and radius, EC, or 3438’, is 8148’, which is
the value of CF or bd, the day-radius. The declination in this case being
south, the day-radius is also south of the equator.
G1. MujJtiply the sine of declination by the equinoctial
shadow, and divide by twelve; the result is the earth-sine
(kshitijya) ; this, multiplied by radius and divided by. the dayradius, gives the sine of the ascensional difference (cara): the
number of respirations due to the ascensional difference
62. Is shown by the corresponding arc. Add these to, and
subtract them from, the fourth part of the corresponding day
and night, and the sum and remainder are, when declination 1s
north, the half-day and half-night ;
G3. When declination is south, the reverse; these, multiplied by two, are the day and the might. The day and the night
of the asterisms (bha) may be found in like manner, by means of
their declination, increased or diminished by their latitude.
We were taught in verse 59 how to find the length of the entire day
of a planet at any given time; this passage gives us the method of
ascertaining the length of its day and of its night, or of that part of the
day during which the planet is above, and that during which it is below,
the horizon.
In order to this, it is necessary to ascertain, for the planet in question,
its ascensional difference (cara), or the difference between its right and
oblique ascension, the amount of which varies with the declination of
the planet and the latitude of the observer. The method of doing this
ig stated in verse 61: it may be explained by means of the last figure
(Fig. 8). First, the value of the line AB, which is called the ** earthsine “’ (kshitijyd), is found, by comparing the two triangles ABC and
CHE. which are similar, since the angles ACB and CEH are each equal
te the latitude of the observer. The triangle CHE is represented here
by a triangle of which a gnomon of twelve digits is the perpendicular, and
ite equinoctial shadow, cast when the sun is in the equator and on the
meridian (see the next chapter, verse 7, ete.), is the base. Hence the
proportion EH: HC:: BC: AB is equivalent—since BC equals DF, the
sine of declination—to gnom.: ¢q. shad, +: sin decl.: earth-sine. But
the arc of which AB is sine is the same part of the circle of diurnal

The True Places of the Planets 103
Ea
revolution as the ascensional difference is of the equator; hence the reduction of AB to the dimensions of «a great circle, by the proportion
4 ‘BD: AB:: CE: CG, gives the value of CG, the sine of the ascensional
_ difference. The corresponding are is the measure in time of the amount by
_ which the part of the diurnal circle intercepted between the meridian and
the horizon differs from a quadrant, or by which the time between SUun-rise
or sun-set and noon or midnight differs from o quarter of the day.
+ In illustration of the process, we will calculate the respective length
SPS of the sun’s day and night at Washington at the time for which our
previous calculations have been made.
. oo The latitude of Washington being 38° 54’, the length of the equi-
‘noctial shadow cast there by a gnomon twelve digits long is found, by
: the rule given below (iii. 17), to be q’ ag, The sine, dF or bC, of the ~
sun's declination at the given time, 28° 41/ 8S, is 1880. Hence the
___- proportion
i gives us the value of the earth-sine, ab, as 1113’. This is reduced to
_- the dimensions of a great circle by the proportion
The value of Cg, the sine of ascensional difference, is therefore 1216’:
the corresponding are is 20° 44’, or 1244’, which, as a minute of are
ah equals a respiration of time, is equivalent to B* 27" 2”. The total length
y os 3 the day was found above (under v. 59) to be 60" 11°, increase and
i Rts diminish the quarter of this by the ascensional difference, and double the
pS ee um and remainder, and the length of the night is found to be 37" 0° 1”,
\ = ot and that of the day 23” 1n- 5", which are equivalent respectively to 14”
al _ 45° 38'.6 and 9* 14™ 48*.9, mean solar time.
es Of course, the respective parts of a sidere
we of the lunar mansions, as represented by its principal star, Ww
» ’ above and below the horizon of a given latitude, may be found in the
3 ime manner, if the declination of the star is known; and this is stated
in the chapter (ch. viii) which treats of the asterisms. bf
ie Why AB is called kahitijyd is not easy to see. One is tempted
nae ing rather ‘sine of situation "" than
rth-sine,’’ the original signification of kshiti being — abode, residence“:
nig at then indicate a sine which, for a given declination, varies with
ration : But that ksahiti in this compound is to be
east strongly indicated by
ame of the sine in question, kujya which is
u i ne commen Ithough not in the text, and which can only
heen 6 rth < ne.** The word cara, used to denote the ascensional
al day during which each
iil remain
=e
F x
Pa
ms 2
| Str
ras
rom
“wal
me wns simply ‘* variable: "* we have ‘elsewhere carakhanda,
e:
ite °

i 7 ] Ws
Stirya-Siddhénta
caradala, ** variable portion; "’ that is to say, the constantly varying
amount by which the apparent day and night differ from the equatorial
se day and night of one half the whole day each. ‘he gnomon, the equinoctial
shadow, etc., are treated of in the next chapter.
64. The portion (bhoga) of an asterism (bha) is eight
hundred minutes; of a lunar day (tithi), in like manner, seven
hundred and twenty. If the longitude of a planet, in minutes, be
divided by the portion of an asterism, the result is its position in
asterisms : by means of the daily motion are found the days, etc.
The ecliptic is divided (see ch. viii) into 27 lunar mansions or asterisms, of equal amount; hence the portion of the ecliptic occupied by
each asterism is 18° 20’, or 800’. In order to find, accordingly, in which
asterism at a given time, the moon or any other of the planets is, we
have only to reduce its longitude, not corrected by the precession, to
minutes, and divide by 800: the quotient is the number of asterisms
traversed, and the remainder the part traversed of the asterism in which
the planet is. The last clause of the verse is very elliptical and obscure;
according to the cormmentary, it is to be understood thus: divide by the
planet's true daily motion the part past and the part to come of the
current asterism, and the quotients are the days and fractions of a day
which the planet has passed, and is to pass, in that asterism. This interpretation is supported by the analogy of the following verses, and is doubtless correct.
The true longitude of the moon was f und above (under v. 39) to be
11* 17° 89’, or 20,859". Dividing by 800, we find that, at the given
time. the moon is in the 27th, or last, asterism, named Revati, of which
+t has traversed 59’, and has 741’ still to pass over. Its daily motion
being 737’, it has spent 28° 4”, and has yet to continue 1¢ 0" 19* 3", in
the asterism.
The latter part of this process proceeds upon the assumption that the
planct’s “ate of motion remains the same during its whole continuance
in the asterism. A similar assumption, it will be noticed, is made in all
the processes from verse 59 onward; its inaccuracy is greatest, of course, ~
where the moon's motion is concerned.
Respecting the lunar day (tithiy see below, under verse 66,
“ 65. From the number of minutes in the sum of the longitudes of the sun and moon are found the yogas, by dividing that
sum by the portion (bhoga) of an asterism. Multiply the minutes
past and to come of the current yoga by sixty, and divide by the
a
. ad Lew?
" 6% Me let ——
, = * e 4 td , Gans
’ a 7 _ “ ey A ds
£, : PAL LP ne

P my 2° ¢ ou
~ a et
The True Places of the Planets LO5
_ ~What the yoga is, is evident from this rule for finding it; it is the
. aes 2 A . pis, ;
A a period, of variable length, during which the joint motion in longitude of
the sun ond moon amounts to 13° 20! the portion of « lunar mansion.
_ According to Colebrooke (As. Kes., ix. 365; Essays, ii. 362, 363), the
pause of the yogas is chiefly astrological; the occurrence of certain movaCia ble festivals is, however, also regulated by them, and they are so frequently
Be desctoyed that every Hindu almanac contains a column specifying the yoga
\ for each day, with the time of its termination, ‘The names of the twentyseven yogas are as follows:
,. 1. Vishkambha. 10. Ganda. 19. Parigha.
ON ee Priti. ll. Wrddhi. 20. Qiva.
g. Ayushmant. 12. Dhruva. 21. Siddha.
4. Siubbigya. 13. Vyighita. 22. Sadhya.
6. Q bhanae. _ 4. Harshaga. 23. Qubba.
ia 6. Atiganda. 15. Wajra. 24. Qukla.
rh § 7. Sukarman. 16. Si ; 25. Brahman.
~~ * 8.“ Dbrti. 17. Vyatipita. 26. [ndra.
“ Pal = Le Gala. 18. Variyas. 27. Whidhrti.
eg There is also in use in India (see Colebrooke, as above) another
aystem of yogas, twenty-eight im number, having for the most part
ee different names from these, and governed by other rules in their succession.
ie? Of this system the Sirya-Siddhanta presents no trace.
ah We will find the time in yogas corresponding to that for which the
previous: calculations have been made.
en. “The longitude of the moon at that time is 11 17° 39’, that of the
sun is 8 18° 15/5 ‘their sum is 8 5° 54’, or 14,754". Dividing by 800,
— we find that eighteen yogas of the series are past, and that the current
a one is the nineteenth, Parigha, of which 354 are past, and 446 to
; - eome. To ascertain the time at which the current yoga began and that
at which it is to end, we divide these parts respectively by 799’, the
he daily motions of the sun and moon at the given time, and
at whicl
mi ‘iply | j 60 to reduce the results to nadis: and we find that Parigha
vegan 16" BG’ before, and will end 38" 30° 4 after the given time.
: T me yoga, by which this astrological period ts ealled, is
) i upparently, as designating the period during which the sum
a) of the increments in longitude of the sun and moon amounts to 4
1 quantity. It seems an entirely arbitrary device of the astrologers,
. ratur: period nor 4 subdivision of one, not being of
an discover in determining the relative position, or
sum of t
is applied
Sill
aa. As :
Beane mon) vv
late Wht

Sirud-Siddhénta:
aspect, of the two planets with which it deals, nor having any assignable
relation to the asterisms, with which it is attempted to be brought into
Connecvion. Were there thirty yogas, instead of twenty-seven, the
period would seem an artificial counterpart to the lunar day, which
the subject of the next verse; being derived from the sum, as the other
from the difference, of the longitudes of the sun and moon.
66. From the number of minutes in the longitude of the
moon diminished by that of the sun are found the lunar days
(tithi), by dividing the difference by the portion (bhoga) of a lunar
day. Multiply the minutes past and to come of the current lunar
day by sixty, and divide by the difference of the daily motions of
the two planets: the result is the time in nadis.
The tithi, or lunar day, is (see i. 13) one thirtieth of a lunar month,
or of the time during which the moon gains in longitude upon the sun
a whole revolution, or 360°: it is, therefore, the period during which the
difference of the increment of longitude of the two planets amounts to
12°. or 720’, which are, as stated in verse 64, is its portion (bhoga). To.
fnd the current lunar day, we divide by this amount the whole excess
ef the longitude of the moon over that of the sun nat the given time; and
to find the part past and to come of the current day, we convert longitude
‘nto time in a manner analogous to that employed in the case of the yoga.
Thus. to find the date in lunar time of the midnight preceding the
firet of January, 1860, we firat deduct the longitude of the sun from that
of the moon: the remainder is 2+ 29° 24’, or 5364!; dividing by 720, it
appears that the current lunar day is the eighth, and that 324’ of its portion
ave traversed, leaving 396’ to be traversed. Multiplyme these numbers
respectively by 60, and dividing by G75’ 38". the difference of the daily
motions at the time, we find that 25" 46° 2p have passed since the
beginning of the lunar day, and that it still has 35" 10° 8? to run.
The lunar days have, for the most part, no distinctive names, but
those of each half month (paksha—see above, under i, 48-51) are called
first, second, third, fourth, ete., up te fourteenth. The last, or fifteenth,
of each half has, however, a special appellation : that which concludes the
first. the light half, ending at the moment of opposition, is called
piurnamdsi, parnimd, pirnpama, © day of full moon; "’ that which closes
the month, and ends with the conjunction of the two planets, is styled
amdnasyd, *‘ the day of dwelling together."
Each lunar day is farther divided into two halves, called karana, 18
appears from the next following passage.

a
re
ein aa. ey
| leet. f . a
eae: The True Places of the Planets 107
rm 67. The fixed (dhruva) karanas, namely gakunt, naga,
_—eatushpada the third, and kinstughna, are counted from the latter
half of the fourteenth day of the dark half-month.
_ GS. After these, the karanas called movable (cara), namely
__bava, etc., seven of them : each of these karanas occurs eight
times in a month.
69. Half the portion (bhoga) of a lunar day is established
as that of the karamas. ...
Of the eleven karanas, four occur only once in the lunar month,
while the other seven are repeated each of them eight times to fill out
the remainder of the month. ‘Their names, and the numbers of the half
lunar days to which each is applied, are presented below:
oe 1. Kinstughna. Ist.
~ 2. Bava. Gnd, Oth, 16th, 23rd, 30th, 37th, 44th, Slst.
< 3. BaAlava. Srd, 10th, 17th, 24th, Sist, Sith, 45th, 52nd.
: 4. Ka&ulava. 4th, Lith, 18th, 25th, 32nd, 39th, 46th, 53rd.
5. Taitila. Sth, 12th, 19th, 26th, 23rd, 40th, 47th, Sith.
: 6. Gara. Gth, 18th, 20th, 27th, Sith, disi, 48th, 55th.
| 7. Banij. 7th, 14th, Qlat, 28th, 35th, 42nd, 49th, S6th.
a? 8. Vishti. Sth, 15th, 22nd, 2kth, Shth, 43rd, SOth, 57th.
oe 9. Qakuni. 58th.
a 10. Naga. 50th.
ihe - , di. Catushpada - 60th.
‘a Most of these names are very obscure: (he last three mean ** hawk °
— serpent,”’ and ‘‘ quadruped."’ Karana itself is, by derivation, “* factor,
tae cause :"’ in what sense it is applied to denote these divisions of the month,
we do not know. Nor have we found anywhere an explanation of the
PNG yalue and use of thé karanas in Hindu astronomy or astrology.
The time which we have had in view in our other calculations being,
oa ‘as is shown under the preceding passage, in the first half of the eighth
- funar day, is, of course, in the fifteenth karana, which is named Visht.
= The remaining half-verse is simply a winding-up of the chapter.
e
ae
hs «
iat
KS Bea Thus has been declared the corrected (sphuta)
motion of the sun and tbe other planets.
~ ae of ef The following chapter is styled the ** chapter of fhe three inquiries "'
% (tripraenddhikara). According to the commentary, this means that it
7 SE EO “ F 1 ' ~ one x Bore :
is intended by the teacher as a reply to his pupil’s inquiries respecting
ree subjects of direction (dig), place (dega), and time (kala).
han

; ee
a
Stirya-S idd hdnta
: ? Or Direction, Pace, anp TIMe.
CONTENTS :—1-6, construction of the dial, and description of its parts; 7, the measure
of amplitude; 8, of the gnomon, bypothenuse, and shadow, any two being given,
to find the third; 9-12, precession of the equinoxes; 12-15, the equinoectial shadow;
13-14, to find, from the equincetial shadow, the latitude and co-latitude; 14-17,
the sun's declination being known, to find, from a given shadow at noon, his zenithdistance, the latitude, and its sime and cosine; 17, latitude being given, to find
the equincctial shadow; 17-20, to find, from the latitude end the sun's zenithdistance at noon, his declination and his true and mean longitude; 20-22, latitude
and declination being given, to find the noon-shadow end hypothenuse; 22-23,
from the sun's declination and the equincetial shadow and the measure of
woplitude; 23-25. to find, from the equinoctial ehadow and the measure of
amplitude at any given time, the base of the shudow; 25-27, to find the hypothenuse af the shadow when the sun is upon the prime vertical; 27-25, the sun's
declination and the latitude being given, to find the sine and the measure of
amplitude; 28-33, to find the gines of the altitude and xénith-distance of the sun,
when upon the south-ecst and south-west vertical circles; 33-34, to find the
corresponding shadow and hypothenuse; 34-36, the sun’s ascensional difference and
the hour-angle being given, to find the sines of his altitude and zenith-distance,
aud the corresponding shadow and hypothenute; 37-39, to find, by a contrary
process, from the shadow of a given time, the sun's altitude and zenith-distance,
and the hour-angle; 40-41, the latitude and the sun's amplitude being known,
to find his declination and true longitude; 4142, to draw the path described by
the extremity of the shadow; 42-45, to find the ares of right and oblique ascension = *
corresponding to the several signs of the ecliptic; 46-48, the sun's longitude and
the time being known, to find the point of the ecliptic which Is upon the horizon ;
49, the eun’s longitude and the hour-angle being known, to find the point of the
ecliptic which is upon the meridian; 50-51, determination of time by means of
these data.
1. On a stony surface, made water-level, or upon hard
plaster, made level, there draw an even circle, of a radius equal to
any required number of the digits (angula) of the gnomon (¢ganku)-
2. At its centre set up the gnomon, of twelve digits of the
measure fixed upon; and where the extremity of its shadow
touches the circle in the former and after parts of the day,
3. There fixing two points upon the circle, and calling them
the forenoon and afternoon points, draw midway between them,
by means of a fish-figure (timi), a north and south line.
ean 4. Midway between the north and south directions draw,
fo by a fish-figure, an east and weatine:: and in like manner also, by — .
eel 2 ) oat ue * rs |
i bo ;
7. so
, y by

Pal ere it
5 ye ae
Of Direction, Place, and Time LO9
oo
gia
ae fish-figures (matsya) between the four cardinal directions, draw
ae? the intermediate directions.
5. Draw acireumscribing square, by means of the lines going
out from the centre; by the digits of its base-line (bhujasitra)
___— projected upon that is any given shadow reckoned.
= In this passage is described the method of construction of the Hindu
dial, if that ean properly be called a dial which is without hour-lmes,
and does not give the time by simple inspection. It is, as will be at
once remarked, a horizontal dial of the simplest character, with a vertirn. eal gnomon. This gnomon, whatever may be the length chosen for it,
f is regarded as divided into twelve equal purts called digits (angula,
va
an
‘* finger ''). The ordinary digit is one twelfth of a span (vifasti), or one
twenty-fourth of a cubit (/asta): if made according to this measure, then
the gnomon would be about nine inches long. Doubtless the first gnormons
were of such a length, and the rules of the gnomonic science were constructed accordingly, ** twelve ** and ** the gnomon *" being used, as they
are used everywhere in this treatise, as convertible terms: thus twelve
q digits became the unvarying conventional length of the staff, and all
measurements of the shadow and its hypothenuse were made to correspond,
‘How the digit was subdivided, we have nowhere any hint. In determining
the directions, the same method was employed which is still in use; namely,
that of marking the points at which the extremity of the shadcw, before
*s cs. and after noon, crosses a circle described about the base of the gnomon,;
__ these points being, if we suppose the sun's declination to have remained
rad ra ‘the same during the interval, at an equal distance upon cither side from
~~ the meridian line. Im order to bisect the line joining these points by .
another at right angles to it, which will be the meridian, the Hindus draw
the figure which is called here the ** fish "* (mataya or timi); that is to
x say, from the two extremities of the line in question as centres, and with
a radius equal to the line itself, arcs of circles are described, cutting one
another in two points. The lenticular figure formed by the two arcs is the
, + ** fish; hy through the points of intersection, which are called (in the commentary) the ‘‘ mouth "" and ** tuil,"" a line is drawn, which is the one
“required, The meridian being thus determined, the enst and west line,
oat. / those for the intermediate points of directions, «are laid down from
t, by a repetition of the same process. A square (cufurasra, ‘* having four
vorners "') is then farther described about the general centre, or about a
- eirele drawn about that centre, the eastern and western sides of which
ie
See
‘i. ie s ,
ot.
are divided into digits; its use, is, to aid in ascertaining the ‘* bas
( hhuja) of any given shadow, which is the value of the latter when projected
upon a nor h and south line (see below, vv. 23-25); the square is drawn, 4+
: aves

pee EL. 7 Stirya-Siddhdnta
Ve (rt )
Se : ars: | :
he i explained by the commentary, in order to insure the correctness of the
__—s projection, by a line strictly paraljel to the east and west line.
The figure (Pig. 9) given below, under verse 7, will illustrate the
form of the Hindu dial, as described in this passage.
The term used for “‘ gnomon’”’ is ¢anku, which means simply
’ staff.’’ For the shadow, we have the common word chdyd, ‘* shadow,’’
and also, in many places, prabhda and bhd, which properly signify the very
opposite of shadow, namely “** light, radiance:"’ it is dificult to see how
they should come to be used in this sense; so far as we are aware, they
are applied to no other shadow than that of the gnomon.
_ eT
r)
oe
G. The east and west line is called the prime vertical (samamandala) ; it is likewise denominated the east and west hour circle
(unmandala) and the equinoctial circle (vishuvanmandala),
The line drawn east and west through the base of the gnomon may
be regarded as the line of common imtersection at that point of three
great circles, as being a diameter to each of the three, and as thus entitled
to represent them all. These circles are the ones which in the last figure
(Fig. 8, p. 101) are shown projected in their diameters ZZ’ PP’ and EI;
the centre C, in which the diameters intersect, is itself the projection of
ihe line in question here. ZZ! represents the prime vertical, which 15
styled samamandala, literally ‘‘ even circle: ** PP’ is the hour circle,
or circle, of declination, which passes through the east and west points of
the observer's horizon; it is called unmandala ‘* up-circle ""—that is to
sav, the circle which in the oblique sphere is elevated; EE’ finally, the
equator, has the name of vishuvanmundala, or vishuvadurtta, ~~ circle of
the equinoxes;’" the equinoctial points themselves being denominated
vishuvat, or vishuva, which may be rendered “' point of equal separation.” ’
‘The same line of the dial might be regarded as the representative im like
manner of a fourth ciccle, that of the horizon (/eshitija), projected, in the
figure, in SN: hence the commentary adds it also to the other three; it is
omitted in the text, perhaps, because it is represented by the whole circle
drawn about the base of the gnomon, and not by this diameter alone.
The specifications of this verse, especially of the latter half of it, are
of little practical importance in the treatise, for there hardly arises 4
case, in any of its calculations, in which the east and west axis of the
dial comes to be taken as standing for these circles, or any one of therm.
In drawing the base (bhuja) of the shadow, indeed, it does represent the
plane of the prime vertical (see below. under vv. 23-25); but this is
not distinctly stated, and the name of the prime vertical (samamandala)
eceurs in only one other passage (below, v. 26): the enst and west hour_eirele (unmandala) is nowhere referred to again: and the equator, a5

“sk eae aly oe
iy Of Direction, Place, and Time 111
ae 7
will be seen under the next verse, is properly represented on the dial,
not by its east and west axis, but by the line of the equinoctial shadow.
— Ps
ee (iP Draw likewise an east and west line through the extreme mity of the equinoctial shadow (rishuvadbha) ; the interval between any given shadow and the line of the equinoctial shadow is
a Ba ominated the measure of amplitude (agra).
he
aa The equinoctial shadow is defined in « subsequent passage (vv. 12.
> 18); it is, as we have already had occasion to notice (under ii. 61-63).
_ the shadow cast at mid-day when the sun is at either equinox—that is
to say, when he is in the plane of the equator. Now as the equator is
. ee circle of diurnal revolution, the line of intersection of its plane with
that of the horizon will be an east and west line; and since it is also a
Ava _ great circle, that line will pass through the centre, the place of the
; observer : if, therefore, we draw through the extremity of the equinoctial
a shadow a line parallel to the east and west axis of the dial, it will repre_———s- sent the intersection with the dial of an equinoctial plane passing
. through the top of the gnomon, and in it will terminate the lines drawn
<* through that point from any point in the plane of the equator; and
Whe hence, it will also coincide with the path of the extremity of the shadow
3 “ - on the day of the equinox. Thus, let the following figure (Fig. 9) repre
" sent the plane of the dial, NS and EW being its two axes, and b the —
base of the gnomon: and let the shadow cast at noon when the sun is
Sy upon the equator be,
in a given latitude, be:
A. then be is the equinocss tial shadow, and QQ’,
drawn through e and
parallel to EW, is the
path of the equinoctial
shadow, being the line in
which a ray of the sun,
ES (le oa
2 . ¥ plane of he equat or,
passing through the top
of the ghomon, will
fi meet the face of the dial
In the figure as given.
hams? ~ , - the circle is supposed to
xd about e base of the gnomon with a radius of forty digits,
: di (ins of ihe eastern and western sides of the circumscribing
din measuring the base (bhuja) of the shadow, is indicated :
wie,

le
OE uaa ae a Cs
eis
» > ah lk, el o 4
ees Lar .+ e:
Siddhaént
a =f ong hel
the length given to the equinoctial shadow corresponds to that which it
has in the latitude of Washington.
It is not, however, on account of the coincidence of QQ’ with the
path of the equinoctial shadow that it is directed to be permanently
drawn upon the dial-face: its use is to determine for any given shadow
its agrd, or mensure of amplitude. Thus, let bd, bd’, bk, bl, bm, be
shadows cast by the gnomon, under various conditions of time and declination: then the distance from the extremity of each of them to the
line of the equinoctial shadow, or de, d’e, ke’, le”, me’ respectively, is
denominated the agrd of that shadow or of that time.
The term agrd we have translated “* measure of amplitude,”’ because
it does in fact represent the sine of the sun's amplitude—understanding
by ‘*‘ amplitude "’ the distance of the sun at rising or setting from the
east or west point of the horizon—varying with the hypothenuse of the
shadow, and always maintaining to that hypothenuse the fixed ratio of
the sine of amplitude to radius. That this is so, is assumed by the text
in its treatment of the agrd, but is nowhere distinctly stated, nor is the
commentator at the pains of demonstrating the principle. Since, however, it is not an immediately obvious one, we will take the hberty of
giving the proof of it.
In the annexed figure (Fig. 10) let C represent the top of ile
enomon, and let K be any given position of the sun in the heavens.
From K draw KB’ at right angles to the plane of the prime vertical,
meeting that plane in B’, and let the pomt of its intersection with
Fig. 10.
je
the plane of the equator be in FE’. Join KC, FC, and BC. Then
KC is radius, and E‘/K equal to the sine of the sun's amplitude: for
if. in the sun's daily revolution, the point K is brought to the horton,
F/B’ will disappear, KE/C will become a right angle, KCE! will be the
amplitude, and E’K its sine; but, with a given declination, the value
of EYK remains always the same, since it is a line drawn in 4 constant
direction between two parallel planes, that of the circle of declination -
and that of the equator. Now conceive the three lines intersecting in
U
i xf ia 2d . , a= Pp-2 pe : P aa 4 ‘] P T g :
; ui ts a a | %
Ce OL, et ey (Ab Rete SE =

Of Direction, Place, and Time 113
C to be produced until they meet the plane of the dial in 6’, e’, and k
respectively; these three points will be in the same straight line, being
in the line of intersection with the hurizon of the plane KB/C produced,
and this line, b’k, will be at right angles to B’b’, since it is the line of
intersection of two planes, each of which is at right angles to the plane
of the prime vertical, in which B’b’ lies. KB’ and kb’ are therefore parallel,
and the triangles CE’/K and Cell are similar, and e/k: Ck:: EK: CK.
But Ck is the hypothenuse of the shadow at the given time, and e/k 1s
the agrd, or measure of amplitude, since ec’, by what was said above. is
in the line of the equinoctial shadow, therefore meas. arnpl.: hyp.
shad.:: sin ampl.: R. Hence, if the declination and the latitude, which
together determine the sine of amplitude, be given, the miecasure of
amplitude will vary with the hypothenuse of the shadow, and the measure
x of umplitude of any given shadow will be to that of any other, as the
_ hypothenuse of the former to that of the latter.
, The lettering of the above figure is made to correspond, as nearly as
' may be, with that of the one preceding, and also with that of the one
given later, under verses 13 and 14, in either of which the relations of
the problem may be farther examined.
There are other methods of proving the constancy of the ratio borne
by the measure of amplitude to the hypothenuse of the shadow, but we
have chosen to give the one which seemed to us most likely to be that
iby ~which the Hindus themselves deduced it. Our demonstration is in
ss One ~=respect only liable to objection os representing @ Hindu process—
“wit Gt is founded, namely, upon the comparison ot oblique-angled triangles,
_ which elsewhere in this treatise are hardly employed at all. Still,
| although the Hindus had no methods of solving problems excepting in
right-angled trigonometry, it is hardly to be supposed that they refrained
from deriving proportions from the similarity of oblique-angled triangles.
_ {he principle in question admits of being proved by means of right-angled
triangles alone, but these would be situated in different planes.
=e a Why the line on the dial which thus measures the sun’s amplitude
im is called the agrd, we have been unable thus for to discover. ‘The word,
wet a feminine adjective (belonging, probably, to rekhd, line,’’ understood),
aa : literally means ** extreme, first, chief."" Possibly it may be in some way
he es connected with the use of antyd, “ final, lowest,"’ to designate the line
Eg or EG (Fig. 8, p. 101): see below, under v. 35. The sine of ampliGude itself, aC or AC (Fig. 8), is called below (vv. 27-80) agrajya.
-. 8. The square root of the sum of the squares of the gnomon
F | the hypothenuse : if from the square of the latter
a subtracted, the square root of the
“ remainde gnomon is found by the converse
ae
fa i, 3
rth’ Seo
et
ede 4
oss

J
a
ne
=) ca
sb’
a
a]
ul
ic Sarya-Sidd hdnta
This is simply an application of the familiar rule, that in a rightangled triangle the square of the hypothenuse is equal to the sum of the
squares of the other two sides, to the triangle produced by the gnomon
as perpendicular, the shadow as base, and the hypothenuse of the shadow,
the line drawn from the top of the gnomon t6 the extremity of the shadow,
as hypothenuse.
The subject next considered is that of the precession of the equinoxes.
9. In an Age (yuqe), the circle of the asterisms (bha) falls
back eastward thirty score of revolutions. Of the result obtained
after multiplying the sum of days (dyuqana) by this number, and
dividing by the number of natural days in an Age,
10. Take the part which determines the sine, multiply it by
three, and divide by ten; thus are found the degrees called those
of the precession (ayana). From the longitude of a planet as
corrected by these are to be calculated the declination, shadow,
ascensional difference (caradala), etc.
11. The circle, as thus corrected, accords with its observed
place at the solstice (ayana) and at either equinox ; it has moved
eastward, when the longitude of the sun, as obtained by caleulation, is less than that derived from the shadow,
12. By the number of degrees of the difference ; then, turning
back. it has moved westward by the amount of difference, when
the calculated longitude is greater. .. .
Nothing could well be more awkward and confused than this mode of
stating the important fact of the precession of the equinoxes, of describing
‘tc method and rate, and of directing how its amount at any time is to be
found. The theory which the pnssage, in its present form, is actually
intended to put forth is as follows: the vernal equinox librates westward
and eastward from the fixed point, sear Piscium, assumed as the commencement of the sidereal sphere—the limits of the libratory movement
being 27° in either direction from that point, and the time of a complete
revolution of libration being the six-hundredth part of the period called
the Grent Age (see above, under 1. 18-17), or 7200 yenrs; so that the
annual rate of motion of the equinox is 54”. We will examine with some
eure the language in which this theory is conveyed, as important results
are believed to be deducible from it,
The first half of verse 9 professes to teach the fundamental fact of
the motion in precession. The words bhdndm cakram, which we have
rendered ‘‘ circle of the asterisms,”” i.ec., the fixed zodiac, would admit of .
being translated ‘* circle of tho signs,’’ i.e., the movable xodiac, as
reckoned from the gete dl equinox, since bha is used in this treatise in

. Fay
Of Direction, Place, and Time 115
wither sense. But our interpretation is shown to be the correct one by
Wor, the directions given in verses 11 and 12, which teach that when the sun's
ag _caleulated longitude—which is his distance from the initial point of the
Fe fixed sphere—is less than that derived from the shadow by the process
~~ to be taught below (vv. 17-19)—-whiech is his distance from the equinox
the circle has moved eastward, and the contrary: it is evident, then,
that the initial point of the sphere is regarded as_ the movable pot,
and the equinox as the fixed one. Now this is no less strange than in-
~ consistent with the usage of the rest of the treatise. Elsewhere Zz P'seium is treated as the one established limit, from which all motion com-
) _ menced at the creation, and by reference to which all motion is reckoned,
ae while here it is made secondary to a point of which the position among
the stars is constantly shifting, and which hardly has higher value than
@ node, as which the Hindu astronomy in general treats it (see p. 99).
. The word used to express the motion (lambate) is the same with that
employed in a former passage (i. 25) to describe the eastward motion of
c the planets, and derivatives of which (as lamba, lambana, ete.) are not
k. infrequent in the astronomical languoge; it means literally to “* lag, hang
ag
back, fall behind:"' here we have it farther combined with the prefix
pari, ** about, round about,” which seems plainly to add the idea of a
complete revolution in the retrograde direction indicated by it, and we
is have translated the line accordingly. ‘This verse, then, contains no hint
Teor & libratory movement, but rather the distinct statement of a contin-
- uous enatward revolution. It should be noticed farther, although the
a circumstance is one of less ‘significance, that the form in which the
number of revolutions is stated, tringatkrfyas, ‘‘ thirty twenties,”’ has no
lel in the usage of this Siddhanta elsewhere.
We may also mention in this connection that Bhiskara, the great
astronomer of the twelfth century, decleres in his Siddhantaomani (Goladh., vi. 17) that the revolutions of the equinox are given
by the Sirya-Siddhanta as thirty in an Age (see Colebrooke, As. Res.,
xii, 209, etc.; Essays, ii. 874. ete., for a full discussion of this passage
and its bearings); thus not only ignoring the theory of libration, but
a”
' ae
ae As regards this latter point, however, the change of a single letter
ib. a0 ern reading (substituting trincatkrtvas, ‘* thirty times,’” for
i) ft "* thirty twenties *") would make it accord with Bhaskara’s
Dia oe _ We shall return again to this subject.
aes | Tt number of revolutions, of whatever kind they may be, being 600
See in the position at any given time of the initial point of the
phe _referen mee to the equinox is found by a proportion, as follows:
~aumber of days in an Age is to the number of revolutions in the
od, 5 is the given ** sum of days "’ (see above, under i. 48-51)

Saka — a _ = Pate
be to the revolutions and parts of a re
given time. Thus
wa
: | volution accomplished down to the
given , , let us find, in illustration of the process, the amount
_ of precession on the first of January, 1860. Since the number of years
_ elapsed before the beginning of the present Iron Age (kali yuga) is divisible
by 7200, it is unnecessary to make our calculation from the commencement of the present order of things: we may take the sum of days since ~
* | the current Age began, which is (see above, under i. 58) 1,811,945. Hence
the proportion
AG
gives us the portion accomplished of the current revolution. Of this
we are now directed (v. 10) to take the part which determines the sine
(dos, or bhuja—for the origin and meaning of the phrase, see above, under
ii, 29, 80). This direction determines the character of the motion as
libratory. For a motion of 91°, 92°, 93°, etc., gives, by it, a precession
89°, 88°, 87°, etce.; so that the movable point virtually returns wpon its
own track, and, after moving 180° has reverted to its starting-place. So
its farther motion, from 180° to 270°, gives a precession increasing from
O° to 90° in the opposite direction; and this, again, is reduced to O° by —
the motion from 270° to 360°. It is as if the second and third quadrants
were folded over upon the first and fourth, so that the movable point can
never. in any quadrant of its motion, be more than 90° distant from the
fixed equinox. Thus, in the instance taken, the bhuja of 248° 2’ B8".9 is
its supplement, or 68° 2’ 8".9; the first 180° having only brought the
movable point back to its original position, its present distance from that _
position is the excess over 180° of the are obtained as the result of the =
first process. But this distance we are now farther directed to multiply |
by three and divide by ten: this is equivalent to reducing it to the measure —
of an are of 27°, instend of 90°, as the quadrant of libration, simce — #
3: 10:: 27: 90. This being done, we find the actual distance of the initial : ae
point of the sphere from the equinox on the first of January, 1860,.to be
it would even be a fair and strictly legitimate deduction from verse ye
a eS Se K Pe, | s
direction from the actual one. We have already remarked above that thers ay
“is ‘ast Brazen Age, and the process of calculation has shown that we are
4 now in the third quarter of a new period, and in the third
— gurrent revolution, ‘Therefore, if the revolution is an ea
ie 24 Ps eee

ans
:. ’ / 7 CENTRAL UBRARY
Of Direction, Place, and Time 117
| taught in the text, only taking place upon a folded cirele, so as to be
Po = sade libratory, the present position of the movable point, ¢ Piscium,
; — ought to be to the west of the equinox, instead of to the east, as it actually
ot is. It was probably on account of this unfortunate flaw in the process,
- that no rule with regard to the direction was given, excepting the experi-
— mental one contained in verses 11 and 12, which, moreover, is not properly
supplementary to the preceding rules, but rather an independent method
of determining, from observation, both the direction and the amount of
the precession. In verse 12, it may be remarked, in the word dortya,
as ** turning back,”’ is found the only distinct intimation to be discovered in
a
ie
_-_—s the :-:passage of the character of the motion as libratory.
- We have already above (under ii. 28) hinted our suspicions that the
ia | phenomenon of the precession was made no account of in the original
rs composition of the Strya-Siddhanta, and that the notice taken of it by
_ the treatise as it is at present is an afterthought: we will now proceed
re to expose the grounds of those suspicions.
oe It is, in the first place, upon record (see Colebrooke, As. Res., xii.
i 215; Essays, ii. 380, etc.) that some of the earliest Hindu astronomers were
z ignorant of, or ignored, the periodical motion of the equinoxes; BrahmaI gupta himself is mentioned among those whose systems took no account
sal of it; it is, then, not at all impossible that the Sirva-Siddhanta, if an
ancient work, may originally have done the same. Among the positive
evidences to that effect, we would first direct attention to the significant
: fact thut, if the verses at the head of this note were expunged, there
would not be found, in the whole body of the treatise besides, 4 single
hint of the precession. Now it is not a little dificult to suppose that a
phenomenon of so much consequence as this and which enters as an
element imto so many astronomical processes, should, had it been borne
- distinctly in mind in the framing of the treatise, have been hidden awny
thus in o pair of verses, and unacknowledged elsewhere—no hint being
va given, in connection with any of the processes taught, as to whether the
‘s correction for precession is to be applied or not, and only the general
2 directions tained in the latter half of verse 10, and ending with on
ear s* etc.,”” being even here presented. It hus much more the aspect of an
after-thought, n correction found necessary at a date subsequent to the
ori inal composition, ond therefore inserted, with orders to “apply
i: wherever it is required.”’ The place where the subject is introduced
to do with a revolution, as entering into
+ should have found a place where
and even in the second
it would
twelfth
in terms
ra a
‘a %& Q > z aft
Ly eS ae 7 =

Strya-Siddhdnta
: dependent upon their times of revolution, such an orbit is assigned to
the asteri#ems (v.88) as implies a revolution once in’ sixty yeurs: it is, indeed
very difficult to see what can have been intended by such a revolution ‘
this; but if the doctrine respecting the revolution of the asterisms given
in verse 9 of this chapter had been in the mind of the author of the
twelfth chapter, he would hardly have added another and a _ conflicting
statement respecting the same or a kindred phenomenon. It appears to
us even to admit of question whether the adoption by the Hindus of the
sidereal year as the unit of time does not imply a failure to recognize
the fact that the equinox was variable. We should expect, at any rate,
that if, at the outset, the ever-increasing discordance between the solar
and the sidereal year had been fully taken into account by them, they .
would have more thoroughly established and defined the relations of the
two, and made the precession a more conspicuous feature of their general
system than they appear to have done. In the construction of their
cosmical periods they have reckoned by sidereal years only, at the same
time assuming (as, for Instance, above, 1. 13, 14) that the sidereal year is
composed of the two ayanas, ‘* progresses "" of the sun from solstice to
egistice. The supposition of on after-correction likewise seems to furnish
the most satisfactory explanation of the form given to the theory of the
precession. The system having been first constructed on the assumption
of the equality of the tropical and sidereal years, when it began later to
uppear, too plainly to be disregarded, that the equinox had changed its
place, the question was how to introduce the new element. Now to assign
to the equinox a complete revolution would derange the whole system,
acknowledging a different number of solar from sidereal years in the chronological periods; if, however, a libratory motion were assumed, the equilbrurm would be maintained, since what the solar year lost in one part of
the revolution of libration it would gain in another, and so the tropical and
sidereal years would coincide, in number and in limits, in each great
period. The circumstance which determined the limit to be assigned to
the libration we conceive to have been, us suggested by Bentley (Hind.
Ast., p. 182), that the earliest recorded Hindu year had been made to begin
when the sun entered the asterism Krttiki, or was 26° 40” west of the
point fixed upon 4s the commencement of the sidereal sphere for all time
(see above, under i. 27), on which secount it wus desirable to make the
are of libration include the beginning of Kritika.
Besides these considerations, drawn from the general history of ‘he
Hindu astronomy, and the position of the element of the precession in
the system of the Sirya-Siddhanta, we have still to urge the blind and
incoherent, as well «as unusual, forrn of statement of the phenomenon,
as fully exposed above. There i< nothing to compare with it in this
respect in any other part of the treatise, and we are unwilling to believe

Of Direction, Place, and Time 119
* that in the original composition of the Siddhinta a clearer explanation,
and one more consistent in its method and language with those of the
treatise generally, would not have been found for the subject. We even
_ discover evidences of more than one revision of the passage. The first
Ls half of verse 9 so distinctly teaches, if rend independently of what follows
it, a complete revolution of the equinoxes, that, especially when taken in
_ connection with Bhiaskara’s statement, as cited above, it almost amounts
r _ to proof that the theory put forth in the Sairya-Siddbanta was at one
time that of a complete revolution. The same conclusion is not a little
strengthened, farther, by the impossibility of deducing from verse 9.
_ through the processes prescribed in the following verses, a true expression
for the direction of the movement at present: we can see no reason why,
if the whole passage came from the same hand, at the same time, this
difficulty should not have been avoided; while it is readily explainable
upon the supposition that the libratory theory of verse 10 was added as on
amendment to the theory of verse 9, while at the same time the language
ee ot the latter was left as nearly unaltered as possible.
ahi
ie ©. There seems, accordingly, sufficient ground for suspecting that in the
+ *Shrya-Siddhanta, as originally constituted, no account was taken of the
ss precession ; that its recognition is a later interpolation, and was made
at first in the form of a theory of complete revolution, being afterward
ss altered to its present shape. Whether the statement of Bhaskara truly
ss represents the earlier theory, as displayed in the Suirya-Siddhinta of his
ne, we must leave an undetermined question. The very slow rate
v,
re
over the whole duration of the present Age, since B.C. 8102.
BE a In his own astronomy, Bhaskara teaches the complete revolution
ae0 of the equinoxes, giving the number of revolutions in an Aon (of
‘ At 4 . 000 years) os 199,669; this makes the time of a single revolution to be 21,635.8073 years, and the yearly rate of precession 59*%.9007.
rate with such exactness as would give precisely the odd number of
19,669 revolutions ‘to the Afon; the number doubtless stands in some
the other elements of
relation which we do not at present comprehend to
“Ss :atronomical system. Bhaskara’s own commentators, however, reject
theory, and hold to that of a libration, which has been and is altogether
“2 Rete te Se LTO Tee rs
the prev - rine throughout India, and seems to have made its way
ah NTO OT ps eS e
1 ace into the Arabian, and even into the early European astronomy (see
is
is
the
aa!
he
ra) J < “es - bet
* Saat ee ath Ss ka ee

180, ete.) that the libration of the equinoxes is taught
Sdarya-Siddhanta
_ Bentley, it may be remarked here altogether denies (Hind, Ast., p.
in the SudryaSiddhanta, maintaining, with arrogant and unbecoming depreciation of
those who venture to hold a different opinion, that its theory is that of
© continuous revolution in an epicycle, of which the
equal to 108° of the zodiac. In truth, however, Bentley's own theory
derives no color of support from the text of the Siddhanta, and is besides
in itself utterly untenable. It is not a little strange that he should not
have perceived that, if the precession were to be explained by a revolution in an epicycle, its rate of increase would not be equable, but as the
increment of the sine of the are in the epicycle traversed by the movable point, farther varied by the varying distance at which it would be
seen from the centre in different parts of the revolution; and also that,
the dimensions of the epicyele being 108°, the amount of precession
would never come to equal 27°, but would, when greatest, fall short of
18°. being determined by the radius of the epicycle. Bentley's whole
treatment of the passage shows a thorough misapprehension of its meaning and relations: he even commits the blunder of understanding the
first half of verse 9 to refer to the motion of the equinox, instead of to
that of the initial point of the sidereal sphere.
circumference is
Among the Greek astronomers, Hipparchus is regarded as the first
who discovered the precession of the equinoxes; their rate of motion,
however, seems not to have been confidently determined by him, although
he pronounces it to be at any rate not less than 36” yearly. For a thorough
discussion of the subject of the precession in Greek astronomy see
Delambre’s History of Ancient Astronomy, ii, 247, etc. From the observations reported as the data whence Hipparchus rade his discovery,
Delambre deduces very nearly the true rate of the precession, Ptolemy,
however, was so unfortunate as to adopt for the true rate Hipparchus’s
minimum, of 36" a year: the subject is treated of by him in the seventh
book of the Syntaxis. The actual motion of the equinox at the present
time is BOY .25 - its rate is slowly on the increase, having been, at the
epoch of the Greek astronomy, somewhat less than 50". How the ee
succeeded in arriving at a determination of it so much more accurate than
was made by the great Greek astronomer, OF whether it was anything more
than a lucky bit on their part, we will not attempt here to discuss.
The term by which the precession is designated in this EN a
ayandinga, ** degrees of the ayana.”’ The latter word is employe oa:
different senses: by derivation, it means simply “ gomg, progress, -
¢ seems to have been first introduced into the astronomical oe peal
designate the half-reyolutions of the sun, from nolatice =e a hana
being called respectively (see xiv. 9) the uttardyape i tie '
‘+ northern progress "' and ‘* southern progress. Hrom this use
Beare
< . > = ct ap. ay
ae
rs
a". b
eS

irection, Place, and Time 121
s transferred to denote also the solstices themselves, a5 we have trans_it in the first half of verse 11. Im the latter sense we conceive
Mo be ermployed in the compound a yandnga; although why the name
“of the precession should be derived from the solstice we are unable clearly
gee. The term krantipdtagati, ‘* movement of the node of declination,”
which is often met with in modern= works on Hindu astronomy, does not
‘occur in the Sirya-Siddhanta. ;
Taine. . Inika manner, the equatorial shadow which 1s
Poast at Wiid-day at one’s place of observation.
1382 Upon the north and south line of the dial—that 1s the
» equinoctial shadow (vishuvatprabhdé) of that place. .
The equinoctial shadow has been already sufficiently explained, in
connection with a preceding passage (ubove, v- 7). In this treatise it 15
y by names formed by combining one of the words for shadow
area re bhd, prabhda), with vishuvat, ‘‘ equinox "* (see above, under y¥.
“a a » In modern Hindu astronomy it is also called akshabhd, ** shadow of
ie BS latitude * '"_ie., which determines the latitude—and palabhd, of which,
nae as wis R this sense,,the meaning is obscure.
a ig "13... . . Radius, multiplied respectively by gnomon and
= shadow, an and divided by the equinoctial hypothenuse,
14. Gives the sines of co-latitude (lamba) and of latitude
we kaha): the corpernaggre arcs are co-latitude and latitude,
a ways south,
ions “upon which these paion are founded are illustrated
“4 im following figure (Fig- 11), in which, as in a previous ficure (Fig- 8,
Pp al nee. Usa a quadrant of the meridian, Z being the zenith
? and $ the south point, ©
‘Fig: il.
being the centre, and EC
the projection of the plane of
the equator. In order to
illustrate the corresponding
relations of the dial, we
have conceived the gnomon,
Cb. to be placed at the
centre. Then, when the sun
ic on the meridian and in
the equator, at BE, the
shadow cust, which is the
equinoctial shadow, is be,
while Ce is the corresponding hypothenuse. But, by
similarity of triangles,
ak eg ce
rs fr
we hee = re
. ‘ — sa is
oat

os
-_ en’ ts
aa Ce: be ::.CE : BE
Cé,: Cb.:: CE 7:CB
s
__and as BE is the sine of EZ, which equals the latitude, and CB_ the
~- sine of ES, its complement, the reduction of these proportions to. the
eS,
re
- form of equations gives the rules of the text. .
+4... . The mid-day shadow is the base (bhuja) ; if radius
4 “be multiplied by that, |
15. And the product divided by the corresponding lypotheuse, the result, converted to arc, is the sun's zenith-distance
(nata), in minutes: this, when the base is south, is north, and
when the base is north, is south. Of the sun’s zenith-distance
and his declination, in minutes,
~ 46. Take the sum, when their direction is different—the
difference, when it is the same; the result is the latitude, in
minutes. From this find the sine of latitude ; subtract its square
from the square of radius, and the square-root of the remainder.
17. Is the sine of co-latitude. . -. .
This passage applies to cases in which the sun is not upon the equator,
but has a certain declination, of which the amount and direction are
known. ‘Then, from the shadow cast at noon, may be derived his zenithdistance when upon the meridian, and the latitude. Thus, supposing
the sun, having north declination ED (Fig. 11), to be upon the meridian,
“at D: the shadow of the gnomon will be bd, and the proportion
| Cd: dh: : CD: DB" "3
gives DB’, the sine of the sun's zenith-distance, ZD, which is found
from it by the conversion of sine into are by a rule previously given
(ji, 33). ZD im this case being south, and ED being north, their sum,
LZ. is the latitude: if, the declination being south, the sun were at D’,
the difference of ED! and ZD! would be EZ, the latitude. The figure
does not give an illustration of north zenith-distance, being drawn for Sime:
the latitude of Washington, where that is impossible, The latitude —
being thus ascertained, it is easy to find its sine and cosine; the only
thing which deserves to be noted in the process js that, to find the cosine from the sine, resort is had to the laborious method of squares, “=
‘instead of taking from the table the ‘sine of the complementary arc, OF
“o
a

| Ros oe & »
Rae * Re
f Direction, Place, and Time — 123
rd 4 i =
| vals The sine of latitude, multiplied by twelve, and~
divided by the sine of co-latitude, gives the equinoctial shadow. . - .
_ That is (Fig. 11),
a La > : BC: BE: : Cb: be 2a
the value of the gnomon in digits being substituted in the rule for thes ~
gnomon itself.
- 17... . The difference of the latitude of the place of obser~ :
vation and the sun’s meridian zenith-distance in degrees (nala-
~ bhdgds), if their direction be the same, or their sum,
- 18. Tf their direction be different, is the sun’s declination :«
if the sine of this latter be multiplied by radius and divided by the
sine of gweatest declination, the result, converted to arc, will be
t 1€ sun's longitude, if ‘he is in the quadrant commencing with
19. ITfin that commencing with Cancer, subtract from a halfSee Circle ; if in that commencing with Libra, add a half-circle ; if in
that c¢ mmencing with Capricorn, subtract from a circle : the result, in each case, is the true (sphuta) longitude of the sun at
#80. To this if the equation of the apsis Gmdnda phala) be
repeatedly applied, with a contrary sign, the sun's mean longitude
will be found. .. .
4 "This passage teaches how, when the latitude of the observer is
sun’s declination, and his true and mean longitudes, may be
The several parts of
e converse of processes previously given,
require no explanation. To find the sun's declination from his
meridian genith-distance and the latitude (reckoned as south, by v- 14),
he rule g al . is inverted; the true longitude
n of the method taught in
. sun may be
cording to the principle of ii. 80: and finally, the mean may be derived
ied 4
from: “the true longitud® by « method of successive approximation,
ing n reverse the equation of the centre, as calculated by 1. 30.
seth ji is hardly necessary to remark that this is a very rough process for
in the hands
ascertainir the sun's longitude, and could give, especially
the process are all of them th
ny
i@uEiindu observers, results only distantly approaching to accursty.
. . .The sum of the latitude of the place of observation
nted i in the
1d the sun's declinati on, if their direction is the same, or,
sntrary case. their difference,
yntrary case, their cileb\s:

* 21. Is the sun’s memdian zenith-distance (natdngds) ; of that -
find the base-sine (bahujyd) and the perpendicular-sine (kotijyd).
Hf, then, the base-sine and radius be multiphed respectively by
* the measure of the gnomon in digits,
Ser. 22. And divided by the perpendicular-sine, the results are
“» the shadow and hypothenuse at mid-day.
ae 4 * The problem here is to determine ‘the length of the shadow which <
Med will be cast at mid-day when the sun has a given declination, the latitude
yor the observer being also known. First, the sun’s meridian zenith- _
‘distance is found, by a process the converse of that taught in verses 15 and —@
16; then, the corresponding sine and cosine having been calculated, a
simple proportion gives the desired result. Thus, let us suppose the sun_
| to be at D’ (Fig. WW, p. 121); the sum of his south declination. ED',” se)
’ and the north Iatitude, EZ, gives the zenith-distance, ZD!: its sme
(bhujajyd) is D'B”, and its cosine (kotijyd) 1s CB". Then
- CB": B'D!:: Cb; bd’
a and -CB": CD!': +.Cb: Cd!
7 which proportions, reduced to equations, give the value of bd’, the shadow.
and Cd’, its hypothenuse.
_ 92. . . . The sine of declination, multiplied by the equinoc- bese
tial hypothenuse, and divided by the gnomon-sine (cankujivd),
93. Gives, when farther multiplied by the hypothenuse of
“any given shadow, and divided by radius (madhyakarna), the sun's
» measure of amplitude (arkdgrd) corresponding to that shadow... <=, saan
In this passage we are taught, the declination being known, how to a
Gnd the measure of amplitude (agrd) of any given shadow, as preparatory
to determining, by the next following rule, the base (bhuja) of the shadow,
by calculation instead of measurement. The first step is to find the sine”
af the sun’s amplitude: in order to this, we compure the triangles ABC
and CEH (Fig. 13, p- 126), which are similar, since the angles ACB and yg
= CEH are each equal to the latitude of the ébserver. Hence pe
< EH: EC:: BC: AC is
ot
* But the triangles CEH (Fig.-13) and QGbe (Fig. 011) are also ‘similar; |
. and EH SEC: :.Cbh: Co ; nn
. of ratios, Cb: Ce:> BC; AC &
= shadow as the sine
; ee See © Ae iy oO «=
ame > x

ae a Tt
ee ee ee —_ = |
Of Direction , Place, ane Tinie 5125
ag
» karya, “ half-dianeter,” which is not found again; nor is karna often
35 in the sense of “* diameter “" in this treatise.
not ensy to discover. Verse 23 presents also a name for radius, madhyai”
| measure of amplitude (arkdgra), when the sun is in the southern
_ hemisphere, is the base, north ;
/ | 94.” When the sunis in the northern hemisphere, the base is
Pot ing to the. direction of the interval between the end of the shadow
- and the east and west axis. _ |
- 285. The mid-day base is invariably the midday shadow... -
rses of this chapter, that the base (bhuja) of the shadow 1s its projeeon upon a north and south line, or the distance of its extremity from
a
i on y
wl the sun upon the plane of the prime vertical. Thus, if (Fig. 11, p. 121)
= ‘K, li, D’, D be different positions of the sun—K and IL being conceived to
‘be upon the surface of the sphere—the perpendiculars KB’, LB’, D'B™,
"DB" are represented upon the dial by kb, ib, d’b, db, or, in Big. 9
5 i Of these, the two latter coincide with their
co a . the shadow cast at noon being always itself upon s
malaga ts The base of any shadow may be found by corabinmng
2 a its meusure of amplitude (agra) with the equinoctial shadow. When the
as at D’ or K (Fig. 11), the measure
o the equinoctin!l shadow,
be necessary,
If he be south,
, bd, will be thrown northward, and the base will be
foun - sub ing the measure of amplitude, de, from the equinoctial
shadow, be: if he be siorth, as at L, the extremity of the shadow, /, will
ye sout i from the east and west axis, and the base, 6!/, will be obtained
st jtracting the equinoctial shadow, be, from the measure of armpliarin ll -
iF ,
‘ oe,
» Multiply the sines of co-latitude and of latitude rethe equinoctial shadow and by twelve,
‘divide ny t 1e sine of declination ; the results are the
hen he sun is on the prime vertical (samamandala).
Why the gnomon is in this passage called the ‘* gnomon-sine,” it 1s”
ew Fy e Ye * - :
found, if north, by subtracting the measure of amplitude from ~
the equinoctial shadow ; if south, by a contrary process—accord- ~
We haye already had oceasion to notice. in connection with the first _
| ‘the east and west axis of the dial. It is that line which, as shown aboves
(under v. 7), corresponds to and represents the perpendicular let fall trom
93. . . . The sum of the equinoctial shadow and the sun See

4 or. | ; wT ws ; awe me ; : a
126°° 7) Satrya-Stddhdnta® —
+e \ ond i r oo .”
Jn Da ~-?
te
“> sass he tee ie’ - =e a | | " a |
hate Ww en north declination is less than the latitude, then the mid-day
| a hh ypothenuse (crava), :
mh 27. Multiplied by the equinoctial shadow, and divided by the
mid-day measure of amplitude (agra), is the hypothenuse. . . |
Here we have two separate and independent methods of finding the
ay oe
i>
__—khypothenuse of the east and west shadow cast by the sun at the moment —
a. when he is upon the prime vertical. In connection with the second of
“’ the two are stated the circumstances under which alone a transit of the
* sun across the prime vertical will take place: if his declination is south,
or if, being north, it is greater than the latitude, his diurnal revolution
will be wholly to the south, or wholly to the north, of that circle.
am The first method is illustrated by the following figures. Let VC"™
Fig. 12. (Fig. 12) be an are of the prime vertical,
V being the point at which the sun
crosses it in his daily revolution; and
let C’ be the centre; then VC’ is radius,
and VG the sine of the sun’s altitude;
and, C’/b being the gnomon, bv will
be the shadow, and C’v its hypothenuse.
But, by similarity of triangles,
: VO: VO':: Cb: O'w
Again, in the other figure (Fig. 13)—of which the general relations
are those of Fig. 8 (p.101)
—AD being the projection
of the circle of the sun’s
diurnal revolution, and
the point at which it
crosses the prime vertical ‘
being seen projected in
V. VC is the sine of the
sun’s altitude at that ~%@
point. But VCB and =
ECH are similar triangles, _
the angles BVC and CEH 7 |
being each equal to the %.
latitude; hence “*
VC: EC:: BC: CH
Now the first of these —_
ratios is—since IEC equals
VC’, both being radius—
- gn the former co
ae
a
Ge wie |
the same with the first —

; a ae |
eed ha 13k Swiey: m. ~
ps A, hy * © —
2s Of Direction, Place, and Time 127
ee 3 | ? ni . therefore
fu _ ito : BC: CH:: C’b: C'vo
Ree sin. decl.: sin. lat.:: gnom.: hyp. pr. vert. shad.
i but ef sin. lat.: cos. lat.:: eq. shad.: gnom.,
- ee ptharafore, by combining terms,
is Ta a, <” sin. decl.: cos. lat.:: eq. shad.: hyp. pr. vert. shad.
and the reduétion of the first and third of these proportions to the form
of equations gives the rules of the text.
: The other method of finding the same quantity is an application of
the principle demonstrated above, under verse 7, that, with a given declination, the measure of amplitude of any shadow is to that of any other
* Shadow as the hypothenuse of the former to that of the latter. Now
when the sun is upon the prime vertical, the shadow falls directly eastwest axis of the dial, and its measure of amplitude is equal to the equinoctial
pat shadow. ‘Lhe noon measure of amplitude is, accordingly, to the hypohenuse of the noon shadow as the equinoctial shadow to the hypothenuse™
- * of the shadow east when the sun is upon the prime vertical.
being known—by a comparison of the similar triangles ABC and
~ HE: EC:: BC: CA
cos. lat. : R:: sin, decl.: sin. ampl.
the proportion upon which is founded the rule in verse 98 namely,
| radius to the sine of amplitude as the hypothenuse ef a given shadow
» the corresponding measure of amplitude—has been demonstrated under
ip ae —s
Taare - Yh above. «
ee) -. . . If from half the square of radius the square of the
wrt Na
” se
So Le
tree 237:
a sail 4
eee ete
> (agrajy) be subtracted, and the remainder multieet
Tae v hel
be +» me!
mee eS. a at
a multiplied by twelve, and then farther divided
uare of the equinoctial shadow increased by half the
anes i, ND ie
ate oF
{i
*r
aot
in e_ s oe
s
ward or directly westward, and hence its extremity lies in the east and al

he a
Y ae
~ Stirya-Siddhdanta
i~ Jone =~
= 30. Te tallea the ‘‘ surd ’’ (karani) : this let the wise man set
~~ down in two places. Then multiply the equinoctial shadow by
twelve, and again by the sine of amplitude,
Res) “31. And divide as before: the result is styled the “* fruit”
~ (phala), Add its square to the “ surd,”" and take the square root
of their sum; this, diminished and increased by the ** fruit,”” for
the southern and northern hemispheres,
- 32. Ts the sine of altitude (canitu) of the southern inter-
- mediate directions (vidi¢) ; and equally, whether the sun’s revolu-
~ tion take place to the south or to the north of the gnomon (canku)
_ —only, in the latter case, the sine of altitude is that of the north=
\ ern intermediate directions.
33. The square root of the difference of the squares of that
and of radius is styled the sme of zenith-distance (dr¢).. If, then,
the sine of zenith-distance and radius be multiplied respectively
by twelve, and divided by the sine of altitude,
~. 34. ‘The results are the shadow and hypothenuse at the angles —__
r
(kona), under the given circumstances of time and place. ... ®
The method taught in this passage of finding, with a given declina-
| tion and latitude, the sine of the sun's altitude at the moment when he
crosses the south-east and south-west vertical’ circles, or when the shadowy |
‘of the gnomon is thrown toward the angles (kona) of the circumscribing — —
4 square Of the dial, is, when stated algebraically, as follows: *.
(jR*—sin* ampli.) x go*_ og -
ign.* + eq. sb.*
eq. sh. x gn, x an. ampl. — fruit. -
ten.* +eq. #h. mindy “" "
/aurd + fruit® +fruit=—sio. alt., declination being north. ; -
aard + frait* —fruit sis. alt, declimation being south. — )
“At is at once apparent that a problem is here pr ted more compli-; _
cated and difficult of solution than any with which ye bee heretofore —
i i
emonstration of re
of the Hindu Er wd
had to do in the treatise, The commentary gives
time, the notation and
ieee
; however, “hd
; —ldMLA peel
- wi * 1 tno .
i a
; ll
j L.
apie ys
é | a y
s I
i a

aod Jt. :
»it o& . ma
Of Direction, Place, and Time 129
fhiatned ; by means, namely, of the consideration of right-angled triangles,
situated in the same plane, and capable of being represented by a single
_" ‘figure. We give below such a solution, which, we are persuaded, agrees
Fig. 1. in all ite main features with the process by which the formulas of the
ad text were originally deduced.
Let ZAEK be the south-eastern
circle of altitude, from the zenith, Z,
to the horizon, K; let E be its imtersection with the equator, and D
the position of the sun; and let Cb
represent the gnomon.
Since ¢ is in the line of the equinoctial shadow (see above, v. 7), and
since be makes an angle of 45° with
cithe® axis of the dial, we have
| pe? =2 eq. sh.?, and dj Ob8-1 betagn. 2 +2 eq. sh.?
“* In like manner, de*=2 meas, ampl.2 But the similar triangles
Cade and CDE’ give Cd®: de=::CD* -DE’?; which, by halving the two
ee _ consequents, and observing the constant relation of Cd to the measure of
ia amplitude (see above, under v. 7), gives R*: sin ampl. 2-: R?: 4DE/?:
pebence 4DE/? =sin ampl.?, or DE’? =2 sin ampl.?
u Now the required sine of altitude is DG, and DG=DH+HG=DH+
tS = iW. And, obviously, the triangles DHI, DIE’, EFC, LC, and Che are
Goes similar. Then, from DHI and Che, we derive
E DH:DI: :be :Ce
from m DIE/ and C Cbe, DI: DE’: :Cb :Ce
d, by com ining terms, DH: :- DE! : :be x Cb :Ce*
1. x = 2, ait ampli. . ©4- sh. = gn. = ain atmopl.
: a ieq. sh $go.* + eq. sh.” == Eruts.
ee from ‘DHI oa EFC, we derive
ling the terins of the equal ratios, and observing that
and p12 +1¢?=DC2= EC*, we have
oa — JH?: -EC?2: - BF? - Ec?
s=nr' 72, _ Hance y2?=J 2 -IH? =EF?—1H? = EF? -DI* + DH?
C and Che are derived
“pe Co :Cb*: EC? - EF®
moe Cb?: . ;DE/? Se

» -_ ae dy LL *
/ eh > 0 Ree es
de Sel ee
Strya-Sid thtnte
ro
EC* Cb we D . ~ / a F
ave “whence ER* = BO*-C°% “Gara ee eee eed Bei DI* a RO DEI:
| Spe that i is to as
my
hy — R*—2ain ampl.*) = go.* _ (gR*—sio ampl.*) = go.
| y % p= -"+2eq. a y ign .* + eq.ab. “panei
But, as was shown above, IJ2?=EF? —DI? + DH? =surd + fruit
and ./surd + fruit? + fruit=IJ +DH=DG=sine of altitude.
When declination is south. so that the sun crosses the circle of altitude
nt D', TH’, the equivalent of DH, is to be subtracted from IJ, to give
D'G’, the sine of altitude.
The correctness of the Hindu formulas may likewise be briefly and
succinctly demonstrated by means of our medern methods. Thus, let
Fig. 15. PZS (Fig. 15) be e spherical triangle, of which
¥. the three angular points are P, the pole, Z,
the zenith, and 8, the place of the sun when
upon the south-east or the south- west vertical
circles; PZ, then, 1s the co-latitude, ZS the
s PR gzenith-distance, or co-altitude, and PS the
co-declination; and the angle PZS is 135°;
the problem is, to find the sine of the complement of ZS, or of the sun's
altitude. By spherical trigonometry, cos 5P=cos ZS cos ZP+sin ZS sim
ZP cos Z. Dividing by sin %P, and observing that cos SP+sin ZP=sin
decl. = cos lat. =sine of ‘amplitude, we have sin ampl.=sin alt, tan lat. + cos
alt. cos 135°. If, now, we represent
sin ampli. by a, tan lat, by 6, cos 135° by — Wj, sin alt. by z, and cos meet by
Ere tee
Vv 1—z*. we have a* —2abr +b*xt=4(1— 2"); and by reduction, abt = gab +b"
Representing. sguiv, ray by f, and isk by s and reducing, we have r=uf+ Vjit+e.
But / isevidently the same with the “ frait,”” since 6, or tan lat., equals eq. ah. + goom.,
. aly. = go. ™ ain, am \
aud therefore - : and « is also the same with the * eur Pe
- oom. + eq. abh.* et <a
f g—e" eR —+in amyl.) *a0.* y |
If, the latitude being north, we consider the north direction os positive,
L will be positive. The value of f, given above, will then evidently be iG
positive or negative as the sign of a is plus or minus. But a, the sine of —
Lawes) amplitude, is positive when declination is north, and negative when declina-
+ Sieg tion is south, Hence f is to be added to or_ subtracted from the radical,
x Re C secapaaie! as the sun i is north: or south a sol rakes as oe by Ber ‘
An inu ‘i before the ! wou espon a sec ’
ae trons the outh-enst and north-waet vertical ciclo;
2 chee yee
Re
-* ge hie =e ie
| ee

Of Direction, Place, and Time 131
which, except in a high latitude, would take place always below the
horizon.
The construction of the last part of verse 32 is by no means clear, yet
we cannot question that the meaning intended to be conveyed by it is
truly represented by our translation. When declination is greater than
north latitude, the sun’s revolution is made wholly to the north of the
__-~prime vertical, and the vertical circles which he crosses are the northeast and the north-west. The process prescribed in the text, however,
gives the correct value for the sine of altitude in this case also. For, m
the triangle SZP (Fig. 15), all the parts remain the same, excepting that
the angle PZS becomes 45”, instead of 135°: but the cosine of the former
ia the same as that of the latter arc, with a difference only of sign, which
disappears in the process, the cosine being squared.
The sine of altitude being found, that of its complement, or of zenithdistance, is readily derived from it by the method of squares (as above, m
vv. 16, 17). To ascertain, farther, the length of the corresponding shadow
and of its hypothenuse, we make the proportions
sin alt.: sin zen. dist.:: gnom.: shad.
and sin alt.: Ro :: gnom.: hyp. shad.
In this passage, as in those that follow, the sine of altitude is called
by the same name, ganku, ** staff,’’ which is elsewhere given to the
gnomon : the gnomon, in fact, representing in all cases, if the hypothenus+
be made radius, the sine of the sun’s altitude. The word 1s frequently
used in this sense in the modern astronomical language : thus VC (Fig. 15,
p- 126), the sine of the sun’s altitude when upon the prime yertical, is
ealled the samamandalacanku, “ prime vertical staff," and BT, the sine
ae of altitude when the sun crosses the unmandala, or east and west hourcircle, is styled the unmandalaganku: of the latter line, however, the
Sirya-Siddhanta makes no account. We are surprised, however, not to find
a distinct name for the altitude, as for its complement, the zenith-distance:
the sine of the latter might with very nearly the same propriety be called
~~ ’ the ‘* shadow,’ as that of the former the gnomon. The particular sine
of altitude which is the result of the present process 1s commonly known
from the word kona, which, signifying originally ~ angle," ’
: h the dial, to indicate the angles of the circump. 111), and then the directions in which those
on. The word itself is doubtless borrowed from
given to it being that in which it appears in the
(Sanskrit trikoua), ete. Lest it seem strange that
udus derived from abroad the name for so familiar anc
entary a juantity as an angle, we would direct attention to the striking
th. that atage of their mathematical science, at least, which is
} Sirya-Siddhanta, they appear to have made no use
-enleulations of the angle: forzexcepting in this passage

Strya-Siddhanta
(v. 34) and in the term for “* square "* employed in a previous verse (vy. 5)
of this chapter, no word meaning “ angle "' is to be met with anywhere
in the text of this treatise. he term dre, used to signify ** zenith-distance’’
—excepting when this is measured upon the meridian; see above, under
vy. 14-16—means literally “* sight: “" in this sense, it occurs here for
the first time: we have had it more than once above with the signification
of ** observed place,’’ as distinguished from a position obtained by calculation. In verse 32, ¢canku might be understood as used in
‘‘ genith,’’ yet it has there, in truth, its own proper
‘* onomon; *’ the meaning being, that the sun, in the cases supposed,
makes his revolution to the south or to the north of the gnomon itself,
or in such a manner as to cast the shadow of the latter, at noon, northward or southward. One of the factors in the calculation is styled karant,
‘“ curd "’ (see Colebrooke’s Hind. Alg., p. 145), rather, apparently, as being
a quantity of which the root is not required to be taken, than one of which
an integral root is always impossible; or, it may be, as being the square
of a line which is not. and cannot be, drawn. The term translated “* fruit”
(phala) is one of very frequent occurrence elsewhere, as denoting *' quotient,
result, corrective equation, etc.
the sense of
signification of
The form of statement and of injunction employed m verses 29 and
80, in the phrases ‘* the resuit obtained by the wise,”’ and ** let the wise
man set down,”’ etc., is so little in accordance with the style of our treatise
eleewhere, while it is also frequent and farniliar in other works of a kindred
character, that it furnishes ground for suspicion that this passage, relating
to the konacanku, is a later interpolation into the body of the text; and
the suspicion is strengthened by the facet that the process prescribed here
i¢ go much more complicated than those elsewhere presented in this chapter.
44 .. . If radius be increased by the sine of ascensional
difference (cara) when declination 1s north, or diminished by the
same, when declination is south,
95 ‘The result is the day-measure (antyd) ; this, diminished
by the versed sine (utkramajyd) of the hour-angle (nata), then
multiplied by the day-radius and divided by radius, 1s the
‘« divisor '’ (cheda) ; the latter, again, being multiplied by the sine
of co-latitude (lamba), and divided
36. By radius, gives the sine of altitude (ganku) : subtract
sts sine from that of radius, and the square root of the remainder
is the sine of zenith-distance (dre) : the shadow and its hypothenuse
: in t ceding process.
nay ghcga aa eae occa a find the sine of the sun's altitude nt
any given hour of the day, when his distance from the meridian, his
declination, and the latitude, are known, The sun's angular distance
an a Ratt -
a= Rat — ayy a

“a
“yg
. ot
“a ’ = f CENTRAL LIBRARY
Of Direction, Place, and Time 133
from the meridian, or the hour-angle, is found, as explained by the commentary, by subtracting the time elapsed since suurise, or which is to
elapse before sunset, from the halfday, as calculated by « rule previously
given (ii, 61-63). From the declination and the latitude the sine of
‘eseensional difference (carajyd) is supposed to have been already derived,
by the method taught in the sume passage; as also, from the declination
> (by ii. 60), the radius of the diurnal circle. The successive steps of the
bh process of calculation will be made clear by a reference to the annexed
figure (Fig. 16), taken i connection with Fig. 13 (p. 126), with which it
| corresponds in dimensions and lettering. Wet GG'C’E represent a portion
of the plane of the equator, C being its centre, and GE ite intersection with
a Fig. 16. the plane of the meridian; and let AATB'D
represent a corresponding portion of the plane
of the diurnal circle, as seen projected upon
the other, its centre and its hne of intersection with the meridian coinciding with those
of the latter. Let CG equal the sine of ascensional difference, and AB its correspondent
in the lesser circle. or the earthsine (/ujya or
kshitijya; see above, ii. 61). Now let O’ be
the place of the sun at a given time; the angle
O’YCD, measured by the arc of the equator
Q'B, is the hour-angle: from Q’ draw Q’Q
perpendicular to CE; then Q’Q is the sine,
and QE is the versed sine, of Q’E. Add to
a : radius, EC, the sine of ascensions! difference,
~ Oe 1G ; their sum, EG—which is the equivalent, in terms of a great circle, of
DA, that part of the diameter of the circle of diurnal revolution which is
J above the horizon, and which consequently measures the length of the day—
‘ is the day-measure (anfyd). From EG deduct EQ, the versed sine of the
en hour-angle; the remainder, GQ, is the same quantity in terms of a great
_ circle which AO is in terms of the diurnal circle: hence the reduction of
: GQ to the dimenkions of the lesser circle, by the proportion
» 2a CE: BD :: GQ: AO
ae ives us the value of AO: to this the text gives the technical name of
AS ak riso ' (cheda), But, by Fig. 18,
et 2. a, CE : EH :: AO: OR
thence OR, which is the sine of the sun's altitude at the given time equals
| a4 divisor," multiplied by EH, the cosine of latitude, and divided
‘ota
for deriving from the sine of altitude that of zenith
m both the length ef the corresponding shadow and its
aro precisely the same as in the last problem,

Sdrya-Sitddhdnta
For the meaning of antyd—which, for lack of a better term, we have
translated ** day-measure ""—sece above, under verse 7. The word nata,
by which the hour-angle is designated, is the same with that employed
above with the signification of “‘ meridian zenith-distance;"’
see the note
to verses 14-17.
37. If radius be multiplied by a given shadow, and divided
by the corresponding hypothenuse, the result is the sine of zenithdistance (dre): the square root of the difference between the square
of that and the square of radius
38. Is the sine of altitude (¢anku); which, multiplied by
radius and divided by the sine of co-latitude (lamba), gives the
‘* divisor °’ (cheda); multiply the latter by radius, and divide by
the radius of the diurnal circle,
39. And the quotient is the sine of the sun's distance from
the horizon (unnata); this, then, being subtracted from the daymeasure (antyd), and the remainder turned into are by means of
the table of versed sines, the final result 1s the hour-angle (nata),
in respirations (asu), east or west.
The process taught in these verses is precisely the converse of the
one described in the preceding passage. The only point which calls for
further remark in connection with it is, that the line GQ (Fig. 16) is in
verse 39 called the ** sine of the unnata.”” By this latter term is designated the opposite of the hour-angle (nata)—that is to say, the sun's
angular distance from the horizon upon his own circle, O'A’, reduced to
time, or to the measure of a great circle. Thus, when the sun is at ©’,
his hour-angle (nata), or the time till noon, is Q’E; his distance from
the horizon (unnata), or the time since sunrise, is Q/G’. But GQ |s with
no propricty styled the sime of G’Q'; it is not itself a sine at all, and the
actual sine of the are in question would have a very different value.
40. Multiply the sine of co-latitude by any given measure
of amplitude (agra), and divide by the corresponding hypothenuse
in digits; the result is the sine of declination. This, again, 18
to be multiplied by radius, and divided by the sine of greatest
declination ; pry aatt
41. ‘The quotient, converted into arc, 18, signs, etc. the
sun's place in the quadrant ; by means of the quadrants is then
found the actual longitude of the sun at that point... .
A.
ps,
Mi

Of Direction, Place, and Time 135
By the method taught in this passage, the sun's declination, and,
through that, bis true and mean longitude, may, the latitude of the observer
being known, be found from a single observation upon the shadow at any
_ hour in the day. The declination is obtained from the measure of amplitude
and the hypothenuse of the shadow, in the following manner: first, as was
shown in connection with verse 7 of this chapter,
hyp. shad.: meas. ampl.:: EC : CA (Fig. 14, p. 130)
but EC : CA :: EH: BC
therefore hyp. shad.: meas. ampl.:: EH : BC
Rin BC, the sine of declination, being thus ascertained, the longitude is deduced
from it as in a previous process (see above, vv. 17-20).
41. . . . Upon a given day, the distances of three bases, at
Sal noon, in the forenoon, and in the afternoon, being laid off,
i 42. From the point of intersection of the lines drawn
between them by means of two fish-figures (matsya), and with
a radius touching the three points, is described the path of the
shadow. . - -
This method of drawing upon the face of the dial the path which
” will be described by the extremity of the shadow upon a given day proceeds
| upon the assumption that that path will be an are of a circle—an erroneous
assumption, since, excepting within the polar circles, the path of the shadow
is always a hyperbola, when the sun is not in the equator. In low latitudes,
however, the difference between the arc of the hyperbola, at any point not
: too far from the gnomon, and the are of a circle, 18 so emall, that it is not
oe very surprising that the Hindus should have overlooked it. The path being
ol .
Ws
regarded as a true circle, of course it can be drawn if any three points in it
Tet ean be found by ealeulation: and this is not difficult, since the rules above
given furnish means of ascertaining, if the sun's declination and _ the
observer's latitude be known, the length of the shadow and the length of
sits base, or the distance of its extremity from the enst and west axis of
the dial, at different times during the day. One part of the process, however, has not been provided for in the rules hitherto given. Thus (Fig. %.
- Pp. 111); supposing d, m, and 7 to be three points in the same daily path
oe of the shadow, we require, in order to lay down | and m, to know not only
the bases 1b”, mb", but also the distances 6b", bb". But these are readily
found when the shadow and the base corresponding to each are known, oF
they may be calculated from the sines of the respective hour-angles.
fe * a ff points being determined, the mode of describing a circle
Ag , gh them is virtually the same with that which we should employ:
-are drawn from the noon-point to each of the others, which are then,
res (see above, under vv. 1-5), bisected by other lines st right
Y
* all

136 Strya-Siddhdanta
angles to them, and the intersection of the latter is the centre of the required
circle,
42... . Multiply by the day-radius of three signs, and
divide by their own respective day-radii,
43. In succession, the sines of one, of two, and of three
signs; the quotients, converted into arc, being subtracted, each
from the one following, give, beginning with Aries, the times of
rising (udaydsaras) at Lanka ;
44. Namely sixteen hundred and seventy, seventeen hundred
and ninety-five, and nineteen hundred and thirty-five respirations.
And these, diminished each by its portion of ascensional difference (carakhanda), as caleulated for a given place, are the times
of rising at that place.
45. Invert them, and add their own portions of ascensional
difference inverted, and the sums are the three signs beginning
with Cancer: and these same six, in inverse order, are the other
six, commencing with Libra.
The problem here is to determine the ** times of rising ~ (udaydsavas)
of the different signs of the ecliptic—that 1s to say, the part of the 5400
respirations (asavas) constituting a quarter of the sidereal day, which each
of the three signs making up a quadrant of the ecliptic will occupy in msing
(udaya) above the horizon. And in the first place, the times of rising at
the equator, or in the nght sphere—which are the equivalents of the signs
in right ascension—are found as follows:
Let ZN (Fie. 17) be a quadrant of the solstitial colure, AN the projection upon its plane of the equinoctial colure, AZ of the equator, and
AC of the ecliptic; and let A, T, G, and C
be the projections upon AC of the initial pomts
ef the first four signs; then AT is the sine
of one sign, or of 30°, AG of two signs, or of
60°, and AC, which is radius, the sine of
three signs, or of 90°, From Leo and C,
draw Tt, Gg, Ce, perpendicular to AN. Then
AT? and ACe ere similar triangles, and, since
AC equals radius,
RR: Cet vAT : Tl
But the arc of which Tt is sine, is the
anme part of the circle of diurnal revolution
of which the radius is ¢f/, as the required ascensional equivalent of one sign
is of the equator: hence the sme of the latter, which we may enll x, 15

Of Direction, Place, and Time 137
found by reducing Tt to the measure of a grent circle, which is done by
the proportion
ive te Ste tS OM a
Combining this with the preceding proportion, we have,
tt. Ce =: AT-;. sin &
Again, to find the ascensional equivalent of two signs, which we will
eall y, we have first, by comparison of the triangles AGg and ACc,
R : Co +: AG: Gg
and gg’: R:: Gg: sinmy
therefore, as before, gg’: Co :; AG: sin y
Hence, the sines of the ascensional equivalents of one and of two signs
respectively are equal to the sines of one and of two signs, AT and AG,
multiplied by the day-radius of three signs, Cc, and divided each by its
own day-radius, tt/ and gg’; and the conversion of the sines thus obtained
ito arc gives the ascensional equivalents themselves. The rule of the
text includes also the equivalent of three signs, but this 1s so obviously
equal to a quadrant that it is unnecessary to draw out the process, all the
terms in the proportions disappearing except radius.
Upon working out the process, by means of the table of sines given
in the second chapter (vv. 15-22), and assuming the inclination of the
plane of the ecliptic to be 24° (ii. 28), we find, by the rule given above
(ii. 60), that the day-radii of one, of two, and of three sines, or tt’, gg’,
| Cc, are $366’, 8216’, and 3140’ respectively, and that the sines of x and
. y are 1604’ and 2907’, to which the corresponding ares are 27° 50! and
57° 45', or 1670’ and 3465’. The former ‘< the ascensional equivalent of
the first sign; subtracting it from the latter gives that of the second sign,
which is 1795’, and subtracting 3465’ from 4 quadrant, 5400’, gives the
.. equivalent of the third sign, which ts 1935’—all as stated in the text.
as These, then, are the periods of sidereal time which the first three
signs of the ecliptic will occupy in rising. above the horizon at the equator,
| or in passing the meridian of any latitude. It is obvious that the same
r quantities, in inverse order, will be the equivalents in right ascension of the
three following signs also, and that the series of six equivalents thus found
will belong also to the six signs of the other half of the ecliptic. In order,
now, to ascertain the equivalents of the signs in oblique ascension, or the
periods of sidereal time which they will occupy in rising above the horizon
latitude, it is necessary first to calculate, for that latitude, the
7 < -d these quantities, in the Hindu method, for the latitude of Washington, 88° 54’, and find the ascensional difference of T to be 678’, that of
1268’. The manner in which these are combined
roduce the equivalents im oblique
er

oo
ns pens ion may be explained by the following figuye (Fig. 18), which, although
an
iddhanta
4 «hi a
e a pet?
as
Ss
- Strya-S
ah
Fig.18. not a true projection, is
bi e sufficient for the purpose
aA >
a Se les
. mae : ecliptic, divided into its
semicircle of the equator,
upon which AT’, T’G’, ete., are the equivalents of those signs in right
T, G, ete. Then tT’ and vV', the ascensional difference of T and V, are
578’, gG’ and IL’ are 1061’, and cC’ is 1263/. Then At, the equivalent in
value of tg, the second equivalent, the text directs to subtract from T’G! the
difference between tT’ and gG! which is called the carakhanda, *' portion of
ascensional difference at the point G as compared with T. Thus
Farther, to find the oblique equivalents in the second quadrant, we
are directed to invert the right equivalents, and to add to each its own
It is obvious without particular explanation that the arcs of oblique
ascension thus found as the equivalents, in a given latitude, of the first
the other six. We have, then, the following table of times of rising
(udaydsavas), for the equator and for the latitude of Washington, of all the
of illustration. Let ACS
, successive signs, and AS a
ascension; and let ¢, g, ete., be the points which rise simultaneously with
oblique ascension of AT, equals AT’—fT’ or 1092’. To find, again, the
ascensional difference ""—that is to say, the increment or decrement of
carakhanda, decrement of ascensional difference. Thus
and finally, eS8=—V'S+o0V’=2248.
six signs of the ecliptic, are likewise, in inverse order, the equivalents of
divisions of the ecliptic:
Equivalents in Right and Oblique Ascension of the Signs of the Ecliptic.
Lat. of “Washington. Sign.
ABim” | Ob: Ascension. ise ROO he
1670 hs ‘Toda Pisces, mt 12.
ies, mesa, 7 aces, mina
2. Teens erahan, 1795 1061 1312 Aquerius, kumbha, 11.
3 | Gemini, mithuna, 1985 1263 1733 Capricornus, makara, 10
| 4.! Cancer. karkafa, 1935 1061 2137 Sagittarius, dianus, | 0
6. | Virgo, kanyS, 1670 2248 Libra, tuld, Wi
For the expression ‘* at Lanka,’’ employed in verse 48 to designate
the equator, see above, under i, 62,

» - Of Direction, Place, and Time 139
4G. From the longitude of the sun at a given time are to be
calculated the ascensional equivalents of the parts past and to
come of the sign in which he is: they are equal to the number
of degrees traversed and to be traversed, multiplied by the ascensional equivalent (udaydsavas) of the sign, and divided by thirty ;
47. Then, from the given time, reduced to respirations, subtract the equivalent, in respirations, of the part of the sign to
come, and also the ascensional equivalents (lagndsavas) of the
following signs, in succession—so likewise, subtract the equivalents cf the part past, and of the signs past, in inverse order ;
48. If there be a remainder, multiply it by thirty and divide
by the equivalent of the unsubtracted sign; add the quotient, in
deyrees, to the whole signs, or subtract it from them: the result
is the point of the ecliptic (lagna) which is at that time upon the
horizon (kshitia).
49. So, from the east or west hour-angle (mata) of the sun,
in nadis, having made a similar calculation, by means of the equivalents in right ascension (lankodaydsavas), apply the result as an
additive or subtractive equation to the sun’s longitude : the result
is the point of the ecliptic then upon the meridian (madhyalagna).
The word lagna means literally ‘* attached to, connected with,”’ and
hence, ** corresponding, equivalent to."’ It is, then, most properly, and
likewise most usually, employed to designate the point or the are of the
equator which corresponds to a given point or arc of the ecliptic. In such
a sense it occurs in this passage, in verse 47, where lagndsavas is precisely
equivalent to udaydsavas, explained in connection with the next preceding
passage; also below, in verse 50, and in several other places. In verses 48
“ and 49, however, it receives a different signification, being taken to indicate
; the point of the ecliptic which, at 4 given time, is upon the meridian or at
the horizon; the former being called lagnam kshitije, ** lagna at the horizon”
—or, in one or two cases elsewhere, simply lagna—the other receiving the
name of madhyalagna, ~ meridian-lagna.""
The rules by which, the aun’s longitude and the hour of the day being
known, the points of the ecliptic at the horizon and upon the meridian are
found, are very elliptically and obscurely stated in the text; our translation
‘tself has been necessarily made in part also a paraphrase and explication
of them. Their farther illustration may be best effected by means of an
> example, with reference to the last figure (Fig. 18).
ad Me At a given place of observation, as Washington, let the moment of
—- local time—reckoned in the usual Hindu manner, from sunrise—be 15°

Ba hy ER Sig ey nee: | , >
“A40' * = otpey ~~ ip
ewer .
— Stirya-Siddhdnta
as au o< es
® » aa i
ile r
~ x BP and let the longitude of the sun, as corrected by the precession,
___ be, by calculation, 42°, or 1* 12°: it is required to know the longitude a
‘ Pas the point of the ecliptic (lagnu) then upon the eastern horizon. |
>) aan Let P (Fig. 18) be the place of the sun, and Hh the line of the horizon,
; ,' at the given time; and let p be the point of the equator which rose with the
sun; then the are ph is equivalent to the time since sunrise, 18" 12" 8p,
or 6555r. The value of tg, the equivalent in oblique ascension of the
<y second sign TG, in which the sun is, is given in the table presented at the
d, end of the note upon the preceding passage as 1312°. To find the value
| of the part of it pg we make the proportion
ae TG : PG :: tg: pg
ad From ph, or 6555", we now subtract pg, 787", and then, in succession,
the ascensional equivalents of the following signs, GC and CL—that 1s,
ge, or 1733”, and cl, or 2187r—until there is left a remainder, /h, or 1898r,
which is less than the equivalent of the next sign. To this remainder of
oblique ascension the corresponding are of longitude is then found by
proportion the reverse of that formerly made, namely
lp 2th SV. be
The result thus obtained being added to AL, or 4*, the sum, 4° 26°, oF
145°, is the longitude of H.
The are pg is called in the text bhogydsavas, * the equivalent in respirations of the part of the sign to be traversed,’’ while tp is styled
bhuktdsavas, ‘‘ the respirations of the part traversed.”
If, on the other hand, it were desired to arrive at the sume result by
reckoning in the opposite direction from the sun to the horizon, either
on account of the greater proximity of the two in that direction, or for
any other reason, the manner of proceeding would be somewhat different.
hus, if AH (Fig. 18) were the sun’s longitude, and pP the line of the
eastern horizon, we should first find hp, by subtracting the part of the day
already elapsed from the calculated length of the day (this step is, in the
text, omitted to be specified); from it we should then subtract the bhukfd4savas, th, and then the equivalents of the signs through which the sun
has already passed, in inverse order, until there remained only the part
of an equivalent, pg, which would be converted into the corresponding are
of longitude, PG, in the same manner as before: and the subtraction of
PG from AG would give AP, the longitude of the point P. er
’ 'But again, if it be required to determine the point of the ecliptic which
ig at any given time upon the meridian, the general process
cess is the same as
a ~ already explained, excepting that for the time from sunrise ‘is substituted Fy “a
ake, the ti til or since noon, and : or the equivalents in oblique ascension —
¥ the time until or since noon, and also for the equivatents m ol que I
3 = ; wet site eat 3 rt q Shag: ‘ res | ay Be
those in right ascension, or, in the language of the text, the ‘ : a a a
+ e “o ye =e oie 4 ' of _
oe iw Ate ek ee

Of Direction, Place, and Time 141
rising at Lanka (lankodaydsavas) ; since the meridian, like the equatorial
horizon, cuts the equator at right angles.
It will be observed that all these calculations assume the increments
of longitude to be proportional to those of ascension throughout each sign:
in a process of greater pretensions to accuracy, this would lead to errors of
some consequence.
The use and value of the methods here taught, and of the quantities
found as their results, will appear in the sequel (see ch. v. 1-9; vil. 7:
The term kshitija, by which the horizon is designated, may be understood, according to the meaning attributed to kshiti (see above, under i.
61-63), either as the *' circle of situation ‘"—that is, the one which ts
dependent upon the situation of the observer, varying with every change
of place on his part—or as the ‘« sarth-circle,’” the one produced by the
intervention of the earth below the observer, or drawn by the earth upon
_ the sky. Probably the latter is it# true interpretation.
50. Add together the ascensional equivalents, in respirations,
of the part of the sign to be traversed by the point having less
longitude, of the part traversed by that having greater longitude,
and of the intervening signs—thus 1s made the ascertainment of
time (kdlasddhana).
ae 51. When the longitude of the point of the ecliptic upon the
horizon (lagna) is less than that of the sun, the time is in the latter
: part of the night ; when greater, it is in the day-time ; when greater
than the longitude of the sun increased by half a revolution, it is
__ after sunset.
in am manner, the converse of
its object being to fined
ecliptic will be upon
Thus (Fig. 18),
The process taught in these verses is,
that which is explained in the preceding passage,
the instant of local time when a given point of the
‘the horizon, the longitude of the sun being also known.
= supposing the sun's longitude, AP, to be, ab s given time, I Ie
Nabi required to know at what time the point H, of which the longitude .
ier + 25°, will rise. The problem, 15, virtually, to ascertain the arc of the
‘5 or intercepted between Pp, the point which rose with the sun, and
that arc determines the time elapsed
1S
which will rise with H,. since :
i seen sunrise and the rise of H, or the time in the day at which the
er will take place. In order to this, we ascertain, by a process eater
» that illustrated in connection with the last passage, the bhogydsa ras,
a onal equivalent of the part of the sign to be traversed, of the
le de—or pg—and the bhuktdsavas, “* ascensional
cis
A
: MP
ang!
ry
Lj ‘
me
a
‘er | SHR PES LEE.
4 4 ae st
oe ast A - i + i " .,"
oint having less longitu
Sa rg — a .
a

- pearl
ss equivalent of
=r = an ee % . has
_- Stirya-Siddhdnta
the part traversed,"’ belonging to H, the point having greater
longitude—or th—and add the sum of both to that. of the ascensional
equivalents of the intervening whole signs, ge and cl, which the text calls
antaralagndsavas, “ equivalent respirations of the interval: '' the total is
in respirations of time, corresponding to minutes of arc, the interval of time
required: it will be found to be 6555r, or 18° 12" BP: and this, in the
case assumed, is the time in the day at which the rise of H takes place :
were H, on the other hand, the position of the sun, 18° 12° 8p would be
the time before sunrise of the same event, and would require to be subtracted from the calculated length of the day to give the instant of local
time.
It is evident that the main use of this process must be to determine
the hour at which a given planet, or a star of which the longitude is known,
will pass the horizon, or at which its “* day '’ (see above, ii, 59-68) will
commence, A like method—substituting only the equivalents in right for
those in oblique ascension—might be employed in determining at what
instant of local time the complete day, ahordtra, of any of the heavenly
bodies, reckoned from transit to transit across the lower meridian, would
commence: and this is perhaps to be regarded as included also in the
terms of verse 50; even though the following verse plainly has reference to
the time of rising, and the word lagna, as used in it, means only the point
upon the horizon.
The last verse we take to be simply an obvious and convenient rule
for determining at a glance in which part of the civil day will take place
the rising of any given point of the ecliptic, or of a planet oceupying that
point. If the longitude of a planet be less than that of the sun, while at
the same time they are not more than three signs apart—this and the
other corresponding restrictions in point of distance are plainly implied in
the different specifications of the verse as compared with one another, and
are accordingly explicitly stated by the commentator—the hour when that
planet comes to assume the position called in the text lagna, or to pass the
eastern horizon, will evidently be between midnight and sunrise, or in
the after part (cesha, literally ‘* remainder “’) of the night: if, again, it be
more than three and less than six signs behind the sun, or, which is the
same thing, more than six and less than nine signe in advance of him. its
time of rising will be between sunset and midnight: if, once more, it be
in advance of the sun by less than six signs, it will rise while the sun is
above the horizon.
The next three chapters treat of the eclipses of the sun and moon, the
fourth being devoted to lunar eclipses, and the fifth to solar, and the
sixth containing directions for projecting an eclipse.

Ty 4 Ope
wl =!
; Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 143
CHAPTER IV.
Or Ectipses, AND ESPECIALLY OF LUNAR ECLIPSEs.
CosTEsTs :—1, dimensions of the sun and moon; 2-3, measurement of their apparent
dimensions; 4-5, measurement of the earth's shadow; 6, conditions of the occurrence of an eclipse; 7-8, ascertainment of longitude at the time of conjunction oF
of opposition; 9, causes of eclipses; 10-11, to determine whether there will be
an eclipse, and the amount of obscuration; 12-15, to find half the time of duration of the eclipse, and balf that of total obscuration; 16-17, to ascertain the
times of contact and of separation, and, in a total eclipse, of immersion and
emergence ; 18-21, to determine the amount of obscuration at a given time;
92.23. to find the time corresponding to a given amount of obscuration; 4-25,
measurement of the deflection of the ecliptic, at the point cccupied by the
eclipsed body, from an cast and west line: 26, ccrrection of the scale of projection for difference of altitude,
1. The diameter of the sun’s disk is six thousand five
hundred yojanas ; of the moon’s, four hundred and eighty.
We shall see, in connection with the next passage, that the diameters
of the sun and moon, as thus stated, are subject to a curious modification,
dependent upon and representing the greater or less distance of those
bodies from the earth; so that, in a certain sense, we have here only their
mean diameters. These represent, however, in the Hindu theory—which
affects to reject the supposition of other orbits than such as are circular,
and described at equal distances about the ecarth—the true absolute
dimensions of the sun and moon.
Of the two, only that for the moon is obtained by « legitimate
process, or presents any near approximation to the truth. The diameter of
the earth being, as stated above (i. 59), 1600 yojanas, that of the moon,
480 yojanas, is .3 of it: while the true value of the moon's diameter in
terms of the earth’s is .2716, or only about a tenth less. An estimate
so nearly correct supposes, of course, an equally correct determination
of the moon's horizontal parallax, distance from the earth, and mean
apparent diameter. The Hindu valuation of the parallax may be deduced
from the value given just below (v. 3), of a minute on the moon's orbit,
as 15 yojanas. Since the moon’s horizontal parallax is equal to the angle
subtended at her centre by the earth's radius, and since, at the moon's
mean distance, 1/ of are equals 15 yojanas, and the earth’s radius, 800
_ yojanas, would accordingly subtend an angle of 53’ 20"—the latter angle,
58’ 20", is, according to the system of the Sdrva-Siddhianta, the moon's
P ir nee ix, when in the horizon and at her mean distance. This is cons!-
derably less than the actual value of the quantity, as determined by modern
YY Da
nee, namely 57 1’; and it is practically, in the calculation of solar

a
he
; aes
iin
P > wera
Ee AL LIBRARY fl .
oe Seale ee J |
: - af ee .
1. Ap S _ = a ™ as A. PS
‘ Ld a «
wal .
Aa
eclipses, still farther lessened by 9’ 51”, the excess of the value assigned
to the sun's horizontal parallax, as we shall see farther on. Of the variation in the parallax, due to the varying distance of the moon, the Hindu
system makes no account: the variation is actually nearly 8’, being from
53’ 48", at the apogee, to 61’ 24", at the perigee.
How the amount of the parallax was determined by the Hindus— if,
indeed, they had the instruments and the skill in observation requisite
for making themselves an independent determination of it—we are not
informed. It is not to be supposed, however, that an actual estimate of
the mean horizontal parallax as precisely 53’ 20" lies at the foundation
ef the other elements which seem to rest upon it; for, in the making up
of the artificial Hindu system, all these elements have been modified and
adapted to one another in such a manner as to produce certain whole
numbers as their. results, and so to be of more convenient use.
From this parallax the moon's distance may be deduced by the proportion
sin 53 20" - R :: earth's rad.: moon's dist.
The radius of the moon's orbit, then, 1s 51,570 yojanas, or, in terms of the
earth's radius, 64.47. The true value of the moon's mean distance is 59.96
radii of the earth
The farther proportion
would give, as the value of a quadrant of the moon's orbit, 81,000 yojnnss,
and, as the whole orbit, 824,000 yojanas. This is, fact, the sah oa
ference of the orbit assumed by the system, and stated in another place
(xii. &5). Since, however, the moon's distance 18 nowhere assumed as an
element in any of the processes of the system, and is even directed hase? )
to be found from the cireumference of the orbit by the false ratio 0 Bi
./10, it is probable that it was also made no account of in prereiacy Ae
system, and that the relations of the moon’s parallax and orbit were
by some such proportion as
The moon’s orbit being 324,000 yojanas, the assignment of 480 pis
ae her diameter implies a determination of her apparent diameter at her
mean distance as 82’; since
| ‘s mean arent diameter is actually Bi! 7. , |
a emperor to ca ienehet farther, how the dimensions of the sun’s orbit
and of the sun himself are determined by the Hindus, we have to notice
that, the moon's orbit being 324,000 yojanas, and her |
revolution 27482167416, the amount of her mean
- spk: a is

Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 145
11,8587.717. The Hindu system now assumes that this is the precise
amount of the actual mean daily motion, in space, of all the planets and
ascertains the dimensions of their several orbits by multiplying it Se the
periodic time of revolution of each (see below, xii. 80-90). The length
of the sidereal year being 3654.25875648, the sun’s orbit is, as stated elsewhere (xii. 86), 4,331,500 yojanas. From a quadrant of this, by the ratio
5400/: 3488’, we derive the sun's distance from the earth, 689,430 yojanas
or 861.8 radii of the earth. This is vastly less than his true distance;
which is about 24,000 radii. His horizontal parallax is, of course, proportionally over-estimated, being made to be nearly 4! (more exactly, 4’ 59".4),
instead of 8".6, its true value, an amount 50 small that it should properly
have been neglected as inappreciable. |
It is an important property of the parallaxes of the sun and moon,
resulting from the manner in which the relative distances of the latter from
the earth are determined, that they are to one another as the mean daily
motions of the planets respectively: that is to say,
Each is likewise very nearly one fifteenth of the whole mean daily motion,
or equivalent to the amount of arc traversed by each planet in 4 nadis; the
difference being, for the moon, about 38", for the sun, about g° We shall
see that, in the calculations of the next chapter, these differences are
neglected, and the parallax taken as equal, in each case, to the mean motion
=, ey during 4 nadis.
ain The circumference of
a assignment of 6500 yojanas as his
7 diameter was considered to be 32/ 24".8; for
the sun's orbit beittg 4.831,500 yojanas, the
diameter implies that his mean apparent
The true value of the sun’s apparent diameter at his mean distance 15
“7 “The results arrived at by the Greek astronomers relative to
parallax, distance, ‘and magnitude of the sun aud moon are not greatly dis-
—s gordant with those here presented. Hipparchus found the moon’s horizontal
ole parallax to be 57’: Aristarchus had previously, by observation upon the
: ‘angular distance of the sun and moon when the latter is half-illuminated,
the
angular
| o" ‘ nt e their relative distances to be as 19 to 1; this gave Hipparchus 5’ as
‘ © om the sun's parallax. Ptolemy makes the mean distances of the sun ancl
b ba moon from the earth equal to 1210 and 5% radii of the earth, and their
: paralle he also states the diameter of the
and 69 14” respectively :
to be as 1, 8%, 18. while the Hindus make them
their true values, us determined by modern science,

so
e.
a
Xe
: sik ie ce |
gee Siddhdut ta scat
“These ice each multiplied by the true motion, and
. a na
: Ba idea by the mean motion, of its own plauet, give the corrected
_— (sphuta) diameters. If that of the sun be multiplied by the number
‘oh of the sun’s revolutions in an Age, and divided by that of the
- in0on’s,
3. Or if it be multiplied by the moon’s orbit (kakshd), and
divided by the sun's orbit, the result will be its diameter upon
the moon’s orbit : all these, divided by fifteen, give the measures
of the diameters in minutes.
The absolute values of the diameters of the sun and moon being
stated in yojanas, it is required to find their apparent values, in minutes
of arc. In order to this, they are projected upon the moon's orbit, or
upon a circle deseribed about the earth at the moon's mean distance, of
which circle—since 824,000 21 600=15—one minute is equivalent to
fifteen yojanas.
The method of the process will be made clear by the annexed figure
(Fig. 19). Let E be the earth’s place, EM or Em the mean distance of
the moon, and ES the mean distance of the sun. Let TU equal the sun's
diameter, 65007. But now let the sun be at the greater distance ES’:
the part of bis mean orbit which his disk will cover will no longer be TU,
but a less quantity, tu, and tu will be to TU, or T'U', as ES to ES’. But —
the text is not willing to acknowledge here, any more than in the second
chapter, an actual inequality in the distance of the sun from the earth at
different times, even though that inequality be most unequivocally implied
in the processes it prescribes: so, instead of calculating ES! a as well a8 ES,
which the method of epicycles affords full facilities for doing, it substitutes,
for the ratio of ES to ES’, the inverse ratio of the daily motion at
the mean distance ES to that at the true distance ES’. The ratios, at
however, are not precisely | equal. The are am (Fig. 4. Pp. 76) of the
uniform velocity. If, then, the motion, at any given. point, a. . :
eccentric circle is supposed to be traversed | by the sun or moon > with a
. i ten
, | pl Fy ; eee!

2 ah. Sth ,
ate” ie
ea wre
Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 147
li er ndicular, to Em, the apparent motion would be imversely 4s the
oe distance. But the motion at m is perpendicular to em instead of Em.
r The resulting error, it is true, and especially in the case of the sun, is not
ey great. it may be added that the eccentric circle which best repre-
: sents the apparent motions of the sun and moon in their elliptic orbits,
i gives much more imperfectly the distances and apparent diameters of those
| | anes ‘The value of tu, however, being thus at least approximately determined, t/u’, the arc of the moon’s mean orbit subtended by it, is then
ee found by the proportion ES : Em (or EM) :: tu : t’'u'—excepting that here,
i “again, for the ratio of the distances, ES and EM, is substituted either that
of the whole circumferences of which they are respectively the radii, or the
_ inverse ratio of the number of revolutions in a given time of the two planets,
which, a5 shown in the note to the preceding passage, is the same thing.
* Having thus ascertained the value of t/u’ in yojanas, division by 15 gives
us the number of minutes in the arc t'u’, or in the angle (/Buw’.
cee In like manner, *¢ the moon be at less than her mean distance from
the earth, as EM’, she will subtend an are of her mean orbit no, greater
thai NO, her true diameter; the value of no, in yojanas and in minutes,
"4 is found by a method precisely similar to that already described.
a ‘There is hardly in the whole treatise a more curious instance than
this of the mingling together of true theory and false assumption in the
| same process, and of the concealment of the real character of a process
i by substituting other and equivalent data for its true elements.
~~ We meet for the first time, in this passage, the term employed in the
Foie" treatise to designate a planetary orbit, namely kakshd, literally ** border,
: The value finally obtained for the apparent diameter
as later of the shvdow, is styled its mdna, ~ measure.””
processes taught im
a eS
girdle, periphery.”
| the sun or moon,
—s- In order to furnish a practical illustration of the
s is ee er, we have calculated in full, by the methods and elements of
he Sdrya-Siddhanta, the lunar eclipse of Feb. 6th, 1860. Rather, how-
| and with its different prounder the
than present the calculation piecemeal,
| ses severed from their natural connection, and arranged
, “passag es to which they severally belong, we have preferred to give it entire
| in the Appendix, whither the reader is referred for it.
the true daily motion of
s the earth's
. oS 3 . Multiply the earth's diameter by ,
the moon. and divide by her mean motion - the result i :
correc ec diameter (stiict). The difference between the ea rth’s
diameter and the corrected diameter of the sun
‘i th 5. Is to be multiplied by the moon's mean diameter,
divided by the sun’s mean diameter - subtract the result from the
earth's corrected ¢ iameter (sfict), and the remainder is the diameter
of the shadow ; wh ch is reduced to minutes as before.
hans,» “are
5 or rr. =
al
Jian
stay and

a ~<a ee oe
. c a ee fe? > . <pen
at ees os
te poe =
P
CENTRAL UBRARY
i q
= am, ° bar
iddhanta
AW.
The method employed in this process for finding the diameter of the
earth's shadow upon the moon's mean orbit may be explained by the aid
of the following figure (Fig. 20).
As in the last figure, let E represent the earth's place, 5 and M points
in the mean orbits of the sun and moon, and M’ the moon's actual place.
Let tu be the sun's corrected diameter, or the part of his mean orbit which
his disk at its actual distance covers, ascertained as directed in the preceding
passage, and let FG be the earth's diameter. Through F and G draw
Fig. 20.
A ad 9 w
vF/ and wGg parallel to SM, and also tFh and uwGk: then hk will be
the diameter of the shadow where the moon actually enters it. The value of
hk evidently equals fg (or FG) — (fh + gk); and the value of fh+gk may be
found by the proportion
Fe (or ES) : te +t (or tu—FG) +: Ff (or EM’) : th + gk
But the Hindu system provides no method of measuring the angular value
of quantities at the distance EM’, nor does it ascertain the value of FM’
iteelf- and as, in the last process, the diameter of the moon was reduced,
for measurement, to its value at the distance EM’, so, to be made commensurate with it, all the data of this process must be similarly modified,
That is to say, the proportion
EM’ : EM :: fg : f'g'
--substituting, as before, the ratio of the moon's mean to her true motion
for that of EM’ to EM—gives f’g’, which the text calls the siici: the word
means literally “‘ needle, pyramid; “" we do not see precisely how it comes
to be employed to designate the quantity f'g’, and have translated it, for
lack of a better term, and in analogy with the language of the text respecting
the diameters of the sun and moon, ** corrected diameter of the earth.”
It is also evident that
EM’ : fhigk :; EM : th’ +9'k’

‘ Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 149
there is a slight inaccuracy. The substitution proceeds upon the assumption that the mean apparent values of the diameters of the sun and moon
are precisely equal, in which case, of course, their absolute diameters would
be as their distances; but we have seen, in the note to the first verse of
this chapter, that the moon’s mean angular diameter is made a little less
than the sun‘’s, the former being 32’, the latter 32’ 24°.6. The error ts
evidently neglected as being too small to impair sensibly the correctness of
i. the result obtained: it is mot easy to see, however, why we do not have the
He ratio of the mean distances represented here, as in verses 2 and 3, by that
r of the orbits, or by that of the revolutions in an Age taken inversely. The
= substitution being made, we have the final proportion on which the rule
im _ the text is based, viz., the sun's mean diameter is to the moon's mean
diameter as the excess of the sun's cérrected diameter over the actual
diameter of the earth is to a quantity which, being subtracted from the
i siici, or corrected diameter of the earth, leaves as a remainder the diameter
of the shadow as projected upon the moon's mean orbit: it is expressed in
yojanas, but is reduced to minutes, as before, by dividing by fifteen. The
earth's penumbra is not taken into account in the Hindu process of
calculation of an eclipse.
: The lines fg, f'g’, etc.. are treated here us if they were straight lines,
instead of arcs of the moon's orbit: but the inaccuracy never comes to
be of any account practically, since the value of these lines always falls
inside of the limits within which the Hindu methods of ealculation recognize no difference between an arc and its sine.
_ 6. The earth's shadow is distant half the signs from the sun :
_ when the longitude of the moon’s node is the same with that of
the shadow, or with that of the sun, or when it is a few degrees
_ greater or less, there will be an eclipse.
. To the specifications of this verse we need to add, of course, ** at the
Ly
P
no attempt is made here to define the lunar
the distances from the moon's node within
Those limits are, for the moon, nearly 12°
wor | ** eclipse," grehana, means literally
**. it, with other kindred terms, to be noticed Inter, exhibits the
ac the primitive theory of eclipses, & seizures of the heavenly
Sa stke Hah, In verses 17 and 10, below, instead of
ana we ve graha, another derivative from the sam | |
* gr ‘geize."’ Elsewhere graha never occur except as signifying
, . on it is the only word which the Sirvya-Siddhanta employs with
tion : a6 so used, it is an active instead of » passive derivative
A
rr 3
Pg
an

150 Surya-Siddhdnta
meaning “ seizer,’" and its application to the planets is due to the astrological conception of them, as powers which “ lay bold upon **
men with their supernatural influences.
7. The longitudes of the sun and moon, at the moment of
the end of the day of new moon (amdvdsyd), are equal, in signs,
etc. ; at the end of the day of full moon (paurnamédsi) they are
equal in degrees, etc., at a distance of half the signs.
8. When diminished or increased by the proper equation of
motion for the time, past or to come, of opposition or conjunction, they are made to agree, to minutes: the place of the node
at the same time is treated in the contrary manner.
The very general directions and explanations contained in verses 6, 7,
and 9 seem out of place here in the middle of the chapter, and would have
more properly constituted its introduction. The process prescribed in verse
§. also, which has for its object the determination of the longitudes of the
sun, moon, and moon's node, at the moment of opposition or conjunction,
ought no less, it would appear, to precede the ascertainment of the true
motions, and of the measures of the disks and shadow, already explained.
Verse 8, indeed, by the lack of connection in which it stands, and by the
obscurity of its language, furnishes a striking instance of the want of
precision and intelligibility so often characteristic of the treatise. The
subject of the verse, which requires to be supplied, is, ** the longitudes of
the sun and moon at the instant of midnight next preceding or following
the given opposition or conjunction “; that being the time for which the
true longitudes and motions are first calculated, in order to test the question
of the probability of an eclipse. If there appears to be such a probability,
the next step is to ascertain the interval between midnight and the moment
of opposition or conjunction, past or to come: this is done by the method
taught in ii. 66, or by some other analogous process: the instant of the
occurrence of opposition or conjunction, in local time, counted from sunrise
of the place of observation, must also be determined, by ascertaining the
interval between mean and apparent midnight (ii. 46), the length of the
complete day (ii. 59), and of its parts (ii. 60-63), ete.; the whole process
ic aufficiently illustrated by the two examples of the calculation of eclipses
given in the Appendix. When we have thus found the interval between
midnight and the moment of opposition or conjunction, verse 8 teaches us
how to ascertain the true longitudes for that moment: it is by calculating
—in the manner teught in i. 67, but with the true daily motions—the
amount of motion of the sun, moon, and node during the interval, and
applying it as a corrective equation to the longitude of each at midnight,
subtracting in the case of the sun and moon, and adding in the case of
the node, if the moment was then already past; and the contrary, if it was
the fates of

ie are —sOF:« Eclipses, and Bspecially of Lunar Eclipses “151
oa still to come. Then, if the process has been correctly performed, the longi-
'. sa’ es of the sun and moon will be found to correspond, in the manner
Eeeexeauired by veree 7,
iE For the days of new and full moon, and their appellations, see the
‘note to ii. 66, above. ‘The technical expression employed here, as in one
oF two other passages, to designate the ‘* moment of opposition or conjunc_ tion” is parvanddyas, ‘* nadis of the parvan,”’ or ** time of the parvan in
nadis, ete.;"" parvan means literally °° knob, joint,’ and is frequently
applied, as in this term, to denote a conjuncture, the moment that distinseth guishes and separates two intervals, and especially one that is of prominence
‘and importance.
> q Ps a
‘a ae i. ‘The moon is the eclipser of the sun, coming to stand
underneath it, like a cloud: the moon, moving eastward, enters
he earth's shadow, and the latter becomes its eclipser.
* ta
iad a " The names given to the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies are either chadya
er and, as here, chédaka, **‘ the body to be obscured "’ and “* the obscurer, ”
a OF: grahya and grahaka, ** the body to be seized "' and ** the seizer."" The
fi A latter terms are akin with grahana and graha, spoken of above (note to v.
bom 6), and represent the ancient theory of the phenomena, while the others
are derived from their modern and scientific explanation, as given in this
verse. | |
10, Subtract the moon's latitude at the time of opposition
or onjunction from half the sum of the measures of the eclipsed
an eclipsing bodies : whatever the remainder is, that 1s said to
be the amount obscured.
Tt is suffi
Sip a a
ri ie:
at when, at the moment of opposition, the
distance of her centre from the ecliptic,
w—is equal to the sum of the radii of
the disk and the shadow will just touch one
wer hand, the moon will, at the moment of
i ‘0 far immersed in the shad |
oft 18 adii: and so in like manner for the sun, with due allowance
The Hind - mode of reckoning the amount eclipsed is not
diameter of the eclipsed body, which method we
oe ee 5
ct
«A

152 Sarya-Siddhdnta
The word grdsa, used in verse 11 for obscuration or eclipse, means
literally “* eating, devouring,’’ and so speaks more distinctly than any other
term we have had of the old theory of the physical cause of eclipses.
12. Divide by two the sum and difference respectively of the
eclipsed and eclipsing bodies: from the square of each of the
resulting quantities subtract the square of the latitude, and take
the square roots of the two remainders.
13. These, multiplied by sixty and divided by the difference
of the daily motions of the sun and moon, give, in nadis, etc.,
half the duration (sthiti) of the eclipse, and half the time of total
obscuration.
These rules for finding the intervals of time between the moment of
opposition or conjunction in longitude, which is regarded as the middle of
the eclipse, and the moments of first and last contact, and, in a_ total
eclipse, of the beginning and end of total obscuration, may be illustrated
by help of the annexed figure (Fig, 21).
Let ECL represent the ecliptic, the point C being the centre of the
shadow, and let CD be the moon's latitude at the moment of opposition;
Fig. 21.
which, for the present, we will suppose to remain unchanged through the
whole continuance of the eclipse. It is evident that the first contact of the
moon with the shadow will take place when, in the triangle CAM, Al equals
the moon’s distance in longitude from the centre of the shadow, AM her
latitude, and CM the sum of her radius and that of the shadow. In aa
manner, the moon will disappear entirely within the shadow a %
equals her distance in longitude from the centre of the shadow, Bt a she
latitude, and CN the difference of the two radii. _ Upon sarcortaee cn oP me: ,
the square of AM or BN from those of CM and CN respectively, and taking

the square roots of the remainders, we shall have the values of AC and BC
in minutes. These may be reduced to time by the following proportion :
is, 8, ‘the excess at the given time of the moon's true motion in a day over that
v of the sun is to a day, or sixty nadis, so are AC and BC, the amounts which
e ; the moon has to gain in longitude upon the sun between the moments of
contact and immersion respectively and the moment of opposition, to the
corresponding intervals of time.
med! But the process, as thus conducted, involves a serious error: the
wae ‘moon’ ‘s latitude, instead of remaining constant during the eclipse, is con-
‘ae ‘stantly and sensibly changing. ‘hus, io the figure above, of which the
rel conditions are those found by the Hindu processes for the eclipse of Feb.
6th, 1860, the moon's path, instead of being upon the line HK, purallel to
ae the ecliptic, is really upon QR. The object of the process next taught is
| * to get rid of this error.
14. Multiply the daily motions by the half-duration, in nadis,
and divide by sixty: the result, in minutes, subtract for the time
ote contact (pragraha), and add for that of separation (moksha),
respec tively ; 2
se a + 1B: By the latitudes thence derived, the half-duration, and
aney
likewise the half-time of total obscuration, are to be calculated
, and the process repeated. In the case of the node, the
is to be applied in the coner correction, in minutes, etc.,
manner.
1 this: method of eliminating the error involved in the supposition of
a cor stant latitude, and of obtaining another and more accurate deterPicnk io of the i intervals between the moment of opposition and those of
rst a 5 et contact, and of immersion and emergence, is by a series of
pproximations. For instance: AC, as already determined,
er ‘as the interval between opposition and first contact, a
aL ulation ‘of the moon’s longitude is made for the moment A, and,
and the sum of the radii, a new value is found for AC. But
\p .) ition of A is changed, the former determination of its latitude
: | must: b made anew, and made to furnish anew « corrected
vi tind 1 of f 0; and l 80 on, ‘until the position of A 1s fixed with the
| Sea juirec ri The The process must be conducted separately. of course,
the 7 quantities affected; since, where Intitude is increasing,
1 rated, the true values of AC and BC will be greater
, while ac and FC, the true intervals in the afte:
wi I be loss than AC and BC: and the contrary when
“ae
degre hy af

i wd
“e
ee
: 2 eee > Shoes 24 ete ee |
a! e: eclipse : their application to the conditions of a solar eclipse requires the
introduction of another element, that of the parallax, and will be explained
in the notes upon the next chapter.
ae te 4 - j a
a-Siddhdnta
ons et pee ee,
ae
= ene ee OUTY
a
r ees © IS, w jh : [ 7
= i ; in yx Re me ; : em
_ We have illustrated these processes by reference only to a lunar
The first contact of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies is styled in this
ptagraha, ** seizing upon, laying hold of;" elsewhere it is also
called grésa, ** devouring,”’ and sparga, “* touching: *’ the last contact, or
separation, is named moksha, ** release, letting go.’’ The whole duration
of the eclipse, from contact to separation, is the athiti, "* stay, continuance ;""
total obscuration is vimarda, ** crushing out, entire destruction.” |
16. The middle of the eclipse is to be regarded as occurring
at the true close of the lunar day: if from that time the time of
half-duration be subtracted, the moment of contact (grasa) is
found: if the same be added, the moment of separation.
17. In like manner also, if from and to it there be subtracted and added, in the case of a total eclipse, the half-time of
total obscuration, the results will be the moments called those of
immersion and emergence.
The instant of true opposition, or of apparent conjunction (see below,
under ch. v. 9), im longitude, of the sun and moon, is to be taken as the
middle of the eclipse, even though, owing to the motion of the moon in
latitude, and also, in a solar eclipse, to parallax, that instant is not midway
between those of contact and separation, or of immersion and emergence.
To ascertain the moment of local time of each of these phases of the eclipse,
we subtract and add, from and to the local time of opposition or conjunction,
the true intervals found by the processes described in verses 12 to 15.
The total disappearance of the eclipsed body within, or behind, the
eclipsing body, is called nimilana, literally the ** closure of the eyelids, as
in winking:"' ite first commencement of reappearance is styled unmilana,
** parting of the eyelids, peeping."" We translate the terms by *‘* immersion "’ and ** emergence *’ respectively.
18. If from half the duration of the eclipse any given interval
be subtracted, and the remainder multiplied by the difference of
the daily motions of the sun and moon, and divided by sixty, the
result will be the perpendicular (/oti) in minutes.
19. In the case of an eclipse (graha) of the sun, the perpendicular in minutes is to be multiplied by the mean half-duration,
and divided by the true (sphuta) half-duration, to give the true

es Oo
we -
po Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 155
be ae. 0. The latitude is the base (bhuja): the square root of the
sum of their squares is the hypothenuse (¢rava) : subtract this
ti from half the sum of the measures, and the remainder is the
amount of obscuration (grdsa) at the given time.
hie
| an ~ 21. If that time be after the middle of the eclipse, subtract
Me) the interval from the balf-duration on the side of separation, and
treat the remainder as before : the result is the amount remaining
obscured on the side of separation.
The object of the process taught in this passage is to determine the
amount of obscuration of the eclipsed body at any given moment during
_. the ‘continuance of the eclipse. It, as well as that prescribed in the
following passage, is a variation of that which forms the subject of verses
aa ‘12 and 18 above, being founded, like the latter, upon a4 consideration of
the right-angled triangle formed by the line joming the centres of the
; eclipsed and eclipsing bodies as hypothenuse, the difference of their longttudes as perpendicular, and the moon’s latitude as base. And whereas, in
the former problem, we had the base and hypothenuse given to find the
ie perpendicular, here we have the base and perpendicular given to find the
hypothenuse. The perpendicular 1s furnished us in time, and the rule
uppose tated in the form of the interval between the given
{ contact : ion: a form to which, of course,
The interval
| es
ion the reverse of that given in ve
tthenuse is deduced; and the comparison of this with the sum
: i gives the measure of the amount of obscuration.
Reet Q1 seems altogether superfluous: it merely states the method of
are roceeding in case the time given falls anywhere between the middle and
th » end of the eclipse, as if the specifications of the preceding verses applied
nly to a time occurring before the middle: whereas they are general in
7 th ir charac r, and include the former case no less than the latter.
Ww 1en the eclipse is one of the sun, allowance needs to be made
| ¢ parallax during its continuance; this is done by the process
| wv ‘ 19, of which the explanation will be given m the notes
+t chapter (vv. 14-17).
In verse 20, for the first ond only time, we have
sand of vikahepa, as elsewhere. In the same verse, the term empleo
T hiypetlientee "* is crava, “ bearing, organ of hearing; — this, as well
PEP Oe Ga o> = ,
latat ude called heab opo
va,
gr ich is also once or twice employed, m a synen):
“an
bal th
r cA 2 a

Sdrya-Siddhanta
of the ordinary term karne, which means literally ‘ ear."" It is difficult to
see upon what conception their employment in this signification is founded.
22. From half the sum of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies
subtract any given amount of obscuration, in minutes: from the
square of the remainder subtract the square of the latitude at
the time, and take the square root of their difference.
23. The result is the perpendicular (kott) in minutes—
which, in an eclipse of the sun, is to be multiplied by the true,
and divided by the mean, hatf-duration—and this, converted into
time by the same manner as when finding the duration of the
eclipse, gives the time of the given amount of obscuration (grasa).
The conditions of this problem are precisely the same with those of
the problem stated above, in verses 12-15, excepting that here, instead
of requiring the instant of time when obscuration commences, or becomes
total. we desire to know wher it will be of a certain given amount. The
solution must be, as before, by a succession of approximative steps, since,
the time not being fixed, the corresponding latitude of the moon cannot be
otherwise determined.
24. Multiply the sine of the hour-angle (mata) by the sine
of the latitude (aksha), and divide by radius : the are corresponding
to the result is the degrees of deflection (valandngds), which are
north and south in the eastern and western hemispheres (/apdla)
respectively.
25. From the position of the eclipsed body increased by
three signs calculate the degrees of declination : add them to the
degrees of deflection, if of like direction ; take their difference, if
of different direction: the corresponding sine is the deflection
(valana)—in digits, when divided by seventy.
This process requires to be performed only when it is desired to project
an eclipse. In making a projection according to the Hindu method, as
will be seen in connection with the sixth chapter, the eclipsed body is
represented as fixed in the centre of the figure, with o north and south
line, and an east and west line, drawn through it. The absolute position
of these lines upon the disk of the eclipsed body is, of course, all the time
_ changing - but the change is, in the case of the sun, not observable, and
oo
atl
et Cel

her Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 157
in the case | + is di
Hie ct the figure sinible in See ge ce teeing cae east
and natural directions upon her disk. It Make oo cae oT ee
eve, by the figure drawn, where, with reference to the Pie thai Pgs wr
and west points of the moment, the contact, SATE sos pe
separation, or other phases of the eclipse, will take place. In eee |
this, it is necessary to know what is, at each given nice the di ode
of the ecliptic, in which the motions of both eclipsed and aan ai0 “hades
are made. The east and west direction is represented by = acer ae
drawn through the eclipsed body, parallel to the prime vertical; the mab
and south direction, by a great circle passing through the bod Da the
the north and south points of the horizon: and the di AY, thie
: direction of the eclipt
is deterrnined by ascertaining _—
: the angular amount of its
3. deflection from the small east
and _=west circle at the point
se occupied by the eclipsed body.
Thus, in the annexed figure
(Fig. 22), if M be the place
By of the eclipsed body upon the
ecliptic, CL, and if EW be
i’, the small east and west circle
drawn through M_ parallel
with E’Z, the prime vertical, then th
M by CM and EM, which is equal to PMN, the angle made by perpeD
diculars to the two circles drawn from their respective poles. In order
to find the value of this angle, double process is adopted: first, the angle
the two small circles EM and DM, which ts equivalent to
PN 5 determined : as this depends for its amount upon the
observer's latitude, being nothing in a right sphere, \* is called by the
: ha valana, “* the deflection due to latitude :"" the text calls
'* since it does not, like the
be expressed in terms of its
CL. and the circle of
Fig. 22.
e deflection will be the angle made at
net result
Next, the angle made at M by the ecliptic,
revolution, DR, which angle is equal to PMP’,
dyana valana, © the deflection due to the deviation
equator ;” the text has no special name for it
or their difference, 45 the ease may be,
he emall east and west
. eine.
is also measured ;
is
the angle P/MN. |
the method and value of these processes, we will
» the second one, oF with that by which PMP’, the dyana
1 23), let OQ be the equator
be the
; cliptic, P and FY being their respec
! Jana, a fc na. In the following figure (Fig.

Stirya-Siddhdnta
point at which the amount of deflection of MI. from the circle of diurnal
revolution, DIR, is sought. Let ML equal Fig. 23.
a quadrant; draw P’L, cutting the equator
at Q; as also PL, cutting it at B; then
draw PM and QM. Now PML is a triquadrantal triangle, and hence MQ is ua
quadrant; and therefore Q is a pole of the
circle POM, and QO is also a quadrant,
and QMO is a right angle. But DR also
makes right angles at M with PM; hence
QM and DR are tangents to one another
at M, and the spherical angle QML is equal
to that which the ecliptic makes at M
with the cirele of declination, or to PMP’:
and QML is measured by QL. The rule
given in the text produces a result which is a near approach to this, although
not entirely accordant with it excepting at the solstice and equinox, the
points where the deflection is greatest and where it is nothing. We are
directed to reckon forward a quadrant from the position of the eclipsed
body—that is, from M to L, in the figure—and then to calculate the
declination at that point, which will be the amount of deflection. But the
declination at L is BL, and since LBQ is a right-angled triangle, having
a right angle at B, and since LQ and LB are always less than quadrants,
LB must be less than LQ. The difference between them, however, can
never be of more than trifling amount; for, as the angle QLB increases,
QI, diminishes; and the contrary.
In order to show how the Hindus have arrived at a determination of
this part of the deflection so nearly correct, and yet not quite correct,
we will cite the commentator’s explanation of the process. He
Says :
** The * east *
(prdci) of the equator [i.¢., apparently, the point of the
equator eastward toward which the small circle must be considered as
pointing at M] is a point 90° distant from that where a circle drawn from
the pole (dhruva) through the planet cuts the equator:*” that is to Bay, it
is the point Q (Fig. 23), a quadrant from O; "* and the interval by which
this is separated from the * east " of the ecliptic at 90° from the planet, that
ia the dyana valana.”’ ‘This is entirely correct, and would give us QL, the
true measure of the deflection. But the commentator goes on farther to say
that since this interval, when the planet is at the solstice, is nothing, and
when at the equinox is equal to the greatest declination, it is therefore
always equal to the declination at a quadrant’s distance from the planet.
This is, as we have seen, a false conclusion, and leads to an erroncour
result: whether they who made the rule were aware of this, but deemed

vi, |
{ ell Att .
im oe ’ a ey had ~ is ge Nd
sks oa Of Eclipses, and Especially of Lunar Eclipses 159
er,
_ the process a convenient one, and its result a sufficiently near approximation
to the truth, we will not venture to say.
“rs The other part of the operation, to determine the amount of deflection of the circle of declination from the east and west small circle, is
_ considerably more difficult, and the Hindu process correspondingly defective.
We will first present the explanation of it which the commentator gives.
: He states the problem thus: ~ by whatever interval the directions of the
ss equator are deflected from directions corresponding to those of the prime
.. vertical, northward or southward, that is the deflection due to latitude
| = (dkaha valana). Now then: if a movable circle be drawn through the pole
of the prime vertical (sama) and the point occupied by the planet [t-¢.,
the circle NMS, Fig. 22], then the interval of the © easts,” at the distance
he. of a quadrant upon each of the two circles, the equator and the prime
Pa vertical, from the points where they are respectively cut by that circle
__ [i.e., from T and V] will be the deflection. . - - Now when the planet is
ee: at the horizon [as at D, referred to E’] then that interval is equal to the
rx latitude [ZQ]; when the planet is upon the meridian (ydmyottaravrtta,
in _ ** south and north circle "') [i.¢., when it is at R, referred to Q and Z],
iy there is no interval [as at E’]. Hence, by the following proportion—with
ee a sine of the hour-angle which is equal to radius the sine of deflection for
care latitude is equal to the sine of latitude; then with any given sine of the
a | hour-angle what is it?——a sine of latitude is found. of which the arc is the
ee required deflection for latitude."’ This is, in the Hindu form of staternent,
ea 5 gshie proportion represented by the rule in verse 24, viz., R : sin lat.: + sin
se 3 a 7 hour-angle : sin deflection. :
i, -——s« Tt seems to us very q
uestionable, at least, whether the Hindus had
any more rigorous demonstration than this of the process they adopted,
BP cecknew wherein lay the inaccuracies of the latter. These we will now
proceed | In the first place, instead of measuring the angle
mad at the point in question, M, by the two small circles, the east and
west circle and that of daily revolution—which would be the angle PMN—
nae they refer the body to the equator by 4 circle passing through the north
! "he of the horizon, and measure the deflection of the equator
at ea and west circle at its intersection with that circle—which
i "if formerly explained,
intention
a
é
a
circle of daily revolution, DR, the
e ecliptic at M and the
then the two parts of the process are inconsistent in this, that
and the other T, at
But neither is
pai ‘ tia mea
Py RA
the one takes as its equatorial point of measurement oO,
the direction of the equator is different.
t correctly found. For, in the spherical triangle PNT, to
eS: + 3x R) : sin PN :: sin PNT : sin PTN
rd terr 1 in this proportion, the Hindus introduce the sine
; ad
cued eee
wei ae
rp
ae
Tr
~ ah

eee A
ow - Sal - —
Strya-Siddhdnta
of the hour-angle, ZPM or MPN, although with a certain modification which
the commentary prescribes, and which makes of it something very near the
angle TPN. The text says simply natajyd, ‘‘ the sine of the hour-angle “
(for nata, see notes to iii. 54-36, and 14-16), but the commentary specifies
that, to find the desired angle in degrees, we must multiply the hour-angle
ir time by 90, and divide by the half-day of the planet. This is equivalent
to making a quadrant of that part of the circle of diurnal revolution which
-; between the horizon and the meridian, or to measuring distances upon
DR as if they were proportional parts of E’Q. To make the Hindu process
correct, the product of this modification should be the angle PN'T, with
which, however, it only coincides at the horizon, where both TPN and TNP
become right-angles, and at the meridian, where both are reduced to nullity.
The error is closely analogous to that involved in the former process, and
is of slight account when latitude is small, as is also the error in substituting
T for O or M when neither the latitude nor the declination is great.
The direction of the ecliptic deflection (dyana valana) is the same,
evidently, with that of the declination a quadrant eastward from the point
in question; thus, in the case illustrated by the figure, it is south. The
direction of the equatorial deflection (@ksha valana) depends upon the
position of the point considered with reference to the meridian, being—in
northern latitudes, which alone the Hindu system contemplates—north
when that point is east of the meridian, and south when west of it, as
specified in verse 24: since, for instance, E/ being the east pomt of the
horizon, the equator at any point between +’ and Q points, eastward, toward
a point north of the prime vertical. In the case for which the figure is
drawn, then, the difference of the two would be the finally resulting detlection. Since, in making the projection of the eclipse, it is laid off as 8
straight line (see the illustration given in connection with chapter vi), it
must be reduced to its value as a sine: and moreover, sinc= it is laid down
“1 a circle of which the radius is 49 digits (see below, vi. 2), OF in which
one digit equals 70’—for 9498! = 49.70’, nearly—that sine ie reduced to its
value in digits by dividing it by 70, . |
The general subject of this passage, the determination of directions
during an eclipse, for the purpose of establishing the positions, upon the
disk of the eclipsed body, of the points of contact, immersion, emergence,
and separation, also engaged the attention of the Greeks; Ptolemy devotes
to it the eleventh and twelfth chapters of the sixth book of his Syntaxis :
his representation of directions, however, and consequently his method of
calculation also, are different from those here exposed.
9%. To the altitude in time (unnata) add a dav and a half,
and divide by a half-day ; by the quotient divide the latitudes and
the disks; the results are the measures of those quantitics in
digits (angula).

Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 161
By this process due account is taken, in the projection of an eclipse,
_ of the apparent increase in magnitude of the heavenly bodies when near
the horizon. The theory lying at the foundation of the rule is this: that
three minutes of are at the horizon, and four at the zenith, are equal to a
digit, the difference between the two, or the excess above three minutes
of the equivalent of a digit at the zenith, being one minute. To ascertain,
then, what will be, at any given altitude, the excess above three minutes of
the equivalent of a digit, we ought properly, according to the commentary,
to make the proportion
R : I’ :: sin altitude : corresp. excess
Since, however, it would be a long and tedious process to find the altitude
and its sine, another and approximative proportion ig substituted for this
+ ~ * by the blessed Sun,’’ as the commentary phrases it, through compassion
- for mankind, and out of regard to the very slight difference between the
tata two.’” It is assumed that the scale of four minutes to the digit will be
always the true one at the noon of the planet in question, or whenever it
> crosses the meridian, although not at the zenith; and so likewise, that the
. relation of the altitude to 90° may be measured by that of the time since
ae rising or until setting (unnata—see above, iii. 37-35) to a half-day. Hence
“2 the proportion becomes
he half-day : I :: altitude im time : corresp. excess
- = . 7 alt. int time
Pe and the excess of the digital equivalent above 3° equals ~~ ra
ie Adding, now, the three minutes, and bringing them into the fractional
ge expression, we have
vs equiv. of digit in minutes ot giveretime = alt. in tine oe.
ee The title of the fourth chapter is candragrahanddhikdra, ** chapter of
hi a dunar eclipses," as that of the fifth is saryagrahanddhikdra, “* chapter of
solar eclipses.’ In truth, however, the processes and explanations of this
-_—— ehapter apply not less to solar than to lunar eclipses, while the next treats
nee only of parallax, as entering into the calculation of a solar eclipse. We
have taken the liberty, therefore, of modifying accordingly the headings
_—s which we have prefixed to the chapters.
ee
Fae ep 9
ne CHAPTER V.
Or PARALLAX IN A SOLAR ECLIPSE.
BME Gis i io parallax in longitude, or no parallax in latitude; 2.
of parallax ; 3, to find the orient-aine: 4-4, the meridian-sine; 5-7, and the
ecliptic zenith-distance and altitude; 7-5, to find the amount, in time, of
< in longitude ; 9, its application in determining the moment of apparen'
) . to find the amount, in arc, of the parallax in latitude; 12-15,

Neg or
wir, 3 oes 7 or et
ee eee ey en ee i
Re 62 oe ~Strya-Siddhanta
gt =" ite application in calculating an eclipse; 14-17, application of the parallax in
raat Fe: longitude in determining the moments of contact, of separation, ete.
ie! 1. When the sun’s place is coincident with the meridian
f
! ecliptic-point Gnadhyalagna), there takes place no parallax in
longitude (harija): farther, when terrestrial latitude (aksha) and
north declination of the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyabha) are
the same, there takes place no parallax in latitude (avanali).
The latter of these specifications is entirely accurate: when the north
declination of that point of the ecliptic which is at the moment upon the
meridian (madhyalagna; see iii. 49) is equal to the observer's latitude—
regarded by the Hindus as always north—the ecliptic itself passes through
the zenith, and becomes a vertical circle; of course, then, the effect of
parallax would be only to depress the body in that circle, not to throw it
out of it. The other is less exact: when the sun is upon the meridian,
there is, indeed, no parallax in right ascension, but there is parallax in
longitude, unless the ecliptic is also bisected by the meridian. Here, as
below, in verses 8 and 9, the text commits the inaccuracy of substituting
the meridian ecliptic-point (L in Fig. 26) for the central or highest point
of the ecliptic (B in the same figure). The latter point, although we are
taught below (vv. 5-7) to calculate the sine and cosine of its zenith-distance,
is not once distinctly mentioned in the text; the commentary calls it
tribhonalagna, ** the orient ecliptic-point (lagna—see above, iil, 46-48: it
is the point C in Fig. 26) less three signs.”’ The commentary points out
this inaccuracy on the part of the text.
In order to illustrate the Hindu method of looking at the subject of
parallax, we make the following citation from the general exposition of it
given by the commentator under this verse: ‘“ At the end of the day of
new moon (amdvdsyd) the sun and
moon have the same longitude; if now,
the moon has no latitude, then a line
drawn from the earth's centre [C in
the accompanying figure] to the sun’s
place [S] just touches the moon
{M]: hence, at the centre, the moon
‘becomes an eclipsing, and the sun an
eclipsed, body, Since, however, men
are not at the earth's centre (garbha,
‘‘ womb "*), but upon the earth's surface (prshtha, “‘ back "'), a line drawn
from the earth's surface [B] up to
the sun does not just touch the moon;
but it cuts the moon's sphere above .
Fig. 24.

de! Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 16?
the point occupied by the moon {at m], and when the moon arrives at
this point, then is she at the earth's surface the eclipser of the sun. But
when the sun is at the zenith (khamadhya, ‘* mid-heaven *'), then the lines
drawn up to the sun from the earth’s centre and surface, being one and the
same, touch the moon, and so the moon becomes an eclipsing body at the
end of the day of new moon. Hence, too, the interval [Mm] of the lines
from the earth’s centre and surface is the parallax (lambana).
. It is evident from this explication how far the Hindu view of parallax
is: coincident with our own, The principle is the same, but its application
is somewhat different. Instead of taking the parallax absolutely, determining that for the sun, which is BSC, and that for the moon, which is
BMC, the Hindus look at the subject practically, as it must be taken
account of in the calculation of an eclipse, and calculate only the difference
of the two parallaxes, which is mBM, or, what is virtually the same thing,
i MCm. The Sirya-Siddhanta, however, a8 we shall see hereafter more
- plainiy, takes no account of any case in which the line CS would not pass
- through M, that is to say, the moon's latitude is neglected, and her
parallax calculated as if she were in the ecliptic.
We cite farther from the commentary, in illustration of the resolution
of the parallax into parallax im longitude and parallax in latitude.
‘* Now by how many degrees, measured on the moon's sphere (gola),
“wa
1 the line drawn from the earth’s surface up to the sun cuts the moon's
=» vertical circle (drgurtta) above the point occupied by the moon—this is,
‘ when the vertical circle and the ecliptic coincide, the moon's parallax in
| longitude (lambana). But when the ecliptic deviates from a vertical circle,
4 then, to the point where the line from the earth's surface cuts the moon's
ty 2 ‘sphere on the moon's vertical circle above the moon fi.e., to m, Fig. 25},
a | draw through the pole of the ecliptic
is Hig. 2 (kadamba) « circle [P/mn'] north and
south to the ecliptic on the moon's
sphere [Mvr’} : and then the east and
west interval [Mn'] on the ecliptic
between the point occupied by the
moon [M] and the point where the
circle as drawn cuts the ecliptic on
' ? the moon's sphere [n’] is the moon's
a Jak : APR me true (splutea) parallax in longitude, im
min rpendicular (koti). And since the moon moves slong
i north and south interval, upon the circle we have
nd the vertical circle [mn] is, in minutes,
which is the base (b/uje). The interval, in
th rele [ZA], between the lines from the earth's
urface [mM], ig the vertical parallax (drglambana), and the

- St ry Sic dhdald a
i . reat a
ae “the cocoate here presented, it will i noticed, is that the moon’s
s path, or the ** eclipti ic on the moon's sphere,”” i is depressed away from CL,
Rae which might be called the *' ecliptic on the sun's sphere,” to an amount
eg measured as latitude by mn’ and as longitude by w/M. To our apprehension,
mnM, rather than mn'M, would be the triangle of resolution: the two are
virtually equal.
a The commentary then goes on farther to explain that when the vertical
circle and the secondary to the ecliptic coincide, the parallax in longitude
oy aes “of =e] _ 4 Je
disappears, the whole vertical parallax becoming parallax in latitude: and — 5
: again, when the vertical circle and the ecliptic coincide, the parallax in
_ Tatitude disappears, the whole vertical parallax becoming parallax in
| longitude.
The term uniformly employ ed by the commentary, and more usually
by the text, to express parallax in longitude, namely lambana, is from the
same root which we have already more than once had occasion to notice
(see above, under i. 25, 60), and means literally ** hanging downward.”
In this verse, as once or twice later (vv. 14, 16), the text uses harija, which
the commentary explains as equivalent io” kshitija, “* produced by the
earth:’’ this does not seem very plausible, but we have nothing better to
suggest. For parallax in latitude the text presents only the term avanati,
‘‘ bending downward, depression:*’ the commentary always substitutes for
it nati, which has nearly the same sense, and is the customary modern term.
2. How parallax in latitude arises by reason of the difference
of place (dega) and time (kdla), and also parallax in longitude
(lambana) from direction (dig) eastward or the contrary—that is
now to be explained. :
This distribution of the three elements of direction, place, and time,
as causes respectively of parallax in longitude and in latitude, is somewhat
arbitrary. ‘The verse is to be taken, however, rather as 4 general introduction to the subject of the chapter, than as a systematic statement of the
causes of parallax. s,
3. Calculate, by the equivalents in oblique ascension Ciaagie x
savas) of the observer's place, the orient ecliptic-point | (lagna) for -
the moment of conjunction (parvavinddyas) : multiply. the sine of
its longitude by the sine of greatest declination, and divide by the —
sine of co-latitude (lamba): the result, is the quantity known as a
the orient-sine (udaya).
The object of this first step in the rather tedious operation of caleulati
the parallax is to find for a given ‘moment—here the ‘moment of ‘a 16
ud -econjunction—tbe sine of amplitude of that point ¢ of the ecliptic which is
ae then upon the eastern horizon. ‘men’ the — rst “place the Benes:
sihakee
ia

<< Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse | 165
: "point (lagna) is determined, by the data and methods taught above, in iii.
46-48, and which are sufficiently explained in the note to that passage:
: then its sine of amplitude is found, by a process which is a combination of
_ that for finding the declination from the longitude, and that for finding the
al periplituds from the declination. Thus, by ti. 28,
a : sin gr. decl.:: sin long.: sin decl.
Coes ene:
sin co-lat.: R :: sin decl.: sin ampl.
es i= ‘combining terms, we have
Bat ai eet tte co-lat.: sin gr. decl.:: sin long.: sin amplay This sine of amplitude receives the technical name of udaya, or
. aiyd = the literal meaning of udaya is simply “* rising.’
vith ah ‘Then, by means of the equivalents in right ascension
ak anko 1ydsavas), find the ecliptic-point (lagna) called that of the
a neri idia 7 (madhya) : of the declination of that point and the latitude
pag i of th 1e observer take the sum, when their direction is the same;
ir otherwise, ‘take their difference.
“t i 5. The result ‘is: the meridian zenith-distance, in degrees
vatang dis) : its sine is Co the meridian-sine
mi adhyajy4). shen
2 i rhe accompanying soa (Fig. 26) will assist the comprehension of
an Let NESW be a horizontal plane, NS
the projection upon it of the meridian,
and EW that of the prime vertical, Z
being the zenith. Let CLT be the
ecliptic. Then C is the orient eclipticpoint (lagna), and CD the sine of its
amplitude (udayajyd), found by the
last process. The meridian ecliptic
point (madhyalagna) is L: it is ascertained by the method prescribed im
iii. 49, above. Its distance from the
zenith is found from its declination
and the latitude of the place of
observation, a5 taught in iii. 20-22;
and the sine of that distance, by
rie ate which, in the figure, it is seen proare called by the wee name madh; aad which we have
Se eeationes ridi ap-sine.’" ao)

Sdrya-Siddhanta
= 5. . . . Multiply the meridian-sine by the orient-sine, and
divide by radius : square the result,
6. And subtract it from the square of the meridian-sine : the
square root of the remainder is the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance
(drkkshepa) ; the square root of the difference of the squares of
that and radius is the sine of ecliptic-altitude (drggati).
Here we are taught how to find the sines of the zenith-distance and
altitude respectively of that point of the ecliptic which has greatest altitude,
or is nearest to the zenith, and which is also the central point of the
portion of the ecliptic above the horizon: it is called by the commentary, as already noticed (see note to v. 1), tribhonalagna. ‘Thus, in the
last figure, if QR be the vertical circle passing through the pole of the
ecliptic, P’, and cutting the ecliptic, CT, in B, B is the central eclipticpoint (tribhonalagna), and the arcs seen projected in ZB and BR are its
venith-distance and altitude respectively. In order, now, to find the sine
of ZB. we first find that of BL, and by the following process. CD is the
orient-sine, already found. But since CZ and CP! are quadrants, © is
a pole of the vertical circle QR, and CR is a quadrant. ES is also a
quadrant: take away their common part CS, and CE remains equal to SR,
and the sine of the latter, SO, is equal to that of the former, CD, the
‘* orient-sine.’” Now, then, ZBL is treated as if it were a plane horizontal
triangle, and similar to ZOS, and the proportion is made
or R : or.-sine :: mer.-sine: BL
This is so far a correct process, that it gives the true sine of the are
BL: for, by spherical trigonometry, in the spherical triangle ZBL, rightangled at B,
sin ZBL : sin BZL :: sin are ZL : sin are BL
or R: 80:: ZL: sin BL
But the third side of a plane right-angled triangle of which the sines
of the arcs ZB and ZL are hypothenuse and perpendicular, is not the sine
of BL. If we conceive the two former sines to be drawn from Z, meeting
in b and | respectively the lines drawn from B and I, to the centre, then
the line joining 67 will be the third side, being plainly less than sin BL.
Hence, on subtracting sin * BL from sin? ZL, and taking the square root
of the remainder, we obtain, not sin ZB, but a less quantity, which may
readily be shown, by spherical trigonometry, to be sin ZB cos BL. The
value, then, of the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkehepa) as determined
by this process, is always less than the truth, and as the corresponding cosine
(drggati) is found by subtracting the square of the sine from that of radius,
and taking the square root of the remainder, its value is always proportionally

ay Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 167
greater than the truth. This inaccuracy is noticed by the commentator,
who points out correctly its reason and nature: probably it was also known
to those who framed the rule, but disregarded, as not sufficient to vitiate
the general character of the process: and it may, indeed, well enough pass
unnoticed among all the other maccuracies involved in the Hindu calculations of the parallax.
) As regards the terms employed to express the sines of ecliptic zenith-
‘distance and altitude, we have already met with the first member of each
compound, drg, literally ~ sight,’’ in other connected uses: as in drgjyd,
iF ‘‘ sine of zenith-distance '’ (see above, iii. 33), drgurtta, © vertical-circle ""
. (commentary to the first verse of this chapter): here it is combined with
words which seem to be rather arbitrarily chosen, to form technical appellations for quantities used only in this process: the literal meaning of kshepa
is “* throwing, hurling; *’ of gati, “* gait, motion.”’
Bi 7. The sine and cosine of meridian zenith-distance (natdngds)
* are the approximate (asphuta) sines of ecliptic zenith-distance and
be altitude (drkkshepa, drqgati). . . .
~ | This is intended as an allowable simplification of the above process
for finding the sines of ecliptic zenith-distance and altitude, by substituting
for them other quantities to which they are nearly equivalent, and which
are easier of ealculation. These are the sines of venith-distance and altitude
of the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna—t. in Fig. 26) the former of
which has already been made an element in the other process, under the
nar e of meridian-sine “ (madhyajya). It might, indeed, from the terms
ee of e text, be doubtful of what point the altitude and yenith-distance were
t Ag to | € taken; g passage cited by the commentator from Bhiskara’s
| ivta-Giromani: (found on page 221 of the published edition of the
adhyaya) directs the sines of zenith-distance and altitude of B (tribhonaen : the sine and cosine of the
hose of ZB in a hasty process: but the
verse 5 for finding the meridian zenithadmit of a doubt that the latter is the
to refer.
substitution is only meant to
: to. ef small amount, or where C has but little
+e
~~ © ews
- Sey
a! the ae | A r : ;
A mis . . . Divide the square of the sine of one sign by the sine
1 that of ecliptic-altitude (drqqatijivd) ; the quotient 1s the
be cheda).
«a
bint
; ee
m~
oe.

ea
_ s t Ic
oe
ae
of _
, Gj me et 3 i. . te ae Ceuta , % Ve, ee a 7
8. _ By this ‘' d visor " divide the sine of the interval between
he meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna) and the sun's place :
th quotient is to be regarded as the parallax in longitude (lambana) of the sun and moon, eastward or westward, in n4dis, ete.
et _- eae : = ve remy
=e The true nature of the process by which this final rule for finding the
parallax in longitude is obtained is altogether hidden from sight under
the form in which the rule is stated. Its method is as follows:
5 We have seen, in connection with the first verse of the preceding
chapter, that the greatest parallaxes of the sun and moon are quite nearly
equivalent to the mean motion of each during 4 nidis. Hence, were both
bodies’ in the horizon, and the ecliptic a vertical circle, the moon would
be depressed in her orbit below the sun to an amount equal to her excess
in motion during 4 nadis.
parallax in longitude. To find what it would be at any other point in the
ecliptic, still considered as a vertical circle, we make the proportion
R : 4 (hor. par.) :: sin zen.-dist.: vert. parallax
This proportion is entirely correct, and in accordance with our
modern rule that, with a given distance, the parallax of a body varies as
the sine of its zenith-distance: whether the Hindus had made a rigorous —
demonstration of its truth, or whether, as in so many other cases, seeing
that the parallax was greatest when the sine of zenith-distance was greatest,
and nothing when this was nothing, they assumed it to vary in the interval
as the sine of zenith-distance, saying “‘ if, with a sine of zenith-distance —
which is equal to radius, the parallax is four nadis, with a given sine of
genith-distance what is it? '"—this we will not venture to determine.
But now is to be considered the farther case in which the ecliptic is
not a vertical circle, but is depressed below the zenith a certain distance,
measured by the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepa), already found.
Here again, noting that the parallax is all to be reckoned as parallax in
longitude when the ecliptic is a vertical circle, or when the sine of eclipticaltitude is greatest, and that it would be only parallax in latitude when
the ecliptic should be a horizontal circle, or when the sine of ecliptic-altitude
should be reduced to nothing, the Hindus assume it to vary in the interval :
as that sine, and accordingly make the proportion: ‘if, with a sine of
ecliptic-altitude that is equal to radius, the parallax in longitude is equal
to the vertical parallax, with any given sine of ecliptic-altitude what 1s it?
—or, inverting the middle terms,
R +: sin eel.-alt.:: vert. parallax : parallax in long. .
But we had before : |
R: 4::; sin zen.-dist. : vert. parallax
Lh ro an
This, then, is the moon's greatest horizontal

Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 169
hence, by combining terms, ¥
R2 - 4 sin ecl.-alt.:: sin zen.-dist.: parallax in long.
For the third term of this proportion, now, is substituted the sine of the
distance of the given point from the central ecliptic-point: that is to say,
Bm (Fig. 26) is substituted for Zm; the two are in fact of equal value only
when they coincide, or else at the horizon, when each becomes a quadrant;
but the error involved in the substitution is yreatly lessened by the circumstance that, as it mereases in proportional amount, the parallax in longitude
itself decreases, until at B tha latter is reduced to nullity, as is the vertical
parallax at 7. The text, indeed, as in verses 1 and 9, puts madhyalagna,
L, for tribhonalagna, B, in reckoning this distance: but the commentary,
without ceremony or apology, reads the latter for the former. These substitutions being made, and the proportion being reduced to the form of an
equation, we have
sin dist. x 4 sin ecl.-alt.
R®
par. in long. =
which reduces to
sin dist. ae sin dist.
R* +4 sin ecl.-alt- 4R*+ain ecl.-alt.
and since }R2=(4R)?, and }R=sin 30°, we have finally
. sin dist.
sin* 30° +ain ecl.-alt.
which is the rule given in the text. To the denominator of the fraction,
in its final form, is given the technical name of cheda, ** divisor,”" which
word we have had before similarly used, to designate one of the factors in
4 complicated operation (see above, iii. 35, 38).
We will now examine the correctness of the second principal proportion
from which the rule is deduced. It is, in terms of the last figure (Fig. 26),
R : sin ZP’! (=BR) :: mM © mn
Assuming the equality of the little triangles Mmn and Mmn’, and accordingly that of the angles mMn and Mmn’, which latter equals ZmP’, we have,
by spherical trigonometry, as 4 true proportion,
sin mn'M : sin Mmn’ :: mM =: mn!
or R : sin ZmP! :: mM = mn
Hence the former proportion is correct only when sin ZP’ and sin ZmP’
are equal; that is to say, when ZP! measures the angle ZmP’; and this can
‘be the case only when Zm, a5 well as P’m, is a quadrant, or when m is on
“a the 1 . Here again, however, precisely as in the case last noticed,
the importance of the error is kept within very narrow limits by the fact
par. in long.”
that, as its relative consequence increases, the amount of the parallax in
ted by, it diminishes.

_. yy
a
a
low | <=
Ps : When |
n De - ia , -
The text so pertinaciously reads ‘* meridian ecliptic-point '' (madhyalagna) where we should expect, and ought to have, *' central ecliptic-point "'
(tribhonalagna), that we are almost ready to suspect it of meaning to designate the latter point by the former name. It is sufficiently clear that,
whenever the sun and moon are to the eastward of the central eclipticpoint, the effect of the parallax in longitude will be to throw the moon
forward on her orbit beyond the sun, and so to cause the time of apparent
to precede that of real conjunction; and the contrary. Hence, in the eastern
hemisphere, the parallax, in time, is subtractive, while in the western it is
additive. But a single calculation and application of the correction for
parallax is not enough; the moment of apparent conjunction must be found
by a series of successive approximations: since if, for instance, the moment
of true conjunction is 25" 2*, and the calculated parallax in longitude for
that moment is 2° 21, the apparent end of the lumar day will not be at
27» 28%, because at the latter time the parallax will be greater than
2° 21°, deferring accordingly still farther the time of conjunction; and so on.
The commentary explains the method of procedure more fully, as follows:
for the moment of true conjunction in longitude calculate the parallax in
longitude, and apply it to that moment: for the time thus found calculate
the parallax anew, and apply it to the moment of true conjunction: again,
for the time found as the result of this process, calevlate the parallax, and
apply it as before; and so proceed, until a moment is arrived at, at which
the difference in actual longitude, according to the motions of the two
planets, will just equal and counterbalance the parallax in longitude.
The accuracy of this approximative process cannot but be somewhat
impaired by the circumstance that, while the parallax is reckoned in difference of mean motions, the corrections of longitude must be made in true
motions. Indeed, the reckoning of the horizontal parallax in- time as 4
nadis, whatever be the rate of motion of the sun and moon, is one of the
most palpable among the many errors which the Hindu process involves.
To ascertain the moment of apparent conjunction in longitude, only.
the parallax in longitude requires to be known; but to determine the time
of occurrence of the other phases of the eclipse, it is necessary to take into
- gecount the parallax in latitude, the ascertainment of which is accordingly =
made the subject of the next rule.
10. If the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepa) be
multiplied by the difference of the mean motions of the sun and — 3
<.. « Ae ; sigh”
wiles Se =

Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 171
Fide thbor,. and divided by fifteen times radius, the result will be the
‘ parallax in latitude (avanati). ad
As the sun’s greatest parallax is equal to the fifteenth part of his
- mean daily motion, and that of the moon to the fifteenth part of hers (see
note to iv. 1, above), the excess of the moon's parallax over that of the
sun is equal, when greatest, to one fifteenth of the difference of their respective mean daily motions. This will be the value of the parallax in latitude
when the ecliptic coincides with the horizon, or when the sine of ecliptic
“zeni ith-distance becomes equal to radius. On the other hand, the parallax
in latitude disappears when this same sine is reduced to nullity. Hence it
=. ‘is to be regarded as varying with the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance, and,
MTT in order to find its value at any given point, we say “‘ if, with a sine of
sales genith- distance which is equal to radius, the parallax in latitude is
tone. fifteenth of the difference of mean daily motions, with a given sine of
_ ecliptic # zenith. distance what is it?’” or ,
: diff. of mean m.+15 : : sin ecl. zen.-dist. ; 2K uy in lat.
aa 2d a This proportion, it is evident, would give with entire correctness the
paralla at the central ecliptic-point (B in Fig. 26), where the whole vertical
— ‘ parallax, is” to be reckoned as parallax in latitude. But the rule given in
— on text: also assumes that, with a given position of the ecliptic, the parallax
a4 wis in lati titude i: is the same at any point in the ecliptic, Of this the commentary
as no demonstration, but it is essentially true. For, regarding the little
triangle Mmn as a plane triangle, right-angled at nm, and with its angle
sieht. nequal: to the angle ZmB, we have
are R: sin ZmB :: Mm : Mn
an the aphatical triangle ZmB, right-angled at B,
_ Tt Bees et pie sin ZmB :: sin Zm : sin ZB
Ace, by equality of ratios,
= pip ele! 9 sin Zm : sin ZB :: Mm : Mn
ia ca rD 4 |
: et as before shown, |
7 = R: sin Zim: - gr. parallax : Mm
d by ‘combining terms, |
: 6 : Re: sin ZB :: ger. parallox : Mn
Sig te: aay: whatever be the position of m, the point for w ‘hich =
of the
al fe Gates i is sought, this will be equal to the product
hah. pall into the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance, divided by radius:
catest parallax equals the difference of mean motions divided
t. = diff. of m. m. 15 = sin ec), Zen. -dist. =x diff. of m. ™.
aiaf. * : o 5

Stirya-Siddhdnta
ae
af The -next verse teaches more summary methods of ‘arriving abs she
a quantity.
a ii. Or, the parallax in latitude is the quotient ariaing from
dividing the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepa) by seventy,
or, from multiplying it by forty-nine, and dividing it by radius.
- In the expression given above fon the value of the parallax in latitude,
all the terms are constant excepting the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance.
The difference of the mean daily motions is 731’ 27", and fifteen times
to which the expressions given in the text are sufficiently near approximations.
12. The parallax in latitude is to be regarded as south or
north according to the direction of the meridian-sine (madhyajya).
When it and the moon’s latitude are of like direction, take their
sum; otherwise, their difference :
13. With this calculate the half-duration (sthiti), half total
obscuration (vimarda), amount of obscuration (qgrdsa), etc., in the
manner already taught ; likewise the scale of projection (pramdna),
the deflection (valana), the required amount of obscuration, ete.,
as in the case of a lunar eclipse.
In ascertaining the true time of occurrence of the various phases of
a solar eclipse, as determined by the parallax of the given point of observation, we are taught first to make the whole correction for parallax in
latitude, and then afterward to apply that for parallax in longitude. The
former part of the process is succinctly taught in verses 12 and 13: the rules
for the other follow in the next passage. The language of the text, as
usual, is by no means so clear and explicit as could be wished. ‘Thus, in
the case before us, we sre not taught whether, as the first step in this
process of correction, we are to calculate the moon's parallax in latitude
for the time of true conjunction (tithyanta, <' end of the lumar day "’), or
for that of apparent conjunction (madhyagrahana, *‘ middle of the
eclipse “'). It might be supposed that, as we have thus far only had in
the text directions for finding the sine and cosine of ecliptic zenith-distance
at the moment of true conjunction, the former of them was to be used in
the calculations of verses 10 and 11, and the result from it, which would
be the parallax at the moment of true conjunction, applied here as the
correction needed. Nor, so far as we have been able to discover, does the
commentator expound what is the true meaning of the text upon this point.
It is sufficiently evident, however, that the moment of apparent conjunc-

Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 173
tion is the time required. We have found, by a process of successive approximation, at what time (see Fig. 25), the moon (her latitude being neglected)
being at m and the sun at n the parallax in longitude and the difference of
true longitude will both be the same quantity, mn, and 80, when apparent
conjunction will take place. Now, to know the distance of the two centres
at that moment, we require to ascertain the parallax in latitude, nM, for
the moon at m, and to apply it to the moon's latitude when in the same
position, taking their sum when their direction is the same, and their
difference when their direction is different, as prescribed by the text;
the net result will be the distance required. The commentary, it may be
remarked, expressly states that the moon's latitude is to be calculated in
this operation for the time of apparent conjunction (madhyagrahana). The
distance thus found will determine the amount of greatest obscuration, and
, the character of the eclipse, as taught in verse 10 of the preceding chapter.
It is then farther to be taken as the foundation of precisely such a process
as that described in verses 12-15 of the same chapter, in order to ascertain
the half-time of duration, or of total obscuration : that is to say, the distance
in latitude of the two centres being first assumed as invariable through the
whole duration of the eclipse, the half-time of duration, and the resulting
moments of contact and separation are to be ascertained: for these moments
the latitude and parallax in latitude are to be calculated anew, and by them
a new determination of the times of contact and separation is to be made,
and so on, until these are fixed with the degree of accuracy required. If the
eclipse be total, a similar operation must be gone through with to ascertain
the moments of immersion and emergence. No account is made, it will be
noticed, of the possible occurrence of an annular eclipse.
The intervals thus found, after correction for parallax in latitude only,
between the middle of the eclipse and the moments of contact and separation respectively, are those which are called in the last chapter (vv. 19, 23),
the ** mean half-duration " (madhyasthityardha).
In this process for finding the net result, as apparent latitude, of the
actual latitude and the parallax in latitude, is brought out with distinctness
the inaccuracy already alluded to; that, whatever be the moon's actual
latitude, her parallax is always calculated as if she were in the ecliptic. In
an eclipse, however, to which case alone the Hindu processes are intended
to be applied, the moon's latitude can never be of any considerable amount.
ih ‘fhe propriety of determining the direction of the parallax in latitude
by means of that of the meridian-sine (ZL in Fig. 26), of which the
we direction is established as south or north by the process of its calculation,
is too evident to call for remark. “CUE
Bee, Pi, ben In verse 13 is given a somewhat confused specification of matters
~ ‘which are, indeed, affected by the parallax in latitude, but in different
« “modes an degrees. The amount of greatest obscuration, and the (mean)
hal times of duration and total obscuration, are the quantities directly
SS

e
y oe valid is ee, i i> he
as - tg ales hee Ven Peace. | Tic oe eee OTE aa eee
— dit Sttrya-Siddhanta
a4 > fim
r as al
true half-duration, as found by the rules stated in the following passage:
_ while the scale of projection and the deflection are affected by parallax
only so far as this alters the time of occurrence of the phases of the eclipse.
14. For the end of the lunar day, diminished and increased
by the half-duration, as formerly, calculate again the parallax in
longitude for the times of contact (grdsa) and of separation
(moksha), and find the difference between these and the parallax
in longitude (harija) for the middle of the eclipse.
15. If, in the eastern hemisphere, the parallax in longitude
for the contact is greater than that for the middle, and that for
the separation less ; and if, in the western hemisphere, the contrary
is the case— .
16. Then the difference of parallax in longitude is to be added
to the half-duration on the side of separation, and likewise on that
of contact (pragrahana); when the contrary is true, it is to be
subtracted. :
17. These rules are given for cases where the two parallaxes
are in the same hemisphere: where they are in different hemispheres, the sum of the parallaxes in longitude is to be added to
the corresponding half-duration. The principles here stated apply
also to the half-time of total obscuration.
We are supposed to have ascertained, by the preceding process, the
true amount of apparent latitude at the moments of first and last contact
of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies, and consequently to have determined
the dimensions of the triangle—corresponding, in a solar eclipse, to CGP,
Fig. 21, in o lunar—made up of the latitude, the distance in longitude,
and the sum of the two radii. The question now is how the duration of
the eclipse will be affected by the parallax in longitude. If this parallax
remained constant during the continuance of the eclipse, its effect would
be nothing: and, having once determined by it the time of apparent con- —
junction, we should not need to take it farther into account. But it varies
from moment to moment, and the effect of ite variation is to prolong the
duration of every part of a visible eclipse. For, to the east of the central
ecliptic-point, it throws the moon's
hastening ul the p : bide tee
which is all the time decreasing, so that it hastens the beginning
f the
> Th
n’s disk forward upon that of the sun, thus —
ing the occurrence of all the phases of the eclipse, but by an amount |
ee _ dependent upon the calculation of that parallax, as here presented: to
: ‘’ find the amount of obscuration at a given moment—as also the time corres-
° ponding to a given amount of obscuration—we require to know also the

Of Parallax in a Solar Eclipse 175
eclipse more than the middle, and the middle more than the close: to the
west of that same point, on the other hand, it depresses the moon's disk
away from the sun’s, but by an amount constantly increasing, so that it
: retards the end of the eclipse more than ita middle, and its middle more
ee than its beginning. The effect of the parallax in longitude, then, upon
- each half-duration of the eclipse, will be measured by the difference between
ss its retarding and accelerating effects upon contact and conjunction, and upon
ee - conjunction and separation, respectively: and the amount of this difference
A, | will always be additive to the time of half-duration as otherwise determined,
b
i. a orf: however, contact and conjunction, or conjunction and separation, take
Ls place upon opposite sides of the point of no parallax in longitude, then the
gum of the two parallactic effects, instead of their difference, will be to be
added to the corresponding half-duration: since the one, on the east, will
hasten the occurrence of the former phase, while the other, on the west,
ss will defer the occurrence of the latter phase. The amount of the parallax
ie >= tn: longitude for the middle of the eclipse has already been found; if, now,
i. ave farther determine its amount—reckoned, it will be remembered, always
Tate in time—for the moments of contact and separation, and add the difference
te or the sum of each of these and the parallax for the moment of conjunction
Ph as to the corresponding. half-duration as previously determined, we shall have
zs the true times of half-duration. In order to find the parallax for contact
i hy and separation, we repeat the same process (see above, v. 9) by which that
es for conjunction was found: as we then started from the moment of true
ss eonjunetion, and, by a series of successive approximations, ascertained the
1 2 time when the difference of longitude would equal the parallax in longitude,
=e. *. go now we start from two moments removed from that of true conjunction
by the equivalents in time of the two distances in longitude obtained by
{3H the last process, and, by a similar series of successive approximations, AScer
tain ne times when the differences of longitude, together with the parallax,
ae will equal those distances in longitude.
«$s «Tn the process, as thus conducted, there is an evident inaccurney” It
eee t eno the whole correction for parallax in latitude, and
ee longitude, since, by reason of the change effected
« of contact and separation, # new calculation of
: ) ealeulation of the
ri?
Pa
| ae This was doubtless known to the
NOs ‘but passed over by them, on account of the excessiveae : of the complete calculation, and because the accuracy
| obtain was not sensibly affected by its neglect.
why the specifications of verse 15 are
. tical instead of positive, and why, in the latter half of ‘verse
supposed which never arises. The commentator anticipates
‘takes much pains to remove it: it is not worth while to
s
rs
tion,
és er
ye ~<
rd ptt Teeth,
‘ a aa a
MEE a

<x aa wi
- Stirya-Siddhdanta
follow his different pleas, which amount to no real explanation, saving
to notice his last suggestion, that, in case an eclipse begins before sunrise,
the parallax for its earlier phase or phases, as calculated according to the
distance in time from the lower meridian, may be less than for its later
phases—and the contrary, when the eclipse ends after sunset. This may
possibly be the true explanation, although we are justly surprised at finding
a case of so little practical consequence, and to which no allusion has been
made in the previous processes, here taken into account.
The text, it may be remarked, by its use of the terms ‘* eastern and
western hemispheres "’ (kapdla, literally ‘“ cup, vessel °’), repeats once more
its substitution of the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna) for the central
ecliptic-point (tribhonalagna), as that of no parallax in longitude; the
meridian forming the only proper and recognized division of the heavens
into an eastern and a western hemisphere.
We are now prepared to see the reason of the special directions given
in verses 19 and 23 of the last chapter, respecting the reduction, in a solar
eclipse, of distance in time from the middle of the eclipse to distance in
longitude of the two centres. The “ mean half-duration "' (madhyasthityardha) of the eclipse is the time during which the true distance of the
eentres at the moments of contact or separation, as found by the process
prescribed in verses 12 and 13 of this chapter, would be gained by the moon
with her actual excess of motion, leaving out of account the variation of
parallax in longitude: the ~ true half-duration '’ (sphutasthityardha) is the
increased time in which, owing to that variation, the same distance in
longitude is actually gained by the moon, the effect of the parallax being
equivalent either to 4 diminution of the moon’s excess of motion, or to a
protraction of the distance of the two centers—both of them in the ratio
of the true to the mean half-duration. If then, for instance, it be required
to know what will be the amount of obscuration of the sun half an hour
after the first contact, we shall first eubtract this interval from the true
half-duration before conjunction; the remainder will be the actual interval
to the middle of the eclipse: this interval, then, we shall reduce to its
value as distance in longitude by diminishing it, either before or after its
reduction to minutes of arc, in the ratio of the true to the mean halfduration. The rest of the process will be performed precisely os in the
€ the moon’s distance—the estimation of its value in time made always
qosording to mean motions, whatever be the true motions of the planets

in a Solar Eclipse 1i7
the moment—the neglect, in calculating the amount of parallax, of the
«Tag eee eeprom pare
Icul which have been pointed out in the notes, render it impossible
the results obtained should ever be more than a rude approximation
: | sr illustration of the subject of solar eclipses, as exposed in
this | the preceding chapters, we present, in the Appendix, a full calcula-
: cn of tho eine of May 20th, 1804 mainly as made for the translator,
4 ng h s residence in India, by a native astronomer.

body.
CHAPTER VI.
OF THE PROJECTION OF ECLIPSES.
Corrents :—1, walue of o projection; 2-4, genera) directions; 5-6, how to lay off the
deflection and latitude for the besinning and end of the eclipse; 7, to exhibit the
points of contact and separation; 8-10, how to lny off the deflection and latitude
for the middle of the eclipse ; 11, to show the amount of greatest obscuration; 12,
reversal of directiona in the western hemisphere; 15, least amount of obscuration
observable: 14-16, to draw the path of the eclipsing body; 17-19, to show the
amount of obscuration at a given time; 20-22, to exhibit the points of immersion
and emergence in a total eclipse; 23, color of the part of the moon obscured; 24, —
caution as to communicating a knowledge of these matters.
1. Since, without a projection (chedyaka), the precise
(sphuta) differences of the two eclipses are not understood, I shall
proceed to explain the exalted doctrine of the projection.
The term chedyaka is from the root chid, ** split, divide, sunder, a
and indicates, as here applied, the instrumentality by which distinctive
differences are rendered evident. The name of the chapter, parilekhadhikira, is not taken from this word, but from parilekha, “ delineation,
figure,’’ which occurs once below, in the eighth verse.
2. Having fixed, upon a well prepared surface, a point, des- ce
cribe from it, in the first place, with a radius of forty-nine digits
(angula), a circle for the deflection (valana) : ’ ce
3 Then a second circle, with a radius equal to half the sum | a 79
of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies ; this: is called the aggregate- — .
circle (samdsa); then a third, with a radius equal to half the eclipsed _
4. The determination of the icenkions north, south, east,
and west, is as formerly. In a lunar eclipse, contact: pees
takes place on the east, and separation: ahs) on the west;ina
solar eclipse, the contrary. a4
=A
_ The lease: circle, drawn with ft gee pores feet, is ‘used ny
na) of ‘ecliptic from an east and
ve Gv. 3 a sta tne of this def lectio 1
2S ol

ca” vee
ing. Py
¥ Of the Projection of Eclipses 179
by seventy its value in minutes. The second circle is employed (see
below, vv. 6, 7) in determining the points of contact and separation. The
third represents the eclipsed body itself, always maintaining a fixed position in the centre of the figure, even though, in a lunar eclipse, it is the
body which itself moves, relatively to the eclipsing shadow. For the scale
by which the measures of the eclipsed and eclipsing bodies, the latitudes,
ic ete., are determined, see above, iv. 26. )
; The method of laying down the cardinal directions is the same with
‘hat used in constructing a dial; it is described in the first passage of the
mt third chapter (iii, 1-4).
hee 4 The specifications of the latter half of verse 4 apply to the eclipsed
body, designating upon which side of it obscuration will commence and
‘terminate.
ag 5. In a lunar eclipse, the deflection (valana) for the contact is to be laid off in its own proper direction, but that for the
separation in reverse; in an eclipse of the sun, the contrary is the
e | The accompanying figure (Fig. 27) will illustrate the Hindu method
of exhibiting, by a projection, the various phases of an eclipse. Its
\ . conditions are those of the lunar eclipse of Feb. 6th, 1860, as determined
by the data and methods of this treatise: for the calculation see the Apmeres Let M be the centre of the figure and the place of the moon, and
ae NS and EW be the circles of direction drawn through the moon's
centre; the former representing (see above, under iv. 24, 25) a great circle
drawn through the | north and south points of the horizon, the latter a small
e parallel | ‘to the prime vertical. In explanation of the manner in
which these directions are presented by the figure, we would remark that
4 we have adapted — it to a supposed position of the observer on the north
od i si je of his projection, as at N, and looking southw ard—a position which,
: 1 in < our. latitude, he would naturally assume, for the purpose of
oom paring: e actual phases of the eclipse, as they occurred,
er 23
Si jelineation of them. The heavier circle, ll’, is that
wn with h the sum of the semi-diameters, or the ‘‘ aggregate-circle;"’
| ssh e outer one, NESW, is that for the deflection. This, in order to
e size of the whole figure, we have drawn upon a seale very much
a tbat prescribed ; its relative dimensions being a matter of no
natever, provided the sine of the deflection be made comwit its radius. In our own, or the Greek, method of laying off
Be ie ular value, the radius of the circle of deflection would also
tter of indiffer ence: the Hindus, ignoring angular measurements,
wkward and bungling method of laying off the are by
ho '
) al
‘ee +

ae
im Boe ie
tS elias
a We >
means of its « sine. Let vw equal the deflection, calculated for the moment
ef contact, expressed as a cine, and i in terms of a circle in which EM is
radius. Now, as the moon's contact with the shadow takes place upon
i “her eastern limb, the deflection. for the contact must be laid off from the
east point of the circle; and, as the calculated direction of the deflection indicates in what way the ecliptic. is pointing eastwardly, it must be laid
off from E in its own proper direction. In the case illustrated, the deflection for the contact is north: hence we lay it off northward from E, and
then the line drawn from M to v, its extremity—which line represents the
direction of the ecliptic at the ioniint—point northward. Again, upon
the side of separation—which, for the moon, is the western side—we day
off the deflection for the moment of separation : but we lay it off from W in
the reverse of its true direction, in order that the line from its extremity
Fig. 27.
Sa
to the centre may truly represent t the Seca of the enliptio: ‘Thus, ind
eclipse figured, the deflection for se aration is” ‘south ; we lay it off hward from W, and shes! the lin line ne A pot | ees M, southward, Ing

Of the Projection of Eclipses 181
eolar eclipse, in which, since the sun’s western limb is the first eclipsed
the deflection for contact must be laid off from W, and that for awpataticns
from E, the direction of the former requires to be reversed, and that of
the latter to be maintained as calculated.
6. From the extremity of either deflection draw a line to the
centre : from the point where that cuts the ageregate-circle
(samdsa) are to be laid off the latitudes of contact and of separation.
| 7. From the extremity of the latitude, again, draw a line to
the central point : where that, in either case, touches the eclipsed
body, there point out the contact and separation.
8. Always, in a solar eclipse, the latitudes are to be drawn
in the figure (parilekha) in their proper direction; in a lunar eclipse, in the opposite direction....
The lines vM and v'M, drawn from v and v’, the extremities of the
rines or ares which measure the deflection, to the centre of the figure, represent, as already noticed, the direction of the ecliptic with reference to
an east and west line at the moments of contact and separation. From
"ot them, accordingly, and at right angles to them, are to be laid off the values
; of the moon’s latitude at those moments. Owing, however, to the principle
adopted in the projection, of regarding the eclipsed body as fixed in the
centre of the figure, and the eclipsing body as passing over it, the lines
. yM and v/M do not, in the case of a lunar eclipse, represent the ecliptic itself, in which is the centre of the shadow, but the small circle of latitude,
in which is the moon’s centre: hence, in laying off the moon's latitude to
determine the centre of the shadow, we reverse its direction. Thus, in
the case illustrated, the moon's latitude is always south: we lay off, then,
the lines kl and i'l’, representing its value at the moments of contact and
aration, northward: they are, like the deflection, drawn as sines, and in
— such manner that their extremities, 2 and I’, are in the aggregate-circle :
ae =t ‘then since IM and UM are each equal to the sum of the two semi-diameters,
aan and lk and Uk’ to the latitudes, KM and k’/M will represent the distances of
wi the centres in longitude, and l and I’ the places of the centre of the shadow,
b and upon describing circles from { and I’, with
‘ad | equal to the semi-diameter of the shadow, the points ¢ and s, where
he uc h the disk of the moon, will be the points of first and last contact:
is being : the points where IM and UM meet
ne et

-- Stirya-Siddhanta — ,
ee | } = ccnp ) | al -
_ _ 8.......In accordance with this, then, for the middle of the
eclipse,
Pee... 8: The deflection is to be laid off—eastward, when it and the
: latitude are of the same direction; when they are of different directions, it is to be laid off westward : this is for a lunar eclipse; in a
solar, the contrary is the case. .
10. From the end of the deflection, again, draw a line to the
centra) point, and upon this line of the middle lay off the latitude,
in the direction of the deflection.
11. From the extremity of the latitude describe a circle with
a radius equal to half the measure of the eclipsing body: whatever of the disk of the eclipsed body is enclosed within that circle,
so much is swallowed up by the darkness (tamas).
The phraseology of the text in this passage is somewhat intricate and
obseure; it is fully explained by the commentary, as, indeed, its meaning
i¢ also deducible with sufficient clearness from the conditions of the problem sought to be solved. It is required to represent the deflection of the
ecliptic from an east and west line at the moment of greatest obscuration,
and to fix the position of the centre of the eclipsing body at that moment.
Vhe deflection is this time to be determined by a secondary to the ecliptic,
drawn from near the north or south point of the figure. The first question
is, from which of these two points shall the deflection be laid off, and the
line to the centre drawn. Now since, according to verse 10, the latitude
itself isc to be measured upon the line of deflection, the latter must be
drawn southward or northward according to the direction in which the
latitude is to be laid off. And this is the meaning of the last part of verse
8; ‘* in accordance,”’ namely, with the direction in which, according to the
previous part of the verse, the latitude is to be drawn. But again, in
which direction from the north or south point, as thus determined, shall
the deflection be measured? This must, of course, be determined by the
direction of the deflection itself: if south, it must obviously be measured —
east from the north point and west from the south point; if north, the
contrary. The rules of the text are in accordance with this, although the
determining circumstance is made to be the agreement or non-agreement,
im respect to direction, of the deflection with the moon's latitude—the — "
latter being this time reckoned im its own proper direction, and not, in a
ss funar eclipse, reversed. Thus, in the case for which the fi ure is drawn, yh
OG lenge eerie memrstaeteaa ae hrs sete uinarsaeeinge or en egee
the deflection, vw", is ured f rin point; a8 demection and %
| faticude are both south, it fe measured eaut from N. Tn an eclipno of the
= .s 5 é 4 vi te “_~ ; Se em
oe,

Of the Projection of Eclipses 183
ws sun, on the other hand, the moon's latitude would, if north, be laid off
a Se northward, as in the figure, and hence also, the deflection would be
measured from the north point: but it would be measured eastward, if its
7 own direction were south, or disagreed with that of the latitude.
ea The line of deflection, which is Mv" in the figure, being drawn, and
having the direction of a perpendicular to the ecliptic at the moment of
icon opposition, the moon's latitude for that moment, MI", is laid off directly
. ty - upon it. The point I” is, accordingly, the position of the centre of the
a 2 shadow at the middle of the eclipse, and if from that centre, with a radius
equal to the semi-diameter of the eclipsing body, a circle be drawn, it will
include so much of the disk of the eclipsed body as is covered when the
obscuration is greatest. In the figure the eclipse is shown as total, the
Hindu calculations making it so, although, in fact, it is only a partial
12. + ‘By the wise man who draws the projection (chedyaka),
upon the ground or upon a board, a reversal of directions 1s _ to
be made in the eastern and western hemispheres.
uy This verse is inserted here in order to remove the objection that, in the
ace es eastern hemisphere, indeed, all takes place as stated, but, if the eclipse ocss gurs west of the meridian, the stated directions require to be all of them
reversed. In order to understand. this objection, we must take notice of
in and literal meaning of the Sanskrit words which designate the
i a ‘directions. The face of the observer is supposed always to be eastthen “' east ”' is prac, ** forward, toward the front oe. ** weat "" is
backward, toward the rear’; ‘‘ south" is dakshina, “* on the
‘north "' is uttara, ** upward “ (i.c., probably, toward the mounp the course of the rivers in north-western India). These words
$i tet
as
It is ces ‘to point out that this objection is one of the most
’ olous ‘and hair-splitting character, and its removal by the text « waste
trouble err s in question have fully acquired in the language an
ig, as indicating directions in space, without regard to the
‘ Ph. Ld
' onl ted
ol A. ate

ig
is
» q wf coed 7 * ul bad
| subtract the amount of obscuration tion, as
a Vs = .
al
13. Owing to her clearness, even the twelfth part of the moon:
when eclipsed (grasta), is observable; but, owing to his piercing
brilliancy, even three minutes of the sun, when eclipsed, are not
observable. °
The commentator regards the negative which is expressed in the
latter half of this verse as also implied in the former, the meaning being
that an obscuration of the moon's disk extending over only the twelfth
part of it does not make itself apparent. We have preferred the interpretation given above, as being better accordant both with the plain and simple
construction of the text and with fact.
14. At the extremities of the latitudes make three points of
corresponding names; then, between that of the contact and
that of the middle, and likewise between that of the separation and
that of the middle,
15. Describe two fish-figures (matsya): from the middle of
these having drawn out two lines projecting through the mouth
end tail, wherever their intersection takes place,
16. There, with a line touching the three points, describe an
arc: that is called the path of the eclipsing body, upon which
the latter will move forward. As
The deflection and the latitude of | ‘three points in the continuance of os
the eclipse heaving been determined and laid down upon the projection, it =
if deemed unnecessary to take the same trouble with regard to any other WG
points, these three being sufficient to determine the path of the eclipsing ya
body: accordingly, an are of # circle is drawn through them, and is regard- — ‘
ed as representing that path. The method of describing the are is the © a $i
same with that which has already been more than once employed (see sts
above, iii. 1-4, 41-42): it is explained here with somewhat more fullness — 1
than before. Thus, in the figure, I, ", and ’ are the three’ extremities of © r
the moon’s latitude, at the moments of r contact, opposition, and | separation, — ee
respectively : we join HH", vl, and upon these lines describe: fish-figures: (see |
note to iii, 1-5); their two extremities (‘‘ mou and ‘‘ tail ’’) are indi- :
cated by the intersecting dotted lines in the pees then, at the point, not Beery)
included in the figure, where the lines drawn through them meet one a another, ia
is the centre of a circle passing through ie and I. ¢ Agi mS ae d
17. From half the sum of the clipeed ata gar Bar
time : take a little stick equal: oe
from the central point, =
out - - A
f

Of the Projection of Eclipses 185
——«-:18. Lay it off toward the path upon either side—when the
time is before that of greatest obscuration, toward the side of
contact; when the obscuration is decreasing, in the direction of
__- separation—and where the stick and the path of the eclipsing
body
c's Fs
is oH 19. Meet one another, from that point describe a circle with a
radius equal to half the eclipsing body : whatever of the eclipsed
: body is included within it, that points out as swallowed up by
_ the darkness (tamas).
«90. :~=«‘Take a little stick equal to half the difference of the
a,
“eS m sasures (mdna), and lay it off in the direction of contact, calling
ié the stick of immersion (nimilana) : where it touches the path,
| ede From that point, with a radius equal to half the eclipsing»
im boc 73 draw a circle, as-in the former case : where this meets the
circle of the eclipsed body, there immersion takes place.
Ope 22> Bb also for the emergence (unmilana), lay it off in the
direction of separation, and describe a circle, as before: it will
5. _ show the point of emergence in the manner explained.
a ‘The method of these processes is so clear as to call for no detailed
nF = exp anation. The centre of the eclipsing body being supposed to be always
NS n the are IT, drawn as directed in the last passage, we have only to fix
a point in this are which shall be at a distance from M corresponding to
calcul ted distance of the centres at the given time, and from that
describe a circle of the dimensions of the eclipsed body, andthe
vill bi . a representation of the then phase of the eclipse. If the
int, thus i d be distant from M by the difference of the two semimeters, as Mi’, Me’, the circles described will touch the disk of the
at the points of immersion and emergence, i and ¢.
rT part, obscured, when less than half, will be dusky
“when. more thi f, it will be black ; wl rg
whe 1 more th » half, it will be black ; when eme rga s copper-color (irshnatdmra) ; when the obscuration
A ee
4 a en ae ds the important circumstance, omitted in the
text, that the moon alon » is here spoken of: no specification being added
wit rofe ence > the s n, because, in a solar eclipse, the part obscured is
; -— rappin J ‘ =
in a 4 oo yy
tury A _&. ,
able place might have been found for this verse in the
: it hi a nothing to do with the projection of an eclipse.

TS =,
J
wal _
> gp Pm a
J e
a ; The commentary ars taniie by this mystery, which is to ve kept
with so jealous care, the Imowledge of the subject of this chapter, the delineation of an eclipse, and not the general subject of eclipses, as treated in
the past three chapters. It seems a little curious to find a matter of so
—s- wubordinate consequence heralded so pompously in the first verse of the
chapter, and guarded so cautiously at its close, ~

CHAPTER VIL.
Or PLANETARY CONJUNCTIONS.
SS ears ‘tll, general classification of planetary conjunctions; 2-6, method of determining
a * at what point on the ecliptic, and at what time, two planets will come to have
the same longitude; 7-10, how to find the point on the ecliptic to which o planet,
shaving latitude, will be referred by a circle passing through the north and south
pointe of the horizon; 11, when o planet must be so referred; 12, how to ascertain
the interval between two planets when in conjunction upon such 6s sorth and south
Hine ; 13-14, dimensions of the lesser planets; 15-18, modes of exhibiting the
“coincidence — between the calculated and actual places of the planets; 18-20,
- definition of different kinds of conjunction; 20-21, when 4 planet, in conjunction,
Se anquished | or victor; 22. farther definition of different kinds of conjunction;
eek a3, psi prevalence of Venus in o conjunction; 23, planetary conjunctions with
- ar _ the moon; 24, conjunctions apparent only; why calculated.
a
. Of the star-planets there take place, with one another,
ier (yuddha) and conjunction (samdgama) ; with the moon,
netion (samdgama); with the sun, heliacal setting
ise a
o ates dia pinnets ** (tdrdgraha) are, of course, the five lesser planets,
(exc xelt a i ive of the won and moon, Their conjunctions with one another and
vit I with the asterisms (nakshatra), and with the sun, are the
acid
| and the ¢ two following chapters.
L idea of ‘* conjunction | ** various terms are indifferently
ter, as samdgama, ‘coming together,”” samyoya,
gay ae junction "* (in viii, 14, also, melaka, ‘* meeting ):
Fon," which is constantly used in the same sense by
ry, and which enters into the title of the chapter, grahaana occur anywhere in the text. The word w hash we
outer’? ¥ yuddha, means literally “* war, conflict.” Verses
» 22, below, give distinctive definitions of some of the
gtd and conjunction.
+ :# Ra "os of ;
her the lon, itude of the swift-moving planet is greater
‘slow one, the conjunction (samyoga) 18 past;
nite wes te
od ’ /~ + x ne
~ so oJ
t
J

e | otherwise, iti is to come : this is the case. fehan’ the two are moving
Pp eastward ; if, however, they are retrograding (vakrin), the con-.
= trary is true.
3. When the longitude of the one moving eastward is
greater, the conjunction (samdgama) is past; but when that of
the one that is’ retrograding is greater, it is to come. Multiply
the distance in longitude of the planets, in minutes, by the
minutes of daily motion of each,
4. And divide the products by the difference of daily motions,
if both are moving with direct, or both with retrograde, motion :
if one is retrograding, divide by the sum of daily motions.
5. The quotient, in minutes, etc., is to be subtracted when
the conjunction is past, and added when it is to come: if the
two are retrograding, the contrary: if one is retrograding, the
quotients are additive and subtractive respectively.
6. Thus the two planets, situated in the zodiac, are made
to be of equal longitude, to minutes. Divide in like manner the
distance in longitude, and a quotient is obtained which is the
time, in days, etc.
The object of this process is to determine where and when the two
planets of which it is desired to calculate the conjunction will have the
same longitude. The directions given in the text are in the main so clear
as hardly to require explication. The longitude and the rate of motion i=
of the two planets in question is supposed to have been found for some -
time not far removed from that of their conjunction. Then, in determining
whether the conjunction is past or to come, and at what distance, ° in are :
and in time, three separate cases require to be taken into account—when
both are advancing, when both are retrograding, and when one is advancing
and the other retrograding. In the two former cases, the | planets are
approaching or receding from one another by the difference of their daily _
motions; in the latter, by the sum of their daily motions. The point of
conjunction will be found by the following proportion: as the daily rate —
at which the two are approaching or receding from each other is to their
distance in longitude, so is the daily motion of each one to the distance
» which it will have to move before, or which it has moved since, the con- Sin 4
junction in longitude. The time, again, elapsed or to elapse ‘between Des
given moment and that of the conjunction, will be found by sBividing. she a *
oud

Of Planetary Conjunctions 189
_~ distance in longitude by the same divisor as was used in the other part of
the process, namely, the daily rate of approach or separation of the two
planets.
The only other matter which seems to call for more special explanation than is to be found in the text is, at what moment the process of
calculation, as thus conducted, shall commence. If a time be fixed upon
which is too far removed—as, for instance, by an interval of several days
—from the moment of actual conjunction, the rate of motion of the two
planets will be liable to change in the mean time so much as altogether to
¥itiate the correctness of the calculation. It is probable that, as in the
calculation of an eclipse (see above, note to iv. 7-8), we are supposed,
before entering upon the particular process which is the subject of this
passage, to have ascertained, by previous tentative calculations, the midnight next preceding or following the conjunction, and to have determined
for that time the longitudes and rates of motion of the two planets. If so,
the operation will give, without farther repetition, results having the desired
degree of accuracy. The commentary, it may be remarked, gives us no
; light upon this point, as it gave us none in the case of the eclipse.
We have not, however, thus ascertained the timé and place of the
conjunction, This, to the Hindu apprehension, takes place, not when the
two planets are upon the same secondary to the ecliptic, but when they
are upon the same secondary to the prime vertical, or upon the same circle
passing through the north and south points of the horizon. Upon such a
Lae circle two stars rise and set simultaneously; upon such a one they together
4 : pass the meridian: such a line, then, determines approximately their
vie relative height above the horizon, each upon its own circle of daily revolution.
_- -We have also seen above, when considering the deflection (valana—see IV.
thas 24-25), that a secondary to the prime vertical is regarded as determining
a the north and south directions upon the starry concave. To ascertain what
— will be the place of each planet upon the ecliptic when referred to it by
- gueh a circle is the object of the following processes.
| 7. Having calculated the measure of the day and night, and
- ——- jikewise the latitude (vikshepa), in minutes ; having determined
Ai : the meridian-distance (nata) and altitude (unnata), in time,
= according to the corresponding orient ecliptic-point (lagna)—
—————S-«&.-~sSs Mulitiply the latitude by the equinoctial shadow,
wt vide by twelve ; the quotient multiply by the meridian-distance
in ri dis _ and divide by the corresponding half-day : |
ay ‘The result, when latitude is north, 1s subtractive in the
« n he nisphere, and additive -n the western; when latitude
anil

q ‘ Si
ag iw ais, af ._ *
tee z, . in 5S apa, | - ae | < * -
__ is south, on the other hand, it is additive in the eastern hemisphere,
and likewise subtractive in the western.
-—~—s«10.-s Multiply the minutes of latitude by the degrees of
rs declination of the position of the planet increased by three signs: ~
the result, in seconds (vikald), is additive or subtractive, according
as declination and latitude are of unlike or like direction.
11. Im calculating the conjunction (yoga) of a planet and
an asterism (nakshatra), in determining the setting and rising of a
planet, and in finding the elevation of the moon’s cusps, this
operation for apparent longitude (drkkarman) 1s first prescribed.
12. Calculate again the longitudes of the two planets for
the determined time, and from these their latitudes: when the
latter are of the same direction, take their difference ; otherwise,
their sum: the result is the interval of the planets.
The whole operation for determining the point on the ecliptic to
which a planet, having a given latitude, will be referred by a secondary
to the prime vertical, is called its drkkarman. Both parts of this compound we have had before—the latter, signifying ** operation, process of
ealculation,’” in ii, 87, 42, ete.—for the former, see the notes to iii. 2834, and v. 5-6: here we are to understand it as signifying the “" apparent
longitude '' of a planet, when referred to the ecliptic in the manner stated,
as distinguished from its true or actual longitude, reckoned in the usual
way: we accordingly translate the whole term, as im verse 11, “' operation
for apparent longitude.’’ The operation, like the somewhat analogous one
by which the ecliptic-defiection (valana) is determined (see above, iv. 24-29),
consists of two separate processes, which receive in the commentary distinct
names, corresponding with ‘those applied to the two parts of the process
for calculating the deflection. The whole subject may be illustrated by
reference to the next figure (Fig. 28). ‘This represents the projection of a
part of the sphere upon a horizontal plane, N and E being the north and
ewst points of the horizon, and Z the zenith. Let CL be the position
of the ecliptic at the moment of conjunction in longitude, C being the orient
ecliptic-point (lagna); and let M be the point at which the conjunction
in longitude of the two planets 5 and V, each upon its parallel of celestial
latitude, cl and el’, and having latitude equal to SM and VM respectively, :
will take place. ‘Through V and 5 draw secondaries to the prime vertical, —
NV and NS, meeting the ecliptic in v and 4: these latter are the ‘points Chee
apparent longitude of the two planets, which are still removed from a true bag
gonjunction by the distance v#: in order to the ascertainment of the time =
“% esired to know the positions of » and #, or
'M. From P, the pole of the equator, draw
+ ee ee. ee re Ts. ng Series

wear efi *
[etapa ot ;
ie - Of Planetary Conjunctions 191
; also circles through the two planets, meeting the ecliptic in s’ and wv’: then,
in order to find Ms, we ascertain the values of ss! and Ma’; and, in like
manner, to find Mv, we ascertain the values of vv’ and Mv’. Now at the
Fig. 28. equator, or in a right sphere,
the circles NS and PS would
coincide, and the distance ss’
disappear: hence, the «amount
of #s' being dependent upon the
latitude (aksha) of the observer,
NP, the process by which it is
calculated ‘is called the *’ operation for latitude "' (akshadrkkarman, or else dksha drkkarman). Again, if P and P’ were
the same point, or if the ecliptic and equator coincided, PS
and P'S would coincide, and
Ms’ would disappear: hence
the process of calculation of
Ms’ is called the *‘ operation for
ecliptic-deviation ~ (ayanadrkkarman, or dyana drkkarman).
The latter of the two processes,
although stated after the other
in the text, is the one first explained by the commentary.
we will also, as in the case of
ths deflection (note to iv. 24-29),
a 7 give to it our first attention.
= ‘The point s/, to which the planet is referred by «a circle passing through
the pole P, is styled by the commentary ayanagraha, ** the planet's longias corrected for ecliptic-deviation,"’ and the distance Ms’, which it
ie desired to ascertain, is called ayanakalds, ** the correction, in minutes,
for ecliptic-deviation.’”” Instead, however, of finding Ms’, the process
\ gh an. the text finds Mf, the corresponding distance on the circle of
daily revol | ve ution DR, of the point M—which is then assumed si 30 to
yee _ = 1} | ated in verse 10, is ultumateThe “Aas dang tim the rule, as stat
Lal Ae
a*
a 2 ere
R : sin MSt :: MS: Mt
« MS 4 which is always very small, being treated as if it were a
vig at t. But now also, 45 the latitude MS is
mall the angle PSP’ may be treated as if equal to
' n mt C r wn in the figure); and this angle is, as was shown in cona

+ gl feel wt =. g } P|
is
a.
ee .
neg a “aA sli 2 atee are
Y Berd ee
-— nection with iv. 24-25, the deflection of the ecliptic from the equator
— (dyana valana) at M, which is regarded as equal to the declination of the
_ point: 90° in advance of M: this point, for convenience’s sake, we will call
-M’. Our proportion becomes, then
A
mh .
R ; sin decl. M’ :: MS: Mt
all the quantities which it contains being in terms of minutes. To bring
this proportion, now, to the form in which it appears in the text, it is made
to undergo a most fantastic and unscientific series of alterations. The
greatest declination (ii. 28) being 24°, and its sine 1397’, which is nearly
fifty-eight times twenty-four—since 58 x 24=—1892—it is assumed that
fifty-eight times the number of degrees in any given are of declination
will be equal to the number of minutes in the sine of that are. Again, the
value of radius, 3438’, admits of being roughly divided into the two factors
fifty-eight and sixty—since 58 x 60=8480. Substituting, then, these values
in the proportion as stated, we have
58 x 60.: 58xdecl. M’ in degre: - latitude in min. :. Mt
Cancelling, again, the common factor in the first two terms, and transferring the factor 60 to the fourth term, we obtain finally
1 : decl. M’ in degr.:: latitude in min.: Mt 60
that is to say, if the latitude of the planet, in minutes, be multiplied by
the declination, in degrees, of a point 90° in advance of the planet, the
result will be a quantity which, after being divided by sixty, or reduced
from seconds to minutes, is to be accepted as the required interval on
the ecliptic between the real place of the planet and the point to which
it is referred by a secondary to the equator.
This explanation of the rule is the one given by the commentator,
nor are we able to see that it admits of any other. The reduction of the
original proportion to its final form is a process to which we have nents:
fore found no parallel, and which appears equally absurd and uncalled for.
That Mt is taken as equivalent to Ms’ has, as will appear from a consideration of the next process, a certain propriety. _
The value of the are Ms! being ane: found, Shs: aus 8
position of M with velerehake to the solstitial cohurs. a3 : At the las: the lines
, it will,
PS and P'S coincide, 50 that, whatever be the latitu ' :
by a secondary to the equator . be referred to the ecliptic « at its true. bie of
longitude. From the winter solstice onward to » th
ie: Ss
when the point nade is upon the sun’s— northward a air: sn i a ae
- planet having north latitude will be “referred back kwar tude 75
a circle from the pole, and n planet having south lati
forward. If M, | ons Ss ofthe, Hae sie at that pot wl Bo
| (dakahindyana), a P » ths Tatitu . Re at oes
é@
t, er as
iar oz, ee

es hl 4, Par e * -
Sees oS
i at * ,
het a Of Planetary Conjunctions 193
forward, and one having south latitude backward: this is the case illustrated by the figure. ‘The statement of the text virtually agrees with this,
it being evident that, when M is on the northward path, the declination of
the point 90° in advance of it will be north; and the contrary.
We come now to consider the other part of the operation, or the
dksha drkkarman, which forms the subject of verses 7-9. As the first
2 step, we are directed to ascertain the day and the night respectively of
the point of the ecliptic at which the two planets are in conjunction in
longitude, for the purpose ef determining also its distance in time from
the horizon and from the meridian. This is accomplished as follows.
‘i, ar
me, * Having the longitude of the point in question (M in the last figure), weore | calculate (by ii. 28) its declination, which gives us (by ii. 60) the radius
oo of its diurnal circle, and (by ii. 61) its ascensional difference; whence,
again, is derived (by ii, 62-63) the length of its day and night. Again,
mee nving the time of conjunction at M, we easily calculate the sun's longitude
at the moment, and this and the time together give us (by iii. 46-48) the
longitude of C, the orient ecliptic-point: then (by iii. 50) we ascertain
directly the difference between the time when M rose and that when ©
rises, which is the altitude in time (unnata) of M: the difference between
“te this and the half-day is the meridian-distance in time (nata) of the same
¥ “s - point. If the conjunction takes place when M is below the horizon, oF
during its night, its distance from the horizon and from the inferior meridian
<a is determined in like manner.
. Figs i ‘The direct object of this part of the general process being to find the
- value of ss’, we note first that that distance is evidently greatest at the
ek horizon; farther, that it disappears at the meridian, where the lines PS
ee, and NS coincide. Tf, then, it is argued, its value at the horizon can be
*; ascertained, we may ‘assume it to yary as the distance from the meridian.
e accompanying figure (Fig. 29) will Nustrate the method by which it
F*
rt .
har,
a
fl sttem be < he) wer BS Tek =
| ttempted to calculate ss’ at the horizon.
. * i) a a SR 5 or J
Suppose the planet 5, being
| removed in latitude to the distance MS from
3 M, the point of the ecliptic which determines
its longitude, to be upon the horizon, and
let #/, as before, be the point to which it is
referred by a circle from the north pole:
ig desired to determine the value of ss’. Let
Fe as DR be the circle of diurnal revolution of the
point M, meeting 52’ in ¢, and the horizon
in wt Stw may be regarded as 4 plane rightNp ss angled triangle, having its angles at §S and
ie w respectively equal to the observer's latitude
ae * | and co-latitude. In that triangle, to find
@ should make the proportion
<a
ae Pe
sd :
a

‘sought. The proportion then becomes
Pure’ Tuva >, . J ca ‘ . > )
nl ae . - Enet
tage aan 6 ;
194 Stirya-Siddhanta
cos tSw : sin (Sw :: tS : tw
Now the first of these ratios, that of the cosine to the sine of latitude, is
(see above, iii. 17) the same with that of the gnomon to the equinoctial
shadow: again, as the difference of Mt and Ms‘ was in the preceding process
neglected, so here the difference of 5M and St; and finally, tw, the true
result of the process, is accepted as the equivalent of 3's, the distance
gnom.: eq. shad.:: latitude : required dist. at horizon
The value of the required distance at the horizon having been thus ascertained, its value at any given altitude is, as pointed out above, determined
by a proportion, as follows: as the planet’s distance in time from the
meridian when upon the horizon is to the value of this correction at the
horizon, so is any given distance from the meridian (nata) to the value at
that distance; or
half-day: mer.-dist. in time:: result of last proportion: required distance
The direction in which the distance thus found is to be reckoned, starting
in each case from the dyana graha, or place of the planet on the ecliptic
as determined by a secondary to the equator, which was ascertained by
the preceding process, is evidently as the text states it in verse 9. In
the eastern hemisphere, which is the case illustrated by the figure, 8's Is
additive to the longitude of s', while v/v is subtractive from the longitude
of v': in the western hemisphere, the contrary would be the case. The
final result thus arrived at is the longitude of the two points s and v, to
which S and V are referred by the circles NS and NV, drawn through them
from the north and south points of the horizon.
The many inaccuracies involved in these calculations are too palpable
to require pointing out in detail. The whole operation is a roughly approximative one, of which the errors are kept within limits, and the result
rendered sufficiently correct, only by the general minuteness of the quantity
entering into it as its main element—namely, the latitude of a planet—
and by the absence of any severe practical test of its accuracy. It may be
remarked that the commentary is well aware of, and points out, most of
the errors of the processes, excusing them by its stereotyped plea of their
insignificance, and the merciful disposition of*the divine author of the
treatise. ;
Having thus obtained « and v, the apparent longitudes of the two
planets at the time when their true longitude is M, the question arises,
how we shall determine the time of apparent conjunction, Upon this point
the text gives us no light at all: according to the commentary, we are to
repeat the process prescribed in verses 2.6 above, determining, from 4
consideration of the rate and direction of motion of the planets in connection
with their new places, whether the conjunction sought for is past or to

Of Planetary Conjunctions. 195
Come, and then ascertaining, by dividing the distance vs by their daily
rate of approach or recession, the time of the conjunction. It is evident,
however, that one of the elements of the process of correction for latitude
(akshadrkkarman), namely the meridian-distance, is changing so rapidly,
us compared with the slow motion of the planets in their orbits, that such
a process could not yield results at all approaching to accuracy: it also
appears that two slow-moving planets might have more than one, and even
several apparent conjunctions on successive days, at different times in the
day, being found to stand together upon the same secondary to the prime
vertical at different altitudes. We do not sce how this difficulty is met
by anything in the text or in the commentary. The text, assuming the
moment of apparent conjunction to have been, by whatever method, already
- determined, goes on to direct us, in verse 12, to calculate anew, for that
moment, the latitudes of the two planets, in order to obtain their distance
from one another. Here, again, is a slight inaccuracy : the interval between
the two, measured upon a secondary to the prime vertical, is not precisely
. equal to the sum or difference of their latitudes,- which are measured
upon secondaries to the ecliptic. The ascertainment of this interval is
necessary, in order to determine the name and character of the conjunction,
as will appear farther on (vv. 18-20, 22).
The cases mentioned in verse 11, in which, as well as in calculating
the conjunctions of two planets with one another, this operation for apparent
= longitude (dgkkarman) needs to be performed, are the subjects of the three
following” chapters.
f lal” alll on
‘ee 13. The diameters upon the moon's orbit of Mars, Saturn,
ca Mercury, and Jupiter, are declared to be thirty, increased suc_ cessively by half the half; that of Venus is sixty.
po ee : 14. These, divided by the sum of radius and the fourth
ag Ae hypothenuse, multiplied by two, and again multiplied by radius,
~~ are the respective corrected (sphuta) diameters : divided by fifteen,
Meus they are the measures (mdna) in minutes.
ewe | ,
: : We have seen above, in connection with thé calculation of eclipses
Z that the diameters of the sun, moon, and shadow had to be
educed foe measurement in minutes, to the moon's mean distance,
ich fifteen yojanas make 4 minute of arc. Here we find the dimensions
of the five lesser planets. when at their mean distances from) the earth,
da only in the form of the portion of the moon's mean orbit covered
rem absolute size being left undetermined. We add them below,
i bular orn both in yojanas and as reduced to minutes, appending
the corresponding estimates of Tycho Brahe (which we take from

at . ‘Delambre), and “ihe: true “epparent Gite cbiee. of the planets, as seen from
eae the earth at their greatest and least distances.
: _ Apparent Diameters of the Planets, according to the Strya-Siddhdnta,
| to Tycho Brahe, and to Modern Science.
Sarrya-Siddbinta ; Moderns :
Planet ty ae
in yojanas.| in arc. te
Mercury, 45 a 2" 10°
This table shows how greatly exaggerated are wont to be any determinations of the magnitude of the planetary orbs made by the unassisted
eye alone. This effect is due to the well-known phenomenon of the irradiation, which increases the apparent size of a brilliant body when seen at
some distance. It will be noticed that the Hindu estimates do not greatly
exceed those of Tycho, the most noted and accurate of astronomical
observers prior to the invention of the telescope. In respect to order of
magnitude they entirely agree, and both accord with the relateve apparent
size of the planets, except that to Mercury and Venus, whose proportional
brilliancy, from their nearness to the sun, is greater, is assigned too high
arank. ‘Tycho also established a scale of apparent diameters for the fixed
stars, varying from 2’, for the first magnitude, down to 20", for the sixth. —
We do not find that Ptolemy made any similar estimates, eithen for planets
or for fixed stars.
The Hindus, however, push their empiricism one step farther, gravely
laying down a rule by which, from these mean values, the true values of
the apparent diameters at any given time may be found. The fundamental
proportion is, of course, a vs
_ ft
true dist.: mean dist. :: mean app. diam. : truc. op opp. diam. et Mees
y
he second term of this proportion is represented iy ‘radius : : for the first
we have, according to ‘the translation given, one half ‘the sum of radius
and the fourth hypothenuse, by which is meant the “* variable hypothenuse *
(cala karma) found in the course. of the fourth, or last, process for finding. « ~
a ‘the true place of the planet (see above, ii, 48-45). The term, — poreree
(tricatuhkarna), which is translated ‘* radius and the fourth hypot thenuse As AR:
is much more na 1‘ third and f. pe Seaman at Bese. 2 {

> eee Of Planetary Conjunctions 197
handed down by tradition (sémpradayika): but, he adds, owing to the
fact that the length of the hypothenuse is not ealeulated in the third
process, that for finding finally the equation of the centre (mandakarman),
and that that hypothenuse cannot therefore be referred to here as known
modern interpreters understand the first member of the compound (fri) as
an abbreviation for ** radius "’ (trijyd), and translate it accordingly. We
must confess that the other interpretation seems to us to be powerfully
supported by both the letter of the text and the reason of the matter.
The substitution of tri for trijyd in such a connection is quite too violent
to be borne,«nor do we see why half the sum of radius and the fourth
hypothenuse should be taken as representing the planet’s true distance,
rather than the fourth hypothenuse alone, which was employed (sce above,
ii, 56-58) in calculating the latitude of the planets. On the other hand,
there is reason for adopting, as the relative value of a planet's true distance.
the average, OF half the sum, of the third hypothenuse, or the planet's
distance as affected by the eccentricity of its orbit, and the fourth, or its
distance as affected by the motion of the earth in her orbit. There seems
to us good reason, therefore, to suspect that verse 14—and with it, probably,
also verse 13—is an intrusion into the Sdarya-Siddhanta from some other
system, which did not make the grossly erroneous assumption, pointed out
| under ii, 39, of the equality of the sine of anomaly in the epicycle
a (bhujajyaphala) with the sine of the equation, but in which the hypothenuse and the sine of the equation were duly calculated in the process for
finding the equation of the apsis (mandakarman), as well as in that for
finding the equation of the conjunction (¢ighrakarman).
oe
15. Exhibit, upon the shadow-ground, the planet at the
. ery extren ity of its shadow reversed : it is viewed at the apex of the
Ne ie gnomon in its_mirror.
fe:
test of the accuracy of his ealculations, or a8 & con
iz proof to the pupil or other person of his knowledge and skill, the
is here directed to set up 8 gnomon upon ground properly prepared
for exhibiting the shadow, and to calculate and lay off from the base of
_ the gnomon, ‘but in the opposite to the true direction, the shadow which
pe a planet would cast at a given time; upon placing, then, 4 horizontal
mirror at the extremity of the shadow, the reflected image of the planet's
dd ske will be seen in it at the given time by an eye placed at the apex of the
J
gg smon. The principle of the experiment is clearly correct, and the rules
mei nd processes taught in the second and third chapters afford the means
of carryir ¢ it out, since from them the shadow which any star would cast,
had it light enough as readily determined as that which the sun
of precisely this character has hitherto been
ight en ugh, may be
its. As no case

——' ae ‘the moment. of conjunction are situated. The latter phrase, however,
e - We will briefly ee @ the ‘course of the calculation. The day
nd nig! ht of f the planet, and its distance from the meridian, or its hourangle, are found in the same manner as in the process previously explained
att; 192, above), excepting that here the planet's latitude, and its declination
as affected by latitude, must be calculated, by ii. 56-58; and then the hourangle and the ascensional difference, by iii, 34- 36, give the length of the
shadow at the given time, together with that of its hypothenuse. The
question would next be in what direction to lay off the shadow from the
base of the gnomon. ‘This is accomplished by means of the base (bhuja)
of the shadow, or its value when projected on a north and south line. From
the declination is found, by iii. 20-22, the length of the noon-shadow and
its hypothenuse, and from the latter, with the declination, comes, by li.
: 22-23, the measure of amplitude (agrd) of the given shadow;
whence, by
iii. 23-25, is derived its base. Having thus both its length and the distance
of its extremity from an east and west line running through the base of
the gnomon, we lay it off without difficulty.
16. Take two gnomons, five cubits (hasta) in height,
stationed according to the variation of direction, separated by the
interval of the two planets, and buried at the base one cubit.
17. Then fix the two hypothenuses of the shadow, passing
from the extremity of the shadow through the apex of cach
gnomon: and, to a person situated at the point of union of the
extremities of the shadow and hypothenuse, exhibit. .
18. The two planets in the sky, situated at the apex each of —
its own gnomon, and ar rived at a coincidence of observed place
This is a proceeding of much the same character with that which |
forms the subject of the preceding passage. In order to make apprehensible, by observation, the conjunction of two planets, as calculated by- the ‘
methods of this chapter, two gnormons, of about the height | of a man, are > ah
set up. At what distance and direction. from, one 0 sapibar. they are are to be |
fixed is not clearly shown. The commentator in ts the expression — ris
** interval of the two planets " (v. 16), to. mean the jistance in aminutes: i
on the secondary to the prime vertical, as ascertained according to verse se
al above, reduced to digits by the method taught in iv. 26 26 while, by +3: <.
‘* according to the variation of direction, # hes! he would understand merle: 3
in the direction from the observer of the ‘hemisphere in which the planets
tterly nugatory; nor do we see iy what siti 3
would be to make the north and south int rval o af the bases < of tes " ;

Of Planetary Conjunctions 199
in digits, correspond with that of the planets in minutes. We do not
think it would be difficult to understand the directions given in the text as
meaning, in effect, that the two gnomons should be so stationed as to cast
their shadows to the same point: it would be easy to do this, since, at
the time in question, the extremities of two shadows cast from one gnornon
by the two stars would be in the same north and south line, and it. would
only be necessary to set the second gnomon 4s far south of the first as
_ the end of the shadow cast by the southern star was north of that cast by
the other. Then, if a hole were sunk in the ground at the point of imtersection of the two shadows, and a person enabled to place his eye there,
: he would, at the proper moment, see both the planets with the same
- glance, and each at the apex of its own gnomon.
ms , Im the eighteenth verse also we have ventured to disregard the
aa authority of the commentator: he translates the words drktulyatdm itds
“come within the sphere of sight,’’ while we understand by drktulyatd,
as in other cases (ii. 14, iii. 11), the coincidence between observed and computed position. &
Foi Such passages as this and the preceding are not without interest and
- yalue, as exhibiting the rudeness of the Hindu methods of observation, and
ef also as showing the unimportant and merely illustrative part which observation was meant to play in their developed system of astronomy.
| 18. . . . When there is contact of the stars, it is styled
“depiction > (ullekha) ; when there 1s separation, ‘* division ™
_ (bheda) ;
«49. +~=An encounter (yuddha) is ealled ‘‘ ray-obliteration "
(aneuvimarda) when there is mutual mingling of rays: when the
:terval is less than’a degree, the encounter is named ‘‘ dexter °
o p savya)—if, in this case, one be faint (anz).
i 20. Tf the interval be more than a degree, it is ‘* conjuncao * tion" (samdgama), if both are endued with power (bala). One
is vanquished (jita) in a dexter encounter (apasav ya yuddha),
* one that is covered, faint (anu), destitute of brillancy,
. : One that is rough, colorless, struck down (vidhvasta ),
vanquished (rtita). One situated
SE af
ve. Fy at eas hd
eel +
~ omm Sy Lg |:
— <a he 2S
oad
. oe a
e
rete)!
oe hed, if both are brilliant, 1t
y nama): if the two are very small, and
hy
AY
Jae

eo
eee Strya-Siddhanta |
_ struck down, it is ‘‘front’’ (kita) and “‘ conflict '’ (vigraha),
23. Venus is generally victor, whether situated to the north
pe Or to the south. . . “3
In this passage, as later in a whole chapter (chap. xi), we quit the
proper domain of astronomy, and trench upon that of astrology. However intimately connected the two sciences may be in practice, they are,
in general, kept distinct in treatment—the Siddhantas, or astronomical
text-books, furnishing, as in the present instance, only the scientific basis,
the data and methods of calculation of the positions of the heavenly bodies,
their eclipses, conjunctions, risings and settings, and the like, while the
Sanhitas, Jatakas, Tajikas, ete., the astrological treatises, make the superstitious applications of the science to the explanation of the planetary
influences, and their determination of human fates. Thus the celebrated
astronomer, Wariha-mihira, besides his astronomies, composed separate
astrological works, which are still extant, while the former have become
lost. It is by no means impossible that these verses may be an interpolation into the original text of the Strya-Siddhanta. They form only a disconnected fragment: it is not to be supposed that they contain a complete
statement and definition of all the different kinds ‘of conjunction recognized and distinguished by technical appellations; nor do they fully set
forth the circumstances which determine the result of a hostile “ encounter”” ~
between two planets: while a detailed explanation of some of the distinctions indicated—as, for instance, when a planet is “ powerful *" or the
contrary—could not be given without entering quite deeply into the subject
of the Hindu astrology. This we do not regard ourselves as called upon
to do here: indeed, it would not be possible to accomplish it satisfactorily
without aid from original sources which are not accessible to us. We shall
content ourselves with following the example of the commentator, who
upon the
the latter connection
. f te
ee) -
“Bt
OS el ener ae
, absolute or relative:

Dae 7 Of Planetary Conjunctions 201
ae India by his native assistant, agree with these, and both accord closely with
| the teachings of the Tetrabiblos, the astrological work attributed to Ptolemy.
a. V1 . Perform in like manner the calculation of the.
conjunction (samyoga) of the planets with the moon.
This is all that the treatise says respecting the conjunction of the
n with the lesser planets: of the phenomenon, sometimes so striking,
| Brat the occultation of the latter by the former, it takes no especial notice.
es, HE commentator cites an additional half-verse as sometimes included in
5 the chapter, to the effect that, in calculating a conjunction, the moon ‘3
latitude is to be reckoned as corrected by her parallax in latitude (avanati),
but rejects it, as making the chapter over-full, and as being superfluous,
8 si nce the nature of the case determines the application here of the general
rules for parallax presented in the fifth chapter. Of any parallax of the
sila themselves nothing is said: of course, to calculate the moon's
a ar x by the methods as already given is, in effect, to attribute to them
la horizontal pereles: of the same value with that assigned to the sun,
ee 4 vo 4.
iy The final verse of the chapter is a caveat against the supposition that
ee conjunction " of two planets is spoken of, anything more is
Holy than that they appear to approach one another; while nevertheless,
cee apparent approach requires to be treated of, on account of its influence
S550 human fates. i
Seas. Unto the good and evil fortune of men is this system set
‘for = /; the planet: 8 move on upon their own paths, approaching
“one : another at: a distance. 7

' CHAPTER VIII.
Or THE ASTERISMS.
Coxrents :—1-9, positions of the asterisms; 10-12, of certain fixed stars; 12, direction
to test by observation the accuracy of these positions; 13, splitting of Robini's
wain: 14-15, bow to determine the conjunction of a planet with an asterism; 16-19,
which is the junction-star in each asterism; 20-21, positions of other fixed stars.
1. Now are set forth the positions of the asterisms (bha),
in minutes. If the share of each one, then, be multiplied by
ten, and increased by the minutes in the portions (bhoga) of the
past asterisms (dhishnya), the result will be the polar longitudes
(dhruva).
The proper title of this chapter is nakshatragrahayutyadhikéra,
‘* chapter of the conjunction of asterisms and planets,’’ but the subject of
conjunction occupies but a small space in it, being limited to a direction
(vv. 14-15) to apply, with the necessary modifications, the methods
taught in the preceding chapter. The chapter is mainly occupied with
such a definition of the positions of the asterisms—to which are added
also those of a few of the more prominent among the fixed stars—as is
necessary in order to render their conjunctions capable of being calculated,
Before proceeding to give the passage which states the positions of
the asterisms, we will explain the manner in which these are defined, In
the accompanying figure (Fig. 30), let EL represent the equator, and CL
Fic. 30, the ecliptic, P and P’ being their respective
N poles. Let S be the position of any given
; star, and through it draw the circle of declination PSa. Then a is the point on the ecliptic
of which the distance from the first of Aries
and from the star respectively are here given as
its longitude and latitude. So far as the latitude
is concerned, this is not unaccordant with the
usage of the treatise hitherto. Latitude
(vikshepa, ‘‘ disjection "’) is the amount by
which any body is removed from the declination
which it ought to have—that is, from the point
of the ecliptic which it ought to occupy—
declination (krdnti, apakrama) being always,
according to the Hindu understanding of the
term, in the ecliptic itself, In the case of 4
_planet, whose proper path is in the ecliptic, the

‘ad
Of the Asterisms 203
point of that circle which it ought to occupy is determined by its calculated
longitude: in the case of a fixed star, whose only motion is about the pole
of the heavens, its point of declination is that to which it is referred by a
circle through that pole. Thus, in the figure, the declination (kranti) of
S would be ca, or the distance of a from the equator at c: its latitude
(vikshepa) is aS, or its distance from a. We have, accordingly, the same
term used here as before. To designate the position in longitude of a, on
the other hand, we have a new term, dhruva, or, as below (vv. 12, 15),
dhruvaka. This comes from the adjective dhruva, ** fixed, immovable, *”
by which the poles of the heaven (see below, xii. 45) are designated; and,
if we do not mistake its application, it indicates, as here employed, the
longitude of a ‘star as referred to the ecliptic by a circle from the pole.
We venture, then, to translate it by ‘* polar longitude,’’ as we also render
vikshepa, in this connection, by ~ polar latitude,"’ it being desirable to
have for these quantities distinctive names, akin with one another.
Colebrooke employs ‘‘ apparent longitude and latitude,’’ which are objectionable, as being more properly applied to the results of the process taught
in the last chapter (vv. 7-10).
The mode of statement of the polar longitudes is highly artificial and
arbitrary : a number is mentioned which, when ees by ten, will give
the position of each asterism, in minutes, in its own ‘‘ portion '’ (bhoga),
or arc of 18° 20 in the ecliptic (see 1. 64).
This passage presents a name for the asterisms, dhishnya, which has
not occurred before; it is found once more below, in xi. 21.
2. Forty-eight, forty, sixty-five, fifty-seven, fifty-eight, four,
seventy-eight, seventy-six, fourteen,
3. Fifty-four, sixty-four, fifty, sixty, forty, seventy-four,
‘sevenity-eight, sixty-four.
a3 Fourteen, six, four: Uttara-Ashadhé, (vdicva) is at the
middle of the portion (bhoga) of Parva-Ashadha (dpya) ; Abhijit.
jikewise, is is at the end of Parva-Ashadha ; the position of Cravana
is at the end of Uttara-Ashadha ;
Tae toe ,s° a
"ele ie ~~
to, # ene, = mm ts

a
_t . ery’ "A : i
Ps 4
Sing Pes -
5. Gravishtha, on the other hand, is at the point of connee-
>. re Sita mi, eee y, =i , ,
tion of the third and fourth quarters (pada) of Qravana: then,
4 in their own portions, eighty, thirty-six, twenty-two,
6. Seventy-nine. Now their respective latitudes, reckoned
from the point of declination (apakrama) of each: ten, twelve,
five, north; south, five, ten, nine;
7. North, six; nothing; south, seven; north, nothing,
twelve, thirteen ; south, eleven, two; then thirty-seven, north ;
8. South, one and a half, three, four, nine, five and a half,
five ; north, also, sixty, thirty, and also thirty-six ;
9. South, half a degree; twenty-four, north, twenty-six
degrees ; nothing—for Acvini (dasra), etc., in succession.
The text here assumes that the names of the asterisms, and the order
of their succession, are so familiarly known as to render it unnecessary
to rehearse them. It has been already noticed (see above, i. 48-51, 55,
56-58, etc.) that a similar assumption was made as regards the names and
succession of the months, signs of the zodiac, years of Jupiter's cycle,
and the like. Many of the asterisms have more than one appellation: we
present in the annexed table those by which they are more generally and
familiarly known; the others will be stated farther on. Nearly all these
titles are to be found in our text, occurring here and there; a few of the
asterisms, however (the 5th, 6th, 9th, and 17th), are mentioned only by
appellations derived from the names of the deities to whom they are regarded
as belonging, and one (the 25th) chances not to be once distinctively spoken
of. We append to the names, in a tabular form, the data presented in this
passage; namely, the position of each asterism (nakehatra) in the arc of
the ecliptic to which it gives mame, and which is styled its ** portion "°
(bhoga), the resulting polar longitudes, and the polar latitudes, And since
it is probable (see note to the latter half of v. 12, below) that the latter
were actually derived by calculation from true declinations and right ascensions, ascertained by observation, we have endeavoured to restore those
more original data by calculating them back again, according to the data
and methods of this Siddh&nta—the declinations by ii. 28, the right
ascensions by iii. 44-48—and we insert our results in the table, rejecting

Of the Asterisms 205
Positions of the Junction-Stara of the Asterisms.
Interval | In
in Longi
| es
2&ocoe.c co 6 ec ele oie eee
ey
Sesscsesessssese
o
g
SREECSREEERERE

me Stirya- Sddhanta
Pig. 31.
28. Revati—
Apriel. I —. Agvini. rh
A.
be —>. Bharani. U.-Bh
Bharani. Bh. 27. U. Bhidrapadi—
3. | toe + P.-Bh
Kettle. i oi K. 26, P.-Bhidrapada—
. —J3. Kritika
i = 35. Catabhishaj—
at
Kohini. | | ‘ He — i Rohint. Ca
nie” r
Megecntik oem |. —5. Mrgacirsha
eH —6. Ardra. ; a
| il - 24, Oraviehths—
Ardrt. | = A. v
7. 33. Cravana—
ri 23
Piacraie -
| '—7,. Ponarvasu. 22, Abhijit—
Pushya. P. at. U.-Ash&dha—
—8. Pushya. 20, P.-Ashidhi—
=—9. Aclesta. ae.
Aclesha. A. maim
10. 1g. se Pe
Pde | MM. M
7 —10, Magha. 18. Jyeshtha—
i!
. radha—
P.-Ph. ‘f ane J
P Phalg ni.
—11. P-Phalguni ; ay
9. 16, Vicdkha—
U.-Ph. A
U- Phaigunt. —13.U-Phalguni oa
IL 15. SvA =
Hasta. —3, Hasta. 6
"7 ieee C. , Hi
Citra. 4. Ciera. 14. Citrd—
a7
Revati.
U_-Bhadrap.
P.-BhAdrap.
a4
(atabhisha).
Crovishtha,
Cravana
U.-Ashaidha.
f
P.-Asbadha
i?
Milas.
Jyeshihs
Anuradba.
Vigakha.
5S vat.
Citra.

’ Of the Asterisms 207
Our calculations, it should be remarked, are founded upon the assumption that, at the time when the observations were made of which our text
records the results, the vernal equinox coincided with the initial point of
the Hindu sidereal sphere, or with the beginning of the portion of the
asterism Acvini a point 10! eastward on the ecliptic from the star ( Piscium:
this was actually the case (see above, under i. 27) about A.D. 560. The
question how far this assumption is supported by evidence contained in the
data themselves will be considered later. To fill out the table, we have
also added the intervals in right ascension and in polar longitude.
The stars of which the text thus accurately defines the positions do
not, in most cases, by thernselves alone, constitute the asterisms
(nakshatra); they are only the principal members of the several groups of
stars—each, in the calculation of conjunctions (yoga) between the planets
and the asterisms (see below, vv. 14-15), representing its group, and therefore called (see below, vv. 16-19) the ~ junction-star "" (yogatdrd) of the
asterism.
It will be at once noticed that while, in a former passage (ii. 64), the
ecliptic was divided into twenty-seven equal arcs, as portions for the
asterisms, we have here presented to us twenty-eight asterisms, very unDequally distributed along the ecliptic, and at greatly varying distances from
it. And it is a point of so much consequence, in order.to therieht under?
standing of the character and history of ‘tue whole system, to apprehend —
clearly the relation of the groups of ¢ cars to the ares allotted to them,
that we have prepared the accompa ‘ying diagram (Pig. 31) in illustration
of that relation. The figure rep sents, in two parts, the circle of the
ecliptic: along the central lines *; marked its division into arcs of ten and
five degrees; upon the outside off these lines it is farther divided into equal
twenty-sevenths, or arcs of 18° 4 and upon the inside into equal twentyeighths, or arcs of 12° 512’; these being the portions (bhoga) of two
systems of asterisms, twenty-sev and twenty-eight in number respectively. ‘The starred lines which rum across all the divisions mark the polar
longitudes, as stated in the text, @f the junction-stars of the asterisms.
The names of the latter are set ov@r against them, in the inner columns:
the names of the portions in the sgstem of twenty-seven are given in full
in the outer columns, and those fin the system of twenty-eight are also
placed opposite the portions, up the inside, in an abbreviated form.
‘The text nowhere expressly tates which one of the twenty-eight
asteriams which it recognizes is, Bin its division of the ecliptic into only
eth 2 ithowt a portion. Thot Abhijit, the twenty-

oe
i been variously misinterpreted, are made entirely clear by supplying the
ist . words ~ asterism “’ and ** portion “’ throughout, where they are to be under-
- stood, thus: “* the asterism Uttara-Ashadha is at the middle of the portion
| styled Pirva-Ashadha; the asterism Abhijit, likewise, is at the end of the
portion Pirva-Ashidha; the position of the asterism Cravana is at the end
of the portion receiving its name from Uttara-Ashidha; while the asterism
Cravishtha is between the third and fourth quarters of the portion named
for Cravana.’’ After this interruption to the regularity of correspondence
of the two systems—the asterism Abhijit being left without a portion, and
the portion Qravishtha containing no asterism—they go on again harmoniously together to the close. The figure illustrates clearly this condition of
things, and shows that, if Abhijit be left out of account, the two systems
agree so far as this—that twenty-six asterisms fall within the limits of
portions bearing the same name, while all the diseordances are confined to
one portion of the ecliptic, that comprising the 20th to the 23rd portions
If, on the other hand, the ecliptic be divided into twenty-eighths, and if —
these be assigned as portions to the twenty-eight asterisms, it is seen from
the figure that the discordances between the two systems will be very great;
that only in twelve instances will a portion be occupied by the asterism
bearing its own name, and by that alone; that in sixteen cases asterisms
will be found to fall within the limits of portions of different name; that
lcs Sour-portions wittte-teft-without any asterism at all, while four others will
contain two each. |
These discordances are enough of themselves to set the whole subject
of the asterisms in a new light. Whereas it might have seemed, from what
we have seen of it heretofore, that.the 8} tem was founded upon a division
of the ecliptic into twenty-seven equal j rtions, and the selection of 4
star or a constellation to mark each porfion, and to be, as it were, its
ruler, it now appears that the series of twenty-eight asterisms may be
something independent of, and anterior to, any division of the ecliptic into
equal ares, and that the one may have been only artificially brought into
connection with the other, complete haymony between them being altogether
impossible. And this view is fully systained by evidence derivable from —
outside the Hindu science of astronomy, and beyond the borders of India. :
The Parsis, the Arabs, and the Chineso, are found also to be in possession 7
of a similar system of division of the heavens into twenty-eight portions, = ——
marked or separated by as many single stars or constellations. Of the ~
Parsi system little or nothing ia knowT) excepting the number and names”
of the divisions, which are given in aa second chapter of the Bundehesh
: | etc., ii. 849). The Arab divisions —
sions, etations of the moon,”
’ oa ie Slabs x a is {>
moon’s revolution; they are
eS Cy ae a ae cS ks 8 a + 7
aps of stars. ‘The first extended ia
2 at ae
J a
- no i

Of the Asterisms 209
comparison of the Hindu asterisms and the Arab mansions was made by Sir
William Jones, in the second volume of the Asiatic Researches, for 1790:
it was, however, only o rude and imperfect sketch, and led its author to
no valuable or trustworthy conclusions. The same comparison was taken
up later, with vastly more learning and acuteness, by Colebrooke, whose
_ yaluable article, published also in the Asiatie Researches, for 1807 (ix.
823, ete.; Essays ji, 821, etc.), has ever since remained the chief source
of knowledge respecting the Hindu asterisms and their relation to the
ie lunar mansions of the Arabs. To Anquetil (as above) is due the credit of
the first suggestion of a coincidence between the Parsi, Hindu, and
ie
Chinese systems: but he did nothing more than suggest it: the origin,
a
character, and use of the Chinese divisions were first established, and their
_ primitive identity with the Hindu asterisms demonstrated, by Biot, in a
a ata of articles published in the J ournal des Savants for 1840: and he
has more recently, in the yolume of the same Journal for 1859, reviewed
a _. and restated his former exposition and conclusions. These we shall present
ve more fully hereafter: at present it will be enough to say that the Chinese
divisions are equatorial, not zodiacal; that they are named = sieu
are ** mansions"’; and that they are the intervals in right ascension between
| certain single stars, which are also called sieu, and have the same title
_ with the divisions which they introduce. We propose to present here a
_ summary comparison of the Hindu, Arab, and Chinese systems, in
-_ gonnection with an identification of the stars and groups of stars forming
ee the Hindu asterisms, and with the statement of such information respecting
a he latter, beyond that given in our text, as will best contribute to a full
erstanding of their character.
‘The identification of tho asterisms Is founded upon the positions of
ome hei : : unction-stars, a8 stated in the astronomical text-books,
= Up on the relative places of these stars in the groups of which they form
: +, and upon the number of stars composing each group, and the
figure by which their arrangement is represented: in a few cases, too, the
names themselves of the asterisms are distinctive, and assist the identification. The number and ‘configuration of the stars forming the groups
re not stated in our text; we derive them mainly from Colebrooke, although
ourse ves also having had access to, and compared, most of his authorities,
ae name aes bi Cakalya- Sanita, the Muhirta- Cintamani, and the Ratnamaéla
(as ones, As. Res., ji, 204). Sir William Jones, it may be
erm As. Res., ii. 293, plate) an engraved copy of drawings
: artist of the figures assigned to the asterisams. For the
in each group we have an additional authority in alsavant of the eleventh century, who travelled in India,
. al care the Hindu astronomy. The information
sgard to the asterisms we derive from Biot, in the
"1845 (pp. 89-54); it professes to be founded upon
ae Rt ata
wing

7 le
f. 210° 8 OS SAtrya-Siddhanta
ao Pee | |
~~ the Khanda-Kataka* of Brahmagupta, Al-Bironi also gives an identifione cation of the asterisms, so far as the Hindu astronomers of his day were
able to furnish it to him, which was only in part: he is obliged to mark
«seven or eignt of the series as unknown or doubtful. He speaks very
slightingly of the practical acquaintance with the heavens possessed by the
Hindus of his time, and they certainly have not since improved in this
respect; the modern investigators of the same subject, as Jones and
Colebrooke, also complain of the impossihility of obtaining from the native
astronomers of India satisfactory identifications of the asterisms and their
junction-stars. ‘The translator, in like manner, spent much time and effort
in the attempt to derive such information from his native assistant, but
was able to arrive at no results which could constitute any valuable addition
to those of Colebrooke. It is evident that for centuries past, as at present,
the native tradition has been of no decisive authority as regards the position
and composition of the groups of stars constituting the asterisms: these
must be determined upon the evidence of the more ancient data handed
down in the astronomical treatises.
In order to an exact comparison of the positions of the junction-stars
as defined by the Hindus with those of stars contained in our catalogues,
we have reduced the polar longitudes and latitudes to true longitudes and
latitudes, by the following formulas (see Fig. 30):
(1+ cos Aa) cot ELC=tan Sab
sin Sab sin Sa=sin Sb
tan Sb cot Sab=sin ab
Aa being the polar longitude as stated in the text (=La+180°), Sa
the polar latitude, ELC the inclination of the ecliptic, Sb the true latitude,
and ab a quantity to be added to or subtracted from the polar longitude
to give the true longitude. The true positions of the stars compared we
take from Flamsteed’s Catalogus Brittanicus, subtracting in each case
15° 42! from the longitudes there given, in order to reduce them to distances
from the vernal equinox of A.D. 560, assumed to coincide with the initial
point of the Hindu sphere. There is some discordance among the different
Hindu authorities, as regards the stated positions of the junction-stars of
the asterisms. The Cikalya-Sanhiti, indeed, agrees in every point precisely
with the Sairya-Siddhinta. But the Siddhinta-Ciromani often gives a
somewhat different value to the polar longitude or latitude, or both.
With it, so far as the longitude is concerned, exactly accord the BrahmaSiddhinta, as reported by Colebrooke, and the Khanda-Kataka, as reported
by al-Birini. The latitudes of the Brahma-Siddhanta also are virtually the
*'The true form of the name is not altogether certain, it being known only through
ite Arabic transcription: it seems to designate rather @ chapter in o treating than 6
complete work of ite author,
ae
SB a
ee

fu
od
Of the Asterisms 211
game with those of the Siddhanta- Ciromani, their differences never amounting, save in a single instance, to more than 8': but the latitudes of the
Khanda-Kataka often vary considerably from both. The Graha-Lighava,
the only other authority accessible to us, presents a series of variations of
its own, independent of those of either of the other treatises. All these
differences are reported by us below, in treating of cach separate asterism.
The presiding divinities of the asterisms we give upon the authority of the
Taittiriya-Sanhita (iv. 4, 10, 1-3), the Taittirilya-Brahbmana (iii. 1. 1, 2, as
cited by Weber, Zeitsch. f. d. K. d. Morg., vii. 266 etc., and Ind. Stud.,
i. 90 etc.), the Muborta-CGintamani, and Colebrooke: those of about half the
asterisms are also indirectly given in our text, in the form of appellations
for the asterisme derived from them.
The natnes and situations of the Arab lunar stations are taken from
Ideler’s Untersuchungen tiber die Sternnamen: for the Chinese mansions
and their determining stars we rely solely upon the articles of Biot, to which
we have already referred.
It has seemed to us advisable, notwithstanding the prior treatment by
Colebrooke of the same subject, to enter ‘nto a careful re-examination and
identification of the Hindu asterisms, because we could not accept in the
bulk, and without modification, the conclusions at which he errived. The
identifications by Ideler of the Arab mansions, more thorough and correct
than any whico had been previously made, and Biot’s comparison of the
Chinese sieu, have placed new and valuable materials in our hands: and
these—together with a more exact comparison than was attempted by
Colebrooke of the positions given by the Hindus to their junction-stars
with the data of the modern catalogues, and a new and independent combination of tha various materials which he himself furnishes—while they
have led us to accept the greater number of his identifications, often
establishing them more confidently than he was able to do, have also
enabled us in many cases to alter and amend his results. Such a re
examination was necessary, ‘n order to furnish safe ground for a more
detailed comparison of the three systems, which, as will be seen hereafter,
leads to important conclusions respecting their historical relations to one
1. Agvini; this treatise exhibits the form agvini; in the older lists,
as also often elsewhere, we have the dual agvindu, acvayujdu, “* the two
horsemen, or Agvins.” The Acvins are personages in the ancient Hindu
1ythology somewhat nearly corresponding to the Castor and Pollux of
the Greeks. ‘They are the divinities of the asterism, which is named from
them. ‘The group is figured as a horse's head, doubtless in allusion to its
presiding deities, and not from any imagined resemblance. The dual name
leads us to expect to find it composed of two stars, and that is the number
allotted to the asterism by the Qikalya and Khanda-Kataka. The Surys-
- §iddhanta (below, v. 16) designates the northern member of the group 45
Po
oy

ye .
—21I20Ccm0C ————CCS Str ya-Siiddhdinta
a its junction-star : that this is the star £8 Arietis (magn. 3.2), and not a
pt Arietis (magn. 2), as assumed by Colebrooke, is shown by the following
_ somparison of positions :
B Arietis “ee -- do. 13°56" ae do. , S28" N.
- a Ariotis pre oe do. 17°37" do. 9°57" N.
Colebrooke was misled in this instance by adopting, for the number
of stars in the asterism, three, as stated by the later authorities, and then .
applying to the group as thus composed the designation given by our text
of the relative position of the junction-star as the northern, and he accordingly overlooked the very serious error in the determination of the longitude
thence resulting. Indeed, throughout his comparison, he gives too great
weight to the determination of latitude, and too little to that of longitude:
we shall see farther on that the accuracy of the latter is, upon the whole,
much more to be depended upon than that of the former.
Considered as a group of two stars, Acvini is composed of # and +
Arietis (magn. 4.3); as a group of three, it comprises also a in the same
constellation.
There is no discordance among the different authorities examined by
us as regards the position of the junction-star of Agvini, either in latitude
or in longitude. The case is the same with the 8th, 10th, 12th, and 13th
asterisms, and with them alone.
The first Arab manzil is likewise composed of 8 and y Arietis, to
which some add a: it is called ash-Sharatén, ‘‘ the two tokens ’’—that is
to say, of the opening year. - Y.
The Chinese series of sieuw commences, as did anciently the Hindu ~
authorities agree in assigning it three stars, and the southernmost is pointed —
out below (v. 18) as its junction-star. The group is unquestionably to be
identified with the triangle of faint stars lying north of the back of the Ram, ah
or 35, 39, and 41 Arietis: they are figured by some as 4 distinct constellaJ
tion, under the name of Musea Borealis. T
ft. as the junction-star is not altogether uns bi,
te
: LR TER NE ONG Pee Ser ere Se ot eee
A.D. 560, very nearly equidistant from the equ tor; the latter would seem — :
more likely to be the one intended, since it is: the
~~ ’ eth * ri ee) rime, > Po Ate, “Sst r ty = |
brightest of the group—being of the third a :

Of the Asterisms 213
the error in longitude, as compared with 41, is greater than that of any
other star in the series:
— | Bharapi ae «-» 24° 35° see a PE 3 Oe te,
es. 35 Arictis (a Musem) .. 26°54 ... fe OI 17
ts 41 Arietis {c Musca») eee 25° 10’ oan i 10°22 ‘N.
+ ty The Graha-Liaghava gives Bharani 1° more of polar longitude: this
y ab. OP ould reduce by the same amount the error in the determination of its
longitude by the other authorities. |
ae second Arab manzil, al-Butain, ‘* the little belly ""—i.c., of the
_ Ram—is by most authorities defined as comprising the three stars in the
oe haunch of the Ram, or e, 5, and ¢* (or else () Arietis. Some, however, have
> regarded it as the same with Musca; and we cannot but think that al-Birini,
ie! 3 in identifying, as he does, Bharani with al-Butain, meant to indicate by
: the latter name the group of which the Hindu asterism is actually composed.
>, «|The last Chinese sieu, Oci, is the star 35 Arietis, or a Muscee.
eo ee Krttika; or, as plural, krttikas: the appellative meaning of the word
is: doubtful. The regent of the asterism 15 Agni, the god of fire. The
: ~ group, composed of six stars, is that known to us as the Pleiades. It 1s
Ps figured by some as a flame, doubtless in allusion to its presiding divinity:
2 the more usual representation of it is a razor, and in the choice of this
~ | symbol is to be recognized the influence of the etymology of the name,
| which may be derived from the root kart, “* cut; '’ in the configuration of
. the group, too, may be seen, by a sufficiently prosaic eye, 4 broad-bladed
” knife, with a short handle. If the designation given below (v. 18) of the
_-—s- southern member of the group as its junction-star, be strictly true, this
ig not Alcyone, or » Tauri (magn. 3), the brightest of the six, but either
Atlas (27 ‘Tauri : magn. 4) or Merope (23 Tauri: magn. 5): the two latter
were very
w nearly equally distant from the equator of A.D. 560, but Atlas is
hi TE SO A egy emery ipti ; fined ition agrees best with
a little mearer to the ecliptic. The defined positic Zz
ep yone, nor can \ e hesitate to regard this as actually the junction-star of
| the asterism. — We compare the positions below :
ch. ai
the 23 Tauri Cll ly a9° 41’ =e. soe Ss 5% N.
| The Siddhanta-Ciromani ete. give Krttika 2/ less of polar longitude
; he Sarya-Siddhanta, and the Graha-Laghava, on the other hand,
more: thi latter, with the Khanda-Kataka, agree with our text as regards
polar latitude, which the others reckon at 4° 30’, instead of 5°.
‘Whe Pleindes constitute the third manzil of the Arabs, which is
ted ath-Thuraiya, ** the little thick-set group,"’ or an-Najm, “ the
'* Aleyone is likewise the first Chinese sieu, which is styled
ty
a
P
tet
a
wae

— 4. Rohini, “ ruddy "*; so named from the hue of its principal star.
_ Prajapati, ‘‘ the lord of created beings,”’ is the divinity of the asterism.
_ It contains five stars, in the grouping of which Hindu fancy has seen the
figure of a wain (compare v. 13, below); some, however, figure it as ao
temple. The constellation is the well-known one in the face of Taurus to
which we give the name of the Hyades, containing ¢«, 3, y,», a Tauri; the
latter, the most easterly (v. 19) and the brightest of the group—being the
brilliant star of the first magnitude known as Aldebaran—is the junctionstar, as is shown by the annexed comparison of positions:
Rohigi <5 - 4 9 ats yesiie er Ge os
Aldebaran in a. 40° 458’ ot .. 5° 30'S.
‘he SiddhAnta-Ciromani ete. here again present the insignificant
variation from the polar longitude of our text, of 2! less: the former also
makes its polar latitude 4° 30’: the Graha-Laghava reads, for the polar
longitude, 49°. All these variations add to the error of defined position.
The fourth Arab manzil is composed of the Hyades: its name is adDabarfin, ‘* the follower ""—i.c., of the Pleiades. We would suggest the
inquiry whether this name may not be taken as an indication that the Arab
system of mansions once began, like the Chinese, and like the Hindu system
originally, with the Pleiades. ‘There is, certainly, no very obvious propriety
in naming any but the second of a series the “‘following " (sequens or
secundus). Modern astronomy has retained the title as that of the principal
star in the group, to which alone it was often also applied by the Arabs.
The second Chinese sieu, Pi, is the northernmost member of the same
group, or e Tauri, a star of the third to fourth magnitude. ,
5. Mrgagirsha, or mrgagiras, ‘* antelope’s head *’: with this name the
figure assigned to the asterism corresponds: the reason for the designation
we have not been able to discover. Its divinity is Soma, or the moon.
It contains three stars, of which the northern (v. 16) is the determinative.
These three can be no other than the faint cluster in the head of Orion, or
A, ¢, ¢2 Orionis, although the Hindu measurement of the position of
the junction-star, A (magn. 4), is far from accurate, especially as regards
its latitude:
R tenia ne era "I ag ae" 8.
In this erroneous determination of the latitude all authorities agree:
the Graha-Lighava adds 1° to the error in polar longitude, reading 62°
instead of 63°.
Here again there is an entire harmony among the three systems compared. The Arab manzil, al-Hak'ah, is composed of the same stars which
make up the Hindu asterism : the third sieu, named Tse, is the Hindu
junction-star, A Orionis.

Of the Asterisms 215
6. Ardrdé, ** moist: ** the appellation very probably has some meteorological ground, which we have not traced out: this is indicated also by
the choice of Rudra, the storm-god, «as regent of the asterism. It comprises a single star only, and is figured as a gem. It is impossible not to
regard the bright star of the first magnitude in Orion's right shoulder,
or a Orionis, as the one here meant to be designated, notwithstanding the
very grave errors in the definition of its position givem by our text: the only
visible star of which the situation at all nearly answers to that definition
is 135 Tauri, of the sixth magnitude; we add its position below, with that
of a Orionis:
«a Orionis ee ae 48" 43° sae Ns Coe et
135 Tauri ess sae 7° 38° ss. ‘te 9° ly’ 8.
The distance from the sun at which the heliacal rising and setting of
Ardra is stated below (ix. 14) to take place would indicate a star of about
the third magnitude; this adds to the difficulty of its identification with
either of the two stars compared. We confess ourselves unable to account
for the confusion existing with regard to this asterism, of which al-Birini
also could obtain no intelligible account from his Indian teachers. But
it is to be observed that all the authorities, excepting our text and the
Cakalya-Sanhité, give Ardra 11° of polar latitude instead of 9°, which
‘would reduce the error of latitude, as compared with a Orionis, to an
‘amount very little greater than will be met with in one or two other cases
below, where the star is situated south of the ecliptic; and it is contrary
to all the analogies of the system that a faint star should, have been selected
to form by itself an asterism. The Siddbanta-Ciromani ete. make the polar
longitude of the asterism 20’ less than that given by the Sirya-Siddhanta,
and the Graha-Laighava 1° 9(Y less: these would add so much to the error
of longitude. }
| Here, for the first time, the three systems which we are comparing
disagree with one another entirely. The Chinese have adopted for the
determinative of their fourth sieu, which is styled Tsan, the upper star
in Orion’s belt, or 6 Orionis (2)—a strange and arbitrary selection, for
which M. Biot is unable to find any explanation. The Arabs have established their sixth station close to the ecliptic, in the feet of Pollux, naming
: , it al-Han'ah, ‘‘the pile’: it comprises the two stars y (2.8) and ¢
A ete (4.3) Geminorum; some authorities, however, extend the limita of the
sip mansion so far as to include also the stars in the foot of the other twin,
ove Or vy, Geminorum; of which the latter is the next Chinese steu.
Te -Punarvasu; in all the more ancient lists the name appears as a
ual, punarvasai: it is derived from punar, ‘‘again,’’ and vasu, “* good,
Bales he reason of the designation is not apparent. The regent
m is Aditi, the mother of the Adityas. Its dual title indicates

216 Strya-Siddhanta
that it is composed of two stars, of nearly equal brilliancy, and two is
the number allotted to it by the Cakalya and Khanda-Kataka, the eastern
being pointed out below (v. 19) as the junction-star. The pair are the
two bright stars in the heads of the Twins, or « and 8 Geminorum, and
the latter (1.2) is the junction-star. The comparison of positions is as
follows :
Punarraso eee ~~» 92° 52’
The Graha-Lighava adds 1° to the polar longitude of Punarvasu as
stated by the other authorities.
Four stars are by some assigned to this asterism, and with that
number corresponds the representation of its arrangement by the figure of
a house: it is quite uncertain which of the neighboring stars of the same
constellation are to be added to those above mentioned to form the group
of four, but we think « (magn. 4) and v (5) those most likely to have been
chosen: Colebrooke suggests wv (3.4) and + (5.4).
The determinative of the fifth sieu Tsing, is « Geminorum (3), which,
as we have seen. is reckoned among the stars composing the sixth manail ;
the seventh manzil includes, like the Hindu asterism, oa and @ Geminorum :
it is named adh-Dhird,’ ‘* the paw *’—1.¢., of the Lion; the figure of Leo
(see Ideler, p. 152 ete.) being by the Arabs so stretched out as to cover
parts of Gemini, Cancer, Canis Minor, and other neighboring constellations.
8. Pushya; from the root push, “ nourish, thrive ''; another frequent
name, which is the one employed by our treatise, 1s tishya, which is
translated ‘* auspicious "’; Amara gives also sidhya, ‘* prosperous.’” Its
divinity is Brhaspati, the priest and teacher of the gods. It comprises three
stars—the Khanda-Kataka alone seems to give it but one—of which the
middle one is the junction-star of the asterism. This is shown by the
position assigned to it to be 6 Cancri (4):
Pusbys mr ~w» 206° OF aan sus o* 0
5 Cancti ch .. 108° 42 a, 6 OP 4s
The other two are doubtless y (4.5) and » (6) of the same constellation : the asterism is figured as a crescent and as an arrow, and the arrangement of the group admits of being regarded as representing 4 crescent, or
the barbed head of an arrow. Were the arrow the only figure given, it
might be possible to regard the group as composed of y, © and 8 (4), the
latter representing the head of the arrow, and the nebulous cluster, Preesepe,
between y and yp, the feathering of its shaft: p» (105° 48’—O° 48/8.) would
n be the junction-star.
5 The Aca’ mangil, an-Nathrah, ‘* the nose-gap '—-{.¢6., of the Lion—
comprises y and 6 Cancri, together with Presepe; oF, according to some

a Of the Asterisms 217
authorities, Presepe alone. The sixth sieu, Kuei, is @ Cancri, a _ star
which is, at present, only with difficulty distinguished by the naked eye.
Ptolemy rates it as of the fourth magnitude, like y and 6: perhaps it is
one of the stars of which the brilliancy has sensibly diminished during
the past two or three thousand years, or else a variable star of very long
j period. The possibility of such changes requires to be taken into account,
in comparing our heavens with those of so remote a past.
9. Agleshd; or, as plural, dgleshds; the word is also written dgreshd:
its appellative meaning is “ entwiner, embracer.’"" With the name accord
the divinities to whom the regency of the asterism is assigned, which are
sarpas, the serpents. The number of stars in the group is stated as five by
all the authorities excepting the Khanda-Kataka, which reads six: their
configuration is represented by a wheel. The star a Cancri (4) is pointed
out by Colebrooke as the junction-star of Aclesha, apparently from the near
correspondence of its latitude with that assigned to the latter, for he says
nothing in connection with it of his native helpers: but a Cancri is not the
eastern (v. 19) member of any group of five stars; nor, indeed, is it a
member of any distinct group at all. Now the name, figure, and divinity
of Acleshé are all distinctive, and point to a constellation of a bent or
circular form: and if we go a little farther southward from the ecliptic,
| we find precisely such 4 constellation, and cne containing, moreover, the
i corresponding Chinese determinative. The group is that in the head of
Hydra, or 9, o, 4 © P Hydre, o and p being of the fifth magnitude, and
4 the rest of the fourth: their arrangement is conspicuously circular. There
j ean be no doubt, therefore, that the situation of the asterism is in the
» head of Hydra, and e Hydre, its brightest star (being rated in the Greenw.
: | Cat. as of magnitude 3.4, while 6 is 4.5), is the junction-star:
reas, rr = us 1a" 90"... Es Ms 3.
in aCaccri +s 2ST ee a. 5° 81'S.
er os The error of the Hindu determination of the latitude is, indeed, very
, considerable, yet not greater than we are compelled to accept in one OF
Pa) two other cases. The Khanda-Kataka increases it 1°, giving the asterism
? 6° instead of 7° of polar latitude. The Siddhanta-CGiroman! ete. deduct
eee 1° from the polar longitude of the Sdrya-Siddhanta, and the Grahaae Wichave deducts 2°: both variations would add to the error in longitude,
, ~ Arab manzil is, in this instance, far removed from the Hindu
0 oy PLS
asterism, being composed of € Caneri (5) and A Leonis (5.4), and called
Turf, “the look *'—i.e., of the Lion. The seventh Chinese sieu, Lieu,
s alrea noticed, included in the Hindu group, being 6 Hydrie.
sha; or, as plural maghds; “mighty.” The pitaras, Fathers,
ects ei ‘ted, are the regents of the asterism, which is figured
so. t is, according to most authorities, composed of five stars,

ite
| . i; » Pes fin A 9, A Toa ie aa .
ie — sary * ; (See lslit slit et:
seers I :
Catt. Beene
RIE ae ee
nta of which the southern (vy. 18) is the jun
the bright stars in the neck and side of the Lion, or {, y, 9, and a
—~— Leonis, of magnitudes 4.5, 2, 8.4, and 1.2 respectively; but which should
____ be the fifth is not easy to determine, for there is no other single star which
ir _ seems to form naturally a member of the same group with these: wv (5),
# (5), or p (4) might be forced into a connection with them. ‘This
difficulty would be removed by adopting, with the Khanda-Kataka, six as
the number of stars included in the asterism: it would then be composed
_ of all the stars forming the conspicuous constellation familiarly known as
“the Sickle.’" The star a Leonis, or Regulus, the most brilliant of the
“Troup, is the junction-star, and its position is defined with unusual
precision :
ction-star. Four of these must be
Magh& ee ws aa” OF ase ve KO
Regulos ee » 120° 49% O° 27°N.
The tenth manzil, aj-Jabhah, *‘ the forehead '’—i.e., of the Lion—is
also composed of (, y 9, a Leonis.
The eighth, ninth, and tenth sieu of the Chinese system altogether
disagree in position with the groups marking the Hindu and Arab mansions,
being situated far to the southward of the ecliptic, in proximity, according
to Biot, to the equator of the period when they were established. The
eighth, Sing, is a Hydrw (2), having longitude (A.D, 560) 127° 16),
latitude 22° 25’ 8S. |
11, 12. Phalgunt; or, as plural, phalgunyas; the dual, phalgunydu,
is also found: this treatise presents the derivative form phdlguni, which
is not infrequently employed elsewhere. Lhe word is likewise used to
owing, apparently, to the ignorance or carelessness of the describers, and
especially to their not having clearly distinguished the characteristics of
the combined constellation from those of its separate parts. In each case,
a couch or bedstead (cayy4, mafica, paryanka) is given as the figure of one =
| forming | roa re oblong figure,
of a constellation of four stars, forming together a regular oblong Mgure, =~
which admits of being represented—not unsuitably, if rather prosaically—by =
‘a bed. ‘his figure, in the case of the Phalgu is composed of 6, 0, By zt
’ yery | : marked constellation, containing —
magnitude, one, 6, of t
Cr eas

Of the Asterisms 919
and one, 93, of the fourth. The symbol of a bed, properly belonging to the
whole constellation, is given by all the authorities to both the two parts
into which it is divided. Each of these latter has two stars assigned to
it, and the junction-stars are said (v. 18) to be the northern. The first
group is, then, clearly identifiable as 6 and @ Leonis, the former and
brighter being the distinctive star:
Parva-Pbhalguni -» 439" 58° a 28" 10':8.
Leonis ee LAE LE. Sree yall Ui gh.
The Siddhanta-Cirornani ete,, and the Graha-Laghava, give PurvaPhalguni respectively 3° and 4° more of polar longitude than the SuryaSiddhanta. These are more notable variations than are found in any other
——s ease, and they appear to us to indicate that these treatises intend to designate
* @ the southern member of the group, as its junction-star: we have accord-
| ingly added its position also above.
In the latter group, the junction-star is evidently @ Leonis:
Uttara-Phalguni .«. 166° 10° >) tn, © RR.
8 Leovis ««» L6I" 37° Ses age iy iit
This star, however, is not the northern, but the southern, of the two
ie composing the asterism: its description as the southern we cannot but
regard as simply an error, founded on a misapprehension of the composition
ie of the double group. To al-Birani, 6 Leonis and another star to the
northward, in the Arab constellation Coma Berenices, were pointed out
as forming the asterism Uttara-Phalguni. The ikalya gives it five stars,
Soa probably adding to 8 Leonis the four small stars in the head of the Virgin,
aE ie é, v, wr, and o, of magnitudes four to five and five.
_ The regents of Parva and Uttara-Phalguni are Bhaga and Aryaman,
a wy'or Aryaman and Bhaga, two of the Adityas.
z a. The two corresponding Arab mansions are ealled az-Zubrah, ** the
~~ mane ’’—ji.¢., of the Lion—and as-Sarfah, *‘ the turn": they agree as
nearly as possible with the Hindu asterisms, the former being composed of
*-§ and @ Leonis, the latter of 8 Leonis alone. The Chinese sieu, named
» respectively Chang and Y, are v! Hydre (5)* and a Crateris (4).
Hasta, “* hand.” Savitar, the sun, is regent of the asterism,
accordance with its name, is figured as a hand, and contains five
ing to the five fingers. These are the five principal stars in
the constellation Corvus, a well-marked group, which bears, however, no
Peary aRnantouc 6 resemblance to a hand. The stars are named—counting
the 1 bum around to the little finger, according to our apprehension
aff
P cy
ra
tein P
; P ia ms
. rl
™ ta @ ec
meer .
d e¢
as- °
ee 5 te. ™
2 my
oi OR aan :
aes Tt a, apparently, by an original error of the press, that M. Biot, in all his tables.
S Te’ i, ata: wea oh VY an A
= A anes baad ne | a — $
aN
a

920, : Stirya-Siddhdnta
of the figure—, a, e, y, and 6 Corvi. The text gives below (v. 17) a very
special description of the situation of the junction-star in the group, but
one which is unfortunately quite hard to understand and apply: we regard
it as most probable, however (sec note to v. 17), that y (8) is the star
intended: the defined position, in which all the authorities agree, would
point rather to 6 (3):
Hasta =a --» 174° 22’ ee (! bie: an.
5 Corvyi vve Oyo tae ig ~~ 22° 10°86,
The Hindu and Chinese systems return, in this asterism, to an accordance with one another: the eleventh sieu, Chin, is the star y Corvi. The
Arab system holds its own independent course one point farther: its
thirteenth mansion comprises the five bright stars A, n, y, 5, « Virginis,
which form two sides, measuring about 15° each, of a great triangle: the
mansion is named al-Auwa’, *‘ the barking dog.’’
i4. Citra, ‘* brilliant."’ This is the beautiful star of the first magnitude o Virginis, or Spica, constituting an asterism by itself, and figured as
a pearl or as a lamp. Its divinity is Tvashtar, ‘*the shaper, artificer.”
Its longitude is very erroneously defined by the Sirya-Siddhanta :
Spee es orgs 49 So 9s.
All the other authorities, however, saving the Cakalya, remove this
error, by giving Citré 183° of polar longitude, instead of 180°. The only
variation from the definition of latitude made by our text 15 offered
by the Siddhanta-C romani; which, varying for once from the BrahmaSiddhanta, reads 1° 45’ instead of 2°-
Spica is likewise the fourteenth manazil of the Arabs, styled by them
as-Simfik, and the twelfth sieu of the Chinese, who call it Kio.
15. Svdtt, or svdti; the word is said to mean sword.’’ The TaittiriyaBrahmana calls the asterism nishtyd, ‘* outcast,” possibly from its remote
northern situation. It is, like the last, an asterism comprising but a single
brilliant star, which is figured as a coral bead, gem, or pearl. In the
definition of its latitude all authorities agree; the Graha-Lighava makes its
polar longitude 198° only, instead of 199°. The star intended is plainly
eo Bootis, or Arcturus:
% is i i : beyond the limits of the
=n this instance, the Hindus have gone far he
yodine, in order to bring into their series of asterisms & brilliant star acs
the northern heavens: the other two systems agree int remaining rises
ecliptic. The fourteenth Chinese sieu, Kang, is x Virgimis (4.5):

Of the Aslerisms 221
manail, al-Ghafr, ** the covering,’ includes the same star, together with
t, and either A or @ Virginis. ;
16. Vigdkhd, ** having spreading branches "’: in all the earlier lists the
name appears as a dual, vigdkhe, ‘The asterism is also placed under the
regency of a dual divinity, indragni, Indra and Agni. We should expect,
then, to find it composed, like the other two dual asterisms, the Ist and
‘Zith, of two stars, nearly equal in brilliancy, and two is actually the number
‘assigned to the group by the Qakalya and the Khanda-Kataka. Now the
| only two stars in thia region of the zodiac forming « conspicuous pair are
a and § Libre, both of the second magnitude, and as these two compose
= the corresponding Arab mansion, while the former of them is the Chinese
sicu, we have the strongest reasons for supposing them to constitute the
Hindu asterism also, There are, however, difficulties in the way of this
| assurmption. The later authorities give Vigakh& four stars, and the defined
in position of the junction-star identifies it neither with a nor 8, but with the
be: faint star « (4.3) in the same constellation. Colebrooke, overlooking
| this star, suggests a or x Libre (5): the following comparison of positions
| will show that neither of them can be the one meant to be pointed out:
- : — Wig&kha <. gist ar i. 1° 28’ 8.
ts : Libr fe MELO . Lt 48 8B.
ee a Libre .. 205" 6° Of 23° N,
. x Libram wee «617° 48" wo OF :
he group is figured as a torana: this word Jones and Colebrooke
= translate “ festoon,’’ but its more proper meaning is “‘ an outer door or
, a decorated gateway."" And if we change the designation of situation
Bete 8 Cecerees |
of the junction-star in its group, given below (v. 16), from “* northern “ to
Peas.’ ** southern, ”’ we find without difficulty a quadrangle of stars, viz., t, a, B, ¥
(4.5) Libre, which admits very well of being figured as a gateway- Nor
sis it, in our opinion, taking an unwarrantable liberty to make such an alteration. The whole scheme of designations we regard as of inferior authenticity, and as partaking of the confusion and uncertainty of the later knowledge of the Hindus respecting their system of asterisms. ‘That they were
long ago doubtful of the position of Vigikh& is shown by the fact that al-
; mark it in his list as “‘ unknown.” Very probably
a-Siddhanta, in calling » the northern member of the group,
to include with it only the star 20 Libre (3.4), situated about
Upon the whole, then, while we regard the identiin some respects more doubtful than that of any
he series, we yet believe that it was originally composed
. B Libre, and that later the group ws extended
5 . and y, and, as so extended, was figured as a gateway.
al usage, of the faintest star in the group
may have been mado in order to insure against the
original dual form.

ae:
222, - Stirya-Siddhdnta
The variations of the other authorities from the position as stated in
our text are of small importance: the Siddhinta-Cjroman etc. give
Vicakha 55’ less of polar longitude, and the Grahna-Laghava 1° less; of
polar latitude, the Siddhanta-Ciromani gives it 10’, the Graha-Lighava 30!
less; the Khanda-Kataka agrees here, as also in the two following asterisms,
with the Sirya-Siddhanta,
The sixteenth Arab manzil, comprising, as already noticed, a and 8
Libre, is styled az-Zubinin, “* the two claws "—i.¢., of the Scorpion: the
name of the correspondmg Chinese mansion, having for its determinative
a Libre, is Ti.
17. Anurdidhd; or, as plural, anurddhads: the word means ** success."’
The divinity is Mitra, “* friend,’’ one of the Adityas. According to the
CGakalya, the asterism is composed of three stars, and with this our text
plainly agrees, by designating (v. 18) the middle as the junction-star: all
the other authorities give it four stars. As a group of three, it comprises
8, 8, x Scorpionis, 6 (2.3) being the junction-ster; as the fourth member
we are doubtless to add 6 Scorpionis (5.4). It is figured as a bali or vali;
this Colebrooke translates ‘* a row of oblations; '" we do not find, however,
that the word, although it means both “* oblation, offering,’’ and “* a row,
fold, ridge,’’ is used to designate the two combined : perhaps it may better
be taken as simply ‘‘ a row; "" the stars of the asterism, whether considered
as three or four, being disposed in nearly a straight line. The comparison
of positions is as follows:
8 Scorpiocnis .. 222° 34 aS batty hl
The Siddhinta-CGiroman and Graha-Laghava estimate the latitude of
‘Anuradha’ somewhat more accurately, deducting from the polar latitude,
as given by our text, 1° 15’ and 1” respectively: the Siddhanta- iromani
ete. also add the insignificant amount of 5’ to the polar longitude of the
Sirya-Siddhinta,
The corresponding Arab manail, named al-Iklil, ‘* the crown, contains also the three stars 6, 8, « Seorpionis, some authorities adding 64
to the group. The Chinese sicu, Fang, is = (3), the southernmost and
the faintest of the three.
18. Jyeshthd, ‘* oldest.” The Taittiriya-Sanhité, in its list of
asterisms, repeats here the name rohini, ** ruddy,” which we have had
above as that of the 4th asterism - the appellation has the same ground
in this as in the other case, the junetion-star of Jyeshthi being also one of
those which shine with a reddish light. The regent is Indra, the god of
the clear sky. The group | according to all the authorities, three
a Js stars, and the central one ie 18) is the junction-star. This is the brian’,
Ris
eek ee ee | :
7 - \ eS 2 i de y Lats eens .
‘ eh oe ae * j in
i:

Of the Asterisms 225
star of the first magnitude a Scorpionis, or Antares; its two companions
are o (3.4) and - (3.4) in the same constellation
Jyeahtba 230° 7 = 3° BO 8,
The constellation is figured as a ring, or ear-ring; by this may be
understood, perhaps, a pendent ear-jewel, as the three stars of Jyeshtha
form nearly a straight line, with the brightest in the middle.
The Siddhanta-Ciromani and Graha-Laghava add to the polar longitude of the junction-star of the asterism, as stated in our text, 5! and 1°
respectively, and they deduct from its polar latitude 30’ and 1° respectively,
making the definition of its position in both respects less accurate.
Antares forms the eighteenth manzil, and is styled al-Kalb, ** the
heart ''—i.¢., of the Scorpion: o and - are called an-Niyat, ‘* the
precordia.’" The Chinese sieu, Sin, is the westernmost of the three, or e¢.
19. Mila, ** root."’ The presiding divinity of the asterism is nirrti,
“ ealamity,’’ who is also regent of the south-western quarter, It comprises, according to the Cikalya, nine stars; their configuration is represented by a lion’s tail. ‘he stars intended are those in the tail of the
Scorpion, or e, p, €, n, 6, « x, v, A Scorpionis, all of them of the third, or
third to fourth, magnitude. Other authdrities count eleven stars in the
ts group, probably reckoning » and £ as four stars; each being, in fact, a
4 group of two closely approximate stars, named in our catalogues p! (3).
p? (4), €' (4.5), & (8). The Khanda-Kataka alone gives Mila only two stars,
_ which are identified by al-Birdni with the Arab manzil ash-Shaulah, or
A and wv Scorpionis. The TAittiriya-Sanhita, too, gives the name of the
asterism as vicrtdu, ‘‘ the two releasers "’: the Vicrtiu are several times
spoken of in the Atharva-Veda as two stars of which the rising promotes
‘relief from lingering disease (Kshetriya): it 1s accordingly probable that
these are the two stars in the sting of the Scorpion, and that they alone
have been regarded by some as composing the asterism: their healing
virtue would doubtless be connected with the meteorological conditions of
nates the eastern member of the group as its junction-star: it is uncertain
whether the direction is meant to apply to the group of two, or to that
of nine stars: if, as seems probable, A is the star pointed out by the
definition of position, it is strictly true only of the pair A and v, since ¢, Xx,
and @ are all farther eastward than A:
. "a e Ds

a)
om
ia
ag
a. AEP 2
=A
e a '
: ‘3 m S aes, ae
ee) ee
7 i .\ = a. a af PVs oy 7 34. hn Os
eae: Stirya-Siddhanta
cg ih a ds as
a
| wet a
oe - me PA bre = = en oe ae fa . fy
by ‘our text : the Siddhinta _Qiromani, in like manner, deducts 30’, while
_ the Khanda-Kataka adds the same amount.
Bpca te The Taittiriya-Sanhité makes pitaras, the Fathers, the presiding
divinities of this asterism, as well as of the tenth.
Bentley states (Hind. Astr., p. 5) that Mila was originally reckoned
as the first of the asterisms, and was therefore so named, as being their
root or origin; also that, at another time, or in a different system, the
series was made to begin with JyeshthA, which thence received its title of
** eldest."" These statements are put forth with characteristic recklessness, and apparently, like a great many others in his pretended history of
Hindu astronomy, upon the unsupported authority of his own conjecture.
It is, in many cases, by no means easy to discover reasons for the particular
appellations by which the asterisms are designated : but we would suggest
that Mola may perhaps have been so named from its being considerably
the lowest, or farthest to the southward, of the whole series of asterisms,
and hence capable of being looked upon as the root out of which they had
erown up the heavens. It would even be possible to trace the same conception farther, and to regard Jyeshth& as so styled because it was the first,
or *' oldest,"" outgrowth from this root, while the Vicikhe, ‘‘ the two
diverging branches,"’ were the stars in which the series broke into two lines,
the one proceeding northward, to Sviti or Arcturus, the other westward,
to Citré or Spica. We throw out the conjecture for what it may be worth,
not being ourselves at all confident of ite accordance with the truth.
The nineteenth Arab manzil is styled ash-Shaulah, ** the sting "—1.e.,
of the Scorpion—and comprises, as already noticed, v and A Scorpionis.
The determinative of the seventeenth steu, Uei, is included in the Hindu
asterism, being »? Scorpionis. |
20, 21. Ashddhd; or, as plural, athddhds; this treatise presents the
derivative form dshddha, which is not infrequent elsewhere : the word
means ‘* unsubdued.’’ Here, again, we have a double group, divided into
two asterisms, which are distinguished as pfiirva and uttara, ‘‘ former " and
“latter.” Their respective divinities are dpas, ** the waters,“ and wvigve
devas, *‘ the collective gods.” Two stars are ordinarily allotted to each
asterism, and in each case the northern is designated (v. 16) as the junctionstar. By some authorities each group is figured as A bed or oy by
others, the one as a bed and the other as an elephant’s tusk; and ere,
ea : : ‘ni to which is the bed and which the
again, there 16 & difference of opinion as to ne Lee ek ihe ene
tusk. The true solution of this confusion is, as we conceive, th ow
| bed, while either of them alone
asterisms taken together are figured as a bed, sephegmte Meroe atae
ihe | : ‘s tusk. The former group must comprise
is represented by an elephant’s tu SOKIDSE Pcaig esr Sig
8 (3.4) and e (3.2) Sagittarii, the former being the junction-star;
shown by the following comparison of positions: )
Porve- 254° 39 £ bap
BB x," Ashight ant 354" 32 “oe G6” 25° s a
M Sagittar ii - f Si i 4 =
Fr i a. i fr ae : —s -
ie: . _ ‘es ah ty ome ; rs hy eres tatenny =.
a iz _ g ns ye os ; es x = | Ls ” ; = wuz [ oe 7 hel r m -

Of the Asterisms 225
_ The Graha-Lighava gives Pairva-Ashidha 1° more of polar longitude,
and 30/ less of polar latitude, than the Strya-Siddhante: the Siddhanta-
"» Giromani etc. give it 10’ less of the latter.
+The latter of the two groups contain®, as its southern star, [ Saggittarii
(8.4), and its northern and junction-star can be no other than o (2.3) in
‘the same constellation, notwithstanding the error in the Hindu determination
of its latitude, which led Colebrooke to regard 7 (4.3) as the star intended ;
we subjoin the positions -
Uttara-Asbidhi ... 260° 23° ae 4" 60-6.
\. y Sagittarii .. 264° 48° a 6° 5 BS:
see: - The only variation from the position of the junction-star of this
| Pe asterism as stated in our text is presented by the Graha-Lighava, which ~
makes its polar longitude 261° instead of 260".
Mate: The Qakalya (according to Colebrooke: our MS. is defective at this
were _ point) and the Khanda-Kataka assign four stars to each of the Ashadhas,
a. and the former represents each as a bed. It would not be difficult to
7 establish two four-sided figures in this region of the constellation Sagittarius,
each including the stars above mentioned, with two others: the one would
ms F be composed of y* (4.3), 8, €. 7 (4—the star is also ealled 8 Telescopii),
iy ets the other of ¢ (4.3), « r, and €: such is unquestionably the constitution of
Kets the two asterisms, considered as groups of four stars; they are thus identified
also, it may be remarked, by al-Bironi. The junction-stars would still
We. be $8 and a, which are the northernmost in their respective constellations ;
ee _ nor is there any question as to which four among the ecight are selected
AS to make up the double asterism, since 8, «, £, and o both form the most
Ke regular quadrangular figure, and are the brightest stars.
_-—s« The determinatives of the eighteenth and nineteenth mansions of the
es Chinese, Ki and Teu, are 72 and ¢ Sagittarii, which are included in the
i e twentieth manzil comprehends
-_—s- two quadruple groups as stated above. Th
all the eight stars which we have mentioned, and is styled an-Na‘déim, - the
__ —pasturing cattle “": some also understand each group of four as representing
a") an ostrich, na’ . The twenty-first manazil, on the other hand, al-Baldab,
eee ¢* <hig town,’’ is described as a vacant space above the head of Sagittarius,
the most conspicuous is = Sagittarii
Co - bounded by fa'nt stars, among which
_ Oa
92. Abhijit, ‘* eonquering.”” The regent of the asterism is Brahma.
sition ned to its junction-star, which is described as the brightest
° identifies it with a Lyre or Vega, a star which
up of three,
only one or two others in the heavens:
es compared (excepting the Q akalys) define the
accurately, adding 2° to the polar

Stirya-Siddhdanta
latitude giyen by the Strya-Siddhanta: the Graha-Liaghava also improves
the position in longitude by adding 1° 20’, while the Siddhinta-Ciromani
ete. increase the error by deducting 1° 40.
The Taittiriya-Sanhiti (iv. 4. 10) omits Abhijit from its list of the
asterisms: the probable reason of its omission in some authorities, or in
certain connections, and its retention in others, we shall discuss farther on.
Abhijit is figured as a triangle, or as the triangular nut of the
erngata, an aquatic plant; this very distinctly represents the grouping of
a luyre with the two other fainter stars of the same constellation, ¢ and €,
both of the fifth magnitude.
Tn this and the two following asterisms—as once before, in the fifteenth
_ of the series—the Hindus have gone far from the zodiac, in order to bring
into their system brilliant stars from the northern heavens, while the
Chinese and the Arab systems agree in remaining in the immediate neighborhood of the ecliptic. The twentieth sieu is named Nieu, and is the
star @ Capricorni (3), situated in the head of the Goat: the twenty-second
mansil, Sa’d adh-Dhabih, “* felicity of the sacrificer,’’ contains the same
star, the group being a (composed of two stars, each of magnitude 8.4)
and 8 Capricorn,
283. Cravana, ‘* hearing, ear; ‘' from the root oru, ‘* hear "’: another
name for the asterism, grond, found occurring in the Tiittiriya lists, is
perhaps from the same root, but the word means also ‘‘ lame."’ avana
comprises three stars, of which the middle one (v. 18) is the junction-star:
they are to be found in the back and neck of the Eagle, namely as y, a, and
8 Aquile; a, the determinative, is a star of the first to second magnitude,
while y and @ are of the third and fourth respectively :
All the authorities agree as to the polar latitude of Ciavana: the
Siddhinta Ciromani etc. give it 2° less of polar longitude than our treatise,
and the Grahba-Lighava even as much as 6” less.
The regent of the asterism is Vishnu and its figure or symbol corresponds therewith, being three footsteps, representatives of the three steps
by which Vishnu is said, in the early Hindu mythology, to have strode
through heaven. The Akalya, however, gives 4 trident as the figure
belonging to Cravana. ossibly the name is to be regarded as indicating
that it was originally figured as an ear.
The Chinese sieu corresponding in rank with (Gravana is called Ni,
and is the faint star e Aquarii (4.3). The Arab manzil Sa’d Bula’,
‘* felicity of a devourer,’’ or al-Bula * 4* the devourer,"’ etce,, includes the
anme star, being composed of «, » (4-5), ¥ (5) Aquarii, or, according to
others, of « and 7 (6) Aquarii, or of p and v.

‘ joy
* Si
Ss oS
Cc Lt ay
Of the Asterisms 227
24. Cravishthd; the word is a superlative formation from the same
root from which came the name of the preceding asterism, and means,
probably, ‘' most famous."’ Another and hardly less frequent appellation
is dhanishthd, am irregular superlative from dhanin, ** wealthy.” The class
of deitics known as the vasus, “* bright, good,” are the regents of the
asterism. It comprises four stars, or, according to the Qakalya and
Khanda-Kataka, five: the former, which is given by so early a list as that
of the Taittiriya-Brihmana, is doubtless the original number. The group
is the conspicuous one in the head of the Dolphin, composed of f, a, ¥, 5
Delphini, all of them stars of the third, or third to fourth, magnitude, and
closely disposed in diamond or lozenge-form:; they are figured by the
Hindus as a drum or tabor. ‘The junction-star, which is the western
The only variation from the position assigned in our text to the junction-star of Cravishtha is presented by the Graha-Laghava, which gives it
286°, instead of 290°, of polar longitude. Perhaps its intention is to point
out £ (5) as the junction-star: this is doubtless the one added to the other
four, on account of its close proximity to them, to make up the group
of five; it lies only about half a degree westward from f.
The name of the twenty-fourth manail, Sa'd as-Su’td, ‘' felicity of
felicities *’—i.e., ““ most felicitous **_exhibits an accordance with that of
the Hindu asterism which possibly is not accidental. The two are, however,
as already noticed, far removed in position from one another, the Arab
mansion being composed of the two stars 8 (8) and € (5.4), in the left
shoulder of Aquarius, to which some added also 46, or c', Capricorni (6).
<a The corresponding sieu, Hil, is the firs® of them, or @ Aquaril.
25. Catabhishaj, ‘‘ having a hundred physicians '': the form catabhishd
which geems to be merely a corruption of the other, also occurs in later
writings. It is, as we should expect from the title, said to be composed
of » hundred stars, of which the brightest (v. 19) is the junction-star.
This, from its defined position, can only be A Aquarii (4):
Qatabbisba
| : ‘The rest of the asterism is to be sought among the yet fainter stars in
‘the knee of Aquarius, and the stream from his jar: ef course, the number
‘one hundred is not to be taken as an exact one, nor aie we to suppose 16
D sle to trace out with any distinctness the figure assigned to the group,
-Kataka, according to al-Birini, gives
| enier fi single star, but this is probably an error of the Arab

a
Fis >. : « oe FF i. <i ,
Sai Lae ated * _# yr en f _——
Pas a ~ } Ss od 1-S rede hi ta ie rato} 2"% 5 ‘ *
| METHOD UGhONIG.
aa >. i
he is unable to point out which of the stars in Aquarius is to
ed as constituting the asterism. :
3 a regent of the 25th asterism, according to nearly all the authorities,
tet is Varuna, the chief of the Adityas, but later the god of the waters: the
sae Taittiriya-Sanhité alone gives to it and to the 14th asterism, as well as to
the 18th, Indra as presiding divinity : this is perhaps mere blundering.
The Graha-Lighava places the junction-star of Catabhishaj precisely
on the ecliptic: the Siddhanta-Qiromani etc., give it 20’, instead of 30’,
of polar latitude south. .
The corresponding lunar mansion of the Arabs, Sa‘d al-Akhbiyah,
‘** the’ felicity of tents,’ comprises the three stare in the right wrist and
hand of the Water-bearer, or y (3), ¢ (4), 7 (4) Aquarii, together with a
fourth, which Ideler supposes to be w (5). Since, however, the twentythird Chinese determinative, Goei, is « Aquarii (3), a star so near as
readily to be brought into the same group with the other three, we are
inclined to regard it as altogether probable that the mansion was, at least
originally, composed of a, y, £ and 7. : .
26, 27. Bhddrapaddé; as plural, bhddrapadds: also bhadrapadd; from
bhadra, ** beautiful, happy,’’ and pada, ‘* foot.'’ Another frequent appellation is proshthapaddéd: proshtha is said to mean “* carp ** and ‘* ox ’’; the
latter signification might perhaps apply here. We have here, once more,
a double asterism, divided into two parts, which are distinguished from
one another as pfirva and uttara, ‘* former "’ and “* latter.” All authorities
agree in assigning two stars to each of the two groups; but there is not
the same accordance as regards the figures by which they are represented ‘
by some the one, by others the other, is called a couch or bed, the alternate
one, in either case, being pronounced a bi-faced figure: the MuhdtrtaCint&mani calls the first a bed, and the second twins. It admits, we
apprehend, of little or no question that the Bhadrapadas are properly the
four bright stars 8, a, y Pegasi, and a Andromed#—all of them common-—
ly reckoned as of the second magnitude—which form together a nearly
perfect square, with sides measuring about 15°: the constellation, a very .
conspicuous one, is familiarly known as the “* Square of Pegasus. The
figure of a couch or bed, then, belongs, as in the case of the other two
double asterisms, already explained, to the whole— constellation, and not
to either of the two separate asterisms into which it is divided, while, on 38
the other hand, cither of these latter is properly enough symbolized by a — *
pair of twins, or by a figure with a double face. ; ‘The appropriateness of as
—s- designation ‘‘ feet,"’ found as a part of both the names of the whole con_ Stellation, is also sufficiently evident, if we regard the group as thus
- gomposed. The junction-star of the former half-asterism is, by its defined
a J
oP S eer
Oe Se ae oe ed :
es
<a. om 7
a Te SMe Ne
py, Ps sos
e p * a
7 , tion, clearly shown to be a Pegasi: a ae a | 7
° eur
rd | ee

Of the Asterisms 229
_ The Graha-Liaghaya gives the junction-star 1° less of polar longitude,
which would bring its position to a yet closer accordance, in respect to
| longitude, with a Pegasi: the error in latitude, which is common to all
7. the authorities, is not greater than we have met with several times else-
¥ where. -But we are told below (v. 16) that the principal star of each of
Is these asterisms is the northern, and this would exclude 8 Pegasi altogether,
bringing in as the other member of the first pair some more southern star,
- “perhaps € Pegasi (3.4). The confusion is not less marked, although of
another character, in the case of the second asterism : in the definition of
position of its junction-star we find a longitude given which is that of one
member of the group, and a latitude which is that of the other, as is shown
by the following comparison:
ra Uttera-Bhidrapada «. 847° 16° 2 24° WN.
If we accept either of these two stars as the one of which the position
is meant to be defined, we shall be obliged to admit an error in the determination either of its longitude or of its latitude considerably greater than
we have met with elsewhere. Nor is the matter mended by any of the
other authorities: the only variation from the data of our text is presented
by the Graha-Lighava, which reads, as the polar latitude of Uttara-
‘Bhadrapadé, 27° ‘nstead of 26°. There can be no doubt that the two
stars recognized as composing the asterism are y Pegasi and a Andromed=
but there has evidently been a blundering confusion of the two in making
out the definition of position of the junction-star- We would suggest the
-_ following as a possible explanation of this confusion: ‘that originally a and
' -y~-Pegasi were designated and described as junction-stars of the two halfCy groups, of which they were respectively the southern members; that afterss ward, for some reason—perhaps owing to the astrological theory (see above,
ss wii, 21) of the superiority of a northern star—the rank of junction-star was
—s sought to be transferred from the southern to the northern stars of both
} asterisms : that, in making the transfer, the original constitution of the
former group was neglected, while in the latter the attempt was made to
2) ‘define the real position of the northern star, but by simply adding to the
F polar latitude already stated for y Pegari, without altering its polar longitude al 10. Al-Birdni, it should be remarked, was unable to obtain from
sal his : du informants any satisfactory identification of either of these asterVe is s, and marks both in his catalogue as “ unknown."*
ve taken of the true character of the two Bhadrapadas
| by their comparison with the corresponding members
The twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh manzils,
and al-Fargh al-Mukhir, ‘‘ the fore and hind spouts
** comprise respectively o and @ Pegasi, and y Pegasi
ue von
fy »*
a,

es er x
Sdrya-Siddhanita
and a Andromedwe; the determinatives of the twenty-fourth and twentyfifth siew,; Che and Pi, are a and y Pegasi.
The regents of these two asterisms ore aja ekapit and ahi budhnya,
the ** one-footed goat "’ and the ** bottom-snake,’’ two mythical figures, of
obscure significance, from the Vedic pantheon.
28. Revati, ‘‘ wealthy, abundant.’’ Its presiding divinity is Pushan,
**the prosperer,’’ one of the Adityas. It is said to conta thirty-two
stars, which are figured, like those of Cravishthé, by a drum or tabor;
but it would be in vain to attempt to point out precisely tho thirty-two
which are intended, or to discover in their arrangement any resemblance
to the figure chosen to represent it. The junction-star of the group is said
(v. 18) to be its southernmost member: all authorities agree in placing it
upon the ecliptic and all excepting our treatise and the Cakalya make its
position exactly mark the initial point of the fixed sidereal sphere, The
star intended is, as we have already often had occasion to notice, the faint
star € Piscium, of about the fifth magnitude, situated in the band which
connects the two Fishes. It is indeed very near to the ecliptic, having
only 13/ of south latitude. It coincided in longitude with the vernal equinox
in the year 572 of our era.
At the time of al-Birdini’s visit to India, the Hindus seem to have
been already unable to point out distinctly and with confidence the situation
in the heavens of that most important point from which they held that the
motions of the planets commenced at the creation, and at which, at successive intervals, their universal conjunction would again take place; for
he is obliged to mark the asterism as not certainly identifiable. He also
assigns to it, as to Catabbishaj, only a single star.
The twenty-sixth Chinese sieu, Koei, is marked by € Andromedm (4), .
which is situated only 35’ east in longitude from € Piscium, but which
has 17° 86’ of north latitude. The last manzil, Batn al-Huit, “‘ the fish's 7
belly,’’ or ar-Risha, *‘ the band,’’ seems intended to include the stars composing the northern Fish, and with them probably the Chinese determinative also: but it is extended so far northward as to take in the bright
star 8 Andromedw (2), and to this star alone the name of the mansion 1s
sometimes applied, although its situation, so far from the ecliptic (in lat.
25° 56’ N.), renders it by no means suited to become the distinctive star
of one of the series of lunar stations. i:
We present, in the annexed table, a general conspectus of the correspondences of the three systems; and, in order to bring out those corres- y
pondences in the fullest manner possible, we have made the comparison in
three different ways: noting, in the first place, the cases in which the three
agree with one another; then those in which each agrees with one of the
others: and finally, those in which each agrees with either the one or the
other of the remaining two.

Of the Asterisms 23).
Correspondencesa of the Hindu, Arab, and Chinese Systems of Asterisms.
. Hindu Arab Chi
with with with
Arab Hinda § Hindoa
or
2 Bharagi, 9 oe a
: 3, Krttika, 3 3 3
4) Robiol, 4 4 4
. 56) Mrgagtrshs, ) 5 5 5
he 7| Panarvasu, | Bes 6 '
ae 9| Aclesha, | 8 - 7
= 10| Magb&, 0 5 ene
‘- 11| P..Phslguni, 10 9 wee
- |12| U.-Phalgupi, IL 10
le 13| Hasta, 12 nd 8
fi 14] Citra, 13 il 9
16) Vicikbs, i4 13 il
17\ Anuradha, 15 14 12
Q1| U.-Asbadhs, 19 + 16
second manzil to be composed of the stars in Musca, as defined
orn sixth mensil includes, according to many anthorities, the
» jeu , but as there ia, at any rate, o discordance in the erder of succession, we have
. reckoned this among the correspondences, + We reckon these two as cases of general
neo, becat the Chinese sieu is not contained in the Arab mansion,
a them both, and the virtual correspondence of the three
yond dispute. § Hore we sasutne the Chinese sieu to be comprised smong
the last menzil, which is altogether probable, although nowhere distinctly
at ae
sf rf

fi
a”
Ts
ee ee AN
_-—s re composed, in wh
oS 1) gi ipa Spee aie <5
ss Strya-Siddhanta
eee fee ioe ee
w
Pe ®
"sete age Nn ee ,
° en
ae
a ee
wa
: ae At, tee Ua “4 SAY ee Pe = 7 . -
_- Owing to the different constitution of the systems, their correspondences are somewhat diverse in character: we accqunt the Hindu asterisms
and the Arab mansions to agree, when the groups which mark the two
i" ra
“composed, ole or in part, of the same stars: we account the
Chinese system to agree with the others, when the determinative of a sieu
is to be found among the stars composing their groups. We have prefixed
to the whole the numbers and titles of the Hindu asterisms, for the sake
of easy reference back to the preceding detailed identifications and
comparisons.
After this exhibition of the concordances existing among the three
systems, it can, we apprehend, enter into the mind of no one to doubt
that all have a common origin, and are but different forms of one and
the same system. The questions next arise—is either of the three the
original from which the others have been derived? and if so, which of them
is entitled to the honor of being so regarded? and are the other two
independent and direct derivatives from it, or does either of them come
from the other, or must both acknowledge an intermediate source? In
endeavoring to answer these questions, we will first exhibit the views of
M. Biot respecting the origin and character of the Chinese sieu, as stated
in the volumes for 1840 and 1859 of the Journal des Savants.
According to Biot, the sieu form an organic and integral part of that
system by which the Chinese, from an almost immemorial antiquity, have
been accustomed to make their careful and industrious observations of
celestial phenomena. Their instruments, and their methods of observation,
have been closely analogous with those in use among modern astronomers
in the West: they have employed a meridian-circle and 4 measure of time,
_ the clepsydra, and have observed meridian-transits, obtaining right ascensions
and declinations of the bodies observed. ‘To reduce the errors of their
imperfect time-keepers, they long ago selected certain stars near the ©
equator, ‘of which they determined with great care the intervals in time,
and to these they referred the positions of stars or planets coming to the
meridian between them. The stars thus chosen are the sieu. Twenty-four
of them were fixed upon more than two thousand years before our era
(M. Biot says, about B.C. 2357: but it is obviously impossible to fix the
date, by internal evidence, within a century or two, nor is the external evidence of a more definite character); the considerations which governed their i
selection were three: proximity to the equator of that period, distinct }
visibility—conspicuous brilliancy not being demanded for them—and a it
agreement in respect to time of transit with the upper and lower meri ap J
passages of the bright stars near the pole, within the circle cha:
‘apparition: M. Biot finds reason to believe that these circumpolar sta
- ve
had been earlier observed with special care, and made standards of com- —
: 4 cx ee Milet 5 Tite pe tee ares BY ae
_ parison, and that, when ‘it was afterward scen to be desirable to have
ne oo Se eae aoe
a? 5 oe ow!
rad at MG. oe 7 ; wet, oot ie
ee ee ee ee | we a ‘ss Dub P| 6 .
a,

Of the Asterisms 233
with them in right ascension. The other four, being the 8th, 14th, 21st,
and 28th, the accession of which completed the system of twenty-eight,
were added in the time of Cheu-Kong, about B.C. 1100, because they
| marked very nearly the positions of the equinoxes and solstices at that
epoch: the bright star of the Pleiades, however, which had originally been
made the first of the series, from its near approach to the vernal equinox
of that remoter era, still maintained, as it has ever since maintained, its
rank as the first. Since the time of Cheu-Kong the system has undergone
no farther modification, but has been preserved unaltered and unimproved,
with the obstinate persistency so characteristic of the Chinese, although
many of the determinative stars have, under the influence of the precession,
become far removed from the equator, one of them even having retrograded
into the preceding mansion.
C If the history of the Chinese sieu, as thus drawn out, is well-founded
and true, the question of origin is already solved: the system of twenty-
~~ eight celestial mansions is proved to be of native Chinese institution—just
ae as the system of representation of the planetary movements by epi-cycles
r is: proved to be Greek by the fact that we can trace in the history of Greek
— science the successive steps of its gradual elaboration. That history rests,
at present, upon the authority of M. Biot alone: we are not aware, at
least, that any other investigator has gone independently over the same
—, ground - and he has not himself laid before us, in their original form, the
{- _‘~passages from Chinese texts which furnish the basis of his conclusions.
- But we regard them as entitled to be received, upon his authority, with
no slight measure of confidence: his own distinguished eminence as 4
aS _ physicist and astronomer, his familiarity with researches into the history
tae ‘ead archseology of science, his access to the abundant material for the history
by: of Chinese astronomy collected and worked up by the French missionaries at
* hs
a
ekin, and the zealous assistance of his son, M. Edouard Bivt, the eminent
Sinologist, whose premature death, in 1850, has been so deeply deplored
as a severe loss to Chinese studies—all theso advantages, rarely united in
ar such fullness in the person of any one atudent of such a subject, give very
great ‘arrived at by him as the results of laborious and
wt
fs
a
pee MT Are 4
ter of the culture of the Chinese, that they
ystem at so early a date. They have, from
distinguished by a tendency to observe and
dus by the lack of such a tendency: they have always
reme impo: ee to astronomical labors, and to the construc-
‘and rectification of the calendar; and the industry and accuracy of their
sservatic 18 | S| y at 7, : by the use made of them by modern astronomers—
is, to take a single instance, of the cometary orbits which have been
2 pec

jae
- Stirya-Siddhénta
_ealeulated, the first twenty-five rest upon Chinese observations alone: and
once more, it is altogether in accordance with the clever empiricism and
practical shrewdness of the Chinese character that they should have
originated at the very start a system of observation exceedingly well
adapted to its purpose, stopping with that, working industriously on thenceforth in the same beaten track, and never developing out of so promising a
commencement anything deserving the name of a science, never devising
a theory of the planetary motions, never even recognizing and defining the
true character of the cardinal phenomenon of the precession.
Again, although it might seem beforehand highly improbable that a
system of Chinese invention should haye found its way into the West,
and have been extensively accepted there, many centuries before the
Christian era, there are no so insuperable difficulties in the way as should
destroy the force of strong presumptive evidence of the truth of such a
communication. It is well known that in very ancient times the products
of the soil and industry of China were sought as objects of luxury in the
West, and mercantile intercourse opened and maintained across the deserts
of Central Asia; it even appears that, as early as about B.C. 600 (Isaiah
xlix. 12), some knowledge of the Sinim, as a far-off eastern nation, had
penetrated to Babylon and Judea. On the other hand, we do not know
how much, if at all, earlier than this it may be necessary to acknowledge
the system of asterisms to have made its appearance in India. The literary
memorials of the earliest period, the Vedic period proper, present no evidence
of the existence of the system: indeed, it is remarkable how little notice
is taken of the stars. by the Vedic poets; even the recognition of some of
them as planets does not appear to have taken place until considerably
later. In the more recent portions of the Vedic texts—as in the nineteenth
book of the Atharva-Veds, a modern appendage to that modern collection,
and in parts of the Yajur-Veda, of which there is reason to believe that
the canon was not closed until a comparatively late period—tull lists of the
asterisms are found. The most unequivocal evidence of the early date of
the system in India is furnished by the character of the divinities under
whose regency the several asterisms are placed : these are all from the
Vedic pantheon; the popular divinities of later times are not to be found
among them; but, on the other hand, more than one whose consequence is
lost, and whose names almost are forgotten, even in the epic period of
Hindu history, appear in the list. Neither this, however, nor any other
evidence known to us, is sufficient to prove, or even to render strongly,
probable, the existence of the asterisms in India at so remote a period that
the system might not be believed to have been introduced, in its fully
developed form, from China.
If, now, we make the attempt to determine, upon internal evidence,
which of the three systems is the primitive one, » detniled examination of
their correspondences and differences will lead us first to the important
ey ™

> Of the Asterisms 235
negative conclusion that no one among them can be regarded as the immediate source from which either of the other two has been derived, It is
evident that the Hindu asterisms and the Arab mandail constitute, in many
respects, one and the same system: both present to us coustellations or
groups of stars, in place of the single determinatives of the Chinese si¢u;
and not only are those groups composed in general of the same stars, but
in several cases—as the 7th, 10th, llth, and 12th members of the series—
where they differ widely in situation from the Chinese determinatives,
they exhibit an accordance with one another which is too close to be plausibly
looked upon as accidental. But if it is thus made to appear that neither
ean have come independently of the other from 4 Chinese original, it 15 no
less certain that neither can have come through the other from such an
original; for each has its own points of agreement with the sieu, which the
other does not share—the Hindu in the 9th, 13th, and 21st asterisms, the
Arab in the 15th, 22nd, 25rd, 24th, and 25th mansions. The same consi-
: derations show, inversely, that the Chinese system cannot be traced to
. either of the others as its source, since it agrees in several points with each
one of them where that one differs from the third. It becomes necessary,
then, to introduce an additional term into the comparison; to assume the
. existence of a fourth system, differing in some particulars from each of the
others, in which all shall find their common point of union. Such an
assumption is not to be looked upon as either gratuitous or arbitrary. Not
only do the mutual relations of the three systems point distinctly toward
it, but it is also supported by general considerations, and will, we think, be
< found to remove many of the difficulties which bave embarrassed the history
- of the general system. It has been urged as a powerful objection to the
Chinese origin of the twenty-eight-fold division of the beavens, that we
‘find traces of its existence in so muny of the countries of the West, geogra
| phically remote from China, and in which Chinese influence can hardly be
supposed to have been directly felt. And it is undoubtedly true that neither
India nor Arabia has stood in ancient times in such relations to China as
should fit it to become the immediate recipient of Chinese learning, and
the means of its communication to surrounding peoples. The great route
‘ of intercourse between China and the West led over the table-land of
Ventral Asia, and into the north-eastern territory of Iran, the seat of the
r
-- Zoroastrian religion and culture: thence the roads diverged, the one leading
westward, the other couth-eastward into India, through the valley of the
‘Cabul, the true gate of the Indian peninsula. Within or upon the limits of
this central land of Iran we conceive the system of mansions to hie
received that form of which the Hindu nakshatras aud the Arab mundail are
the somewhat altered representatives : precisely where, and whether in the
\ hands of Semitic or of Aryan races, we would not at present attempt to say.
‘There are, as has been noticed above, traces of an Iranian system to be
found in the Bundehesh; but this ‘a a work which, although probably not

j ath 7 2 f ~~ _o
et Saxce OUT haénta —
Sh -
i a
= Nex
ae
ea
; Ret, ya el sae
than the times of Persia’s independence under her Sassanian rulers,
Car i
an pretend to no high ‘antiquity, and no like traces have as yet been
pointed out in the earliest Iranian memorial, the Zendavesta. Weber
t By Und, Literaturgeschichte, a 221), on the other hand, sees in the mazzaloth
>i and mazzaroth of the Scriptures (Job xxxvili. 32; Il Kings xxiii. 6)—words
a , radically akin with the Arabic manzil—indications of the early existence of
the system in question among the western Semites, and suspects for it a
_ Chaldaic origin: but the allusions appear to us too obscure and equivocal
' to be relied upon as proof of this, nor is it easy to believe that such a
method of division of the heavens should have prevailed so far to the west,
snd from so ancient a time, without our hearing of it from the Greeks;
and especially, if it formed a part of the Chaldaic astronomy. This point,
however, may fairly be passed over, as one to be determined, perhaps, by
tuture investigations, and not of essential importance to the present inquiry.
The question of originality is at least definitely settled adversely to the
claims of both the Hindu and the Arab systems, and can only lie between
the Chinese and that fourth system from which the other two have together
descended. And as concerns these, we ure willing to accept the solution
which is furnished us by the researches of M. Biot, supported as we
conceive it to be by the general probabilities of the case. Any one who
will trace out, by the help of a celestial globe or map,* the positions of
the Chinese determinatives, cannot fail to perceive their general approach
to a great circle of the sphere which is independent of the ecliptic, and
which accords more nearly with the equator of B.C. 2350 than with any
cther later one. ‘The full explanations and tables of positions given hy
Biot (Journ. d. Sav., 1840, pp- 248-254) also furnish evidence of 8 kind
appreciable by all, that the system may have bad the origin which lhe
attributes to it, and that, allowing for the limitations imposed upon it by
its history, it is consistent with itself, and well enough adapted to the
purposes for which it was designed. With the positions of its determinative stars seem to have agreed those of the constellations adopted by the
common parent of the Hindu and Arab systems, excepting in five or SIX
points: those points being where the Chinese make their one unaccountable
leap from the head to the belt of Orion, and again, where the sieu are drawn
off far to the southward, in the constellations Hydra and Crater: and this,
-n our view, looks much more as if the series of the sieu were the original,
whose guidance had been closely followed excepting oo a few cases, than
as if the asterisms composing the other systems had been independently
selected from the groups of stars situated along the zodiac, with the intention of forming a zodiacal series. It is easy to see, farther, how the single
ao : to furnish at the close of this publication, in connection wit) —
ee rae a cap of, the sofineal sone of the Leevens aa, will safSaiently

Of the Asterisms 237
__ determinatives of the siew should have become the nuclei for constellations
such as are presented by the other systems; but if, on the contrary, the
f sicu had been selected by the Chinese, in each case, from groups previously
constituted, there appears no reason why their hrightest stars should not
: have been chosen, as they were chosen later by the Hindus in the establishment of junction-stars for the asterisms.
: We would suggest, then, as the theory best supported by all the
Fy: evidence thus far elicited, that a knowledge of the Chinese astronomy, and
with it the Chinese system of division of the heavens into twenty-eight
5 mansions, was carried into Western Asia at a period not much later than
c B.C. 1100, and was there adopted by some western people, either Semitic
or Iranian, That in their hands it received a new form, such as adapted
it to a ruder and less scientific method of observation, the limiting stars
of the mansions being converted into zodiacal groups or constellations,
and in some instances altered in position, so as to be brought nearer to
the general planetary path of the ecliptic. That in this changed form,
having become a means of roughly determining and describing the places
and movements of the planets, it passed into the keeping of the Hindus—
--very probably along with the first knowledge of the planets themselves—
“4 and entered upon an independent career of history in India. That it still
maintained itself in its old seat, leaving its traces later in the Bundehesh;
and that it made its way so far westward as finally to become known to,
‘and adopted by, the Arabs. ‘The farther modifications introduced into it
by the latter people all have in view a single purpose, that of establishing
its stations in the immediate neighbourhood of the ecliptic: to this purpose
the whole Arab system is not less constantly faithful than is the Chinese
y to its own guiding principle. The Hindu sustains in this respect but an
- wnfayourable comparison with the others: the arbitrary introduction, in
the 15th, 22nd, 23rd, and 24th asterisms, of remote northern stars, greatly
- jmpairs its unity, and also furnishes an additional argument of no slight
Mt, force against its originality; for, on the one hand, the derivation of the
ae . others from it becomes thereby vastly more difficult, and, on the other,
wo can hardly believe that a system of organic Indian growth could have
‘ "e itrary alterations made, at the time of its adoption, in an
2 Re tion imported from abroad. = _
— i: ght, at first sight, appear that the adoption by the Arabs of the
nail corresponding to Agvini as the first of their series indicated that
erived it from India posterior to the transfer by the Hindus
rank from Krttikaé, the first of the sieu, to Acvini: but the
stance seems readily to admit of another interpretation. The names
iy ¢ f the Arab mansions show the influence of the Greek astronomy,
Pa a
we
from the Greek constellations: the same influence would
A ee ies begin with the grou
an arrangement which made the series begin wi! e@ group
TULLY | baal s
3 VTS >} ia Ti e 2
BERL ott At ass Alls |

Sarya-Sicdhdnta
coinciding most nearly with the beginning of the Greek zodiac. The
transfer on the part of the Hindus, likewise, was unquestionably made at
the time of general reconstruction of their astronomical system under
the influence of western science. ‘The two series ure thus to be regarded
as having been brought into accordance in this respect by the separate and
independent working of the same cause.
M. Biot insists strongly, as a proof of the non-originality of the
system of asterisms among the Hindus, upon its gross and palpable lack
of adaptedness to the purpose for which they used it; he compares it to
a gimlet out of which they have tried to make a saw. In this view we
can by no means agree with him: we would rather liken it to a hatchet,
which, with its edge dulled and broken, has been turned and made to do
duty as a hammer, and which is not ill suited to its new and coarser office.
Indeed, taking the Hindu system in its more perfect and consistent form,
as applied by the Arabs, and comparing it with the Chinese sieu at any
time within the past two thousand years, we are by no means sure that
the advantage in respect to adaptation would not be generally pronounced
to be upon the side of the former. The distance of many, of the siew during
that period from the equator, the faintness of some among them, the great
irregularity of their intervals, render them anything but a model system
for measuring distances in right ascension. On the other hand, to adopt
a series of conspicuous constellations along the zodiac, by their proximity
to which the movements of the planets shall be marked, is no unmotived
proceeding : just such a division of the ecliptic among twelve constellations
preceded and led the way to the Greek method of measuring by signs,
having exact limits, and independent of the groups of stars which originally
gave name to them. M. Biot's error les in his misapprehension, in two
important respects, of the character of the Hindu asterisms: in the first
place, he constantly treats them as if they were, like the sreu, single stars,
the intervals between whose circles of declination constituted the accepted
divisions of the zodiac; and in the second place, he assumes ther to have
been established for the purpose of marking the moon's daily progress from
point to point along the ecliptic. Now, a5 regards the first of these points,
we have already shown above that the conversion of the Chinese determinatives into constellations took place, in all probability, before their introduc- |
tion to the knowledge of the Hindus; there is, indeed, an entire unanimity
of evidence to the effect that the Hindu system is from its inception one
of groups of stars: this 15 conclusively shown by ANC
plural names of the asterisms, or by their otherwise & : itles—
compare especially those of the 13th and 25th of the series. The election
of o ** junction-star *’ to represent the asterism appears to be someibalp:
comparatively modern: we regard it as bea to the reconstruction of
the Hindu astronomy upon oa truly scientific basis, :
by calculation, of the precise places of the planets: this would naturally
a

Of the Asterisms 239
awaken a desire for, and lead to, a similarly exact determination of the
; position of some star representing each asterism, which might be employed
+n the calculation of conjunctions, for astrological purposes; the astronomical
uses of the system being no longer of much account after the division of the
ecliptic into signs. And the choice of the junction-star has fallen, in the
majority of cases, not upon the Chinese determinative itself but upon some
other and more conspicuous member of the group originally formed about
the latter. Agaim, there is an entire absence of evidence that the
‘* portions "’ of the asterisms, or the arcs of the ecliptic named from them,
were ever measured from junction-star to junction-star: whatever may
be the discordance among the different authorities respecting their extent
and limits, they are always freely, and often arbitrarily, taken from parts
: of the ecliptic adjacent to, or mot far removed from, the successive
iat ' constellations.
ee As regards the other point noticed, it is, indeed, not at all to be
so wondered at that M. Biot should treat the Hindu nakshatras as a system
bearing special relations to the moon, since, by those who have treated
ej of them, they have always been styled ~ houses of the moon,”’ “' moonstations,’’ ‘‘ lunar asterisms,”’ and the like. Nevertheless, these designations seem to be founded only in carelessness, or in misapprehension. In
the Strya-Siddhanta, certainly, there is no hint to be discovered of any
particular connection between them and the moon, and for this reason we
have been careful never to translate the term nakshatra by any other word
than simply “ asterism.’’ Nor does the case appear to have been otherwise from the beginning. No ons of the general names for the asterisms
(nakshatra, bha, dhishnya) means literally anything more than “ star 4
or ** constellation '’: their most ancient and usual appellation, nakshatra,
as a word of doubtful etymology (it may be radically akin with nakfa, nox,
wwe ‘‘ night '’), but it -- not infrequently met with in the Vedie writings,
with the general signification of “ star,’’ or ‘* group of stars ": the moon
is several times designated as “ sovereign of the nakshatras,’’ but evidently
jn no other sense than that in which we style her ‘* queen of night; ”
for the same title is m other passages given to the sun, and even also to
the Milky Way. When the name came to be especially applied to the
system of yodiacal asterisms, we have seen above that a single one of the
series, the 5th, was placed under the regency of the moon, as another,
the 13th, under that of the sun: this, too, by no means looks as if the
whol design of the system was fo mark the moon's daily mot ions.
Naturally enough, since the moon is the most conspicuous of the nightly
luminar 3 , and her revolutions more rapid and far more important than
hose ol th : the asterisms would practically be brought into much
nore froa t use in connection with her movements - their number, like-
‘ nat 2s
a Fy ‘ ry
am jpptuse: bcge doe Toma : idereal
wise, being nearly accordant with the number Sidaye sor aner ficeres
ad “ Pea esa “not but tempt those who thus employed them to set up
phon “2s | Fx:
f
: ~~ Pie _ re ‘ ‘oh oa
' Pd

\yabar Se 2d Se ) cn ae
" if a 4 » 1 oe ed a a ‘ ‘ts yin ia J the 4 _-
. (rk. Bs? is aa :
A Be tee 3 ae Ax), .
4 cord i
et ey '* x, =
_ -Sirya-Siddhanta
ae Srey en ae cm | ‘ eo os te.
es artificial relation between the two. Hence the Arabs distinctly call
‘ their divisions of the zodiac, and the constellations which mark them,
_ “houses of the moon,’’ and, until the researches of M. Biot, no one, so
|| far as. we are aware, had ever questioned that the number of the asterisms
_ OF mansions, wherever found, was derived from and dependent on that of
the days in the moon's revolution. It was most natural, then, that
- Western scholars, having first made acquaintance with the Arab system,
should, on finding the same in India, call it by the same name: nor is
it wery strange, even, that Ideler should have gone a step farther, and
applied the familiar title of ‘* lunar stations "" to the Chinese sieu also;
an error for which he is sharply criticised by M. Biot (Journ. d. Sav., 1859,
p. 480). The latter cites from al-Birini (Journ. d. Sav., 1845, p. 49; 1859,
pp. 487-8) two passages derived by him from Varaiha-mihira and Brahma_gupta respectively, in which are recorded attempts to establish a systematic
relation between the asterisms and the moon’s true and mean daily motions.
One of these passages is exceedingly obscure, and both are irreconcilable
with one another, and with what we know of the system of asterisms from
other sources: two conclusions, however, bearing upon the present matter,
are clearly derivable from them: first, that, as the ‘* portions *’ assigned
to the asterisms had no natural and fixed limits, it was possible for any
Hindu system-maker so to define them as to bring them into a connection
with the moon's daily motions: and secondly, that such a connection was
never deemed an essential feature of the system, and hence no one form
of it was generally recognized and accepted. The considerations adduced
by us above are, we think, fully sufficient to account for any such isolated
attempts at the establishment of a connection as al-Birani, who naturally
sought to find in the Hindu nakshatras the eorrelatives of his own manidzil
al-kamar, was able to discover among the works of Hindu astronomers:
there is no good reason why we should deprive the former of their true
character, which is that of zodiacal constellations, rudely marking oub
divisions of the ecliptic, and employable for all the purposes for which
sich a division is demanded. : ;
The reason of the variation in the number of the asterisms, which
are reckoned now as twenty-eight and now 4s twenty-seven, is a point of
no small difficulty in the history of the system. M. Biot makes the acute
suggestion that the omission of Abhijit from the series took place because
the mansion belonging to that asterism was on the point bi cai ea
extinguished, the circle of declination of its junction-star pena be 4 ar.
the precession to a coincidence with that of the Junotion ster =" , or PtSi :
ing asterism about A.D. 972- But it has been shown above that M. Biot s —
view of the nature of a nakehatra—that it is, -
a) 4 Sieg | i. “
hal .
nice ible le cy.
> ae

ee Of the Asterisms a41
its ‘‘ portion "’ from the néighbouring region of the ecliptic. Again, this
explanation would not account for the early date of the omission of
Abhijit, which, as already noticed, is found wanting in one of the most
ancient lists, that of the Taittiriya-Sanhita. It is to be observed, moreover, that M. Biot, in calculating the period of Abhijit’s disappearance,
has adopted + Sagittarii as the junction-star of Uttara-Ashadha, while we
have shown above that o, and not r, is to be so regarded: and this substitution would defer until several centuries later the date of coincidence of
the two circles of declination. According to the Hindu measurements,
indeed (see the table of positions of the junction-stars, near the beginning
of this note), Abhijit is farther removed from the preceding asterism, both
in polar longitude and in right ascension, than are five of the other asterisms
from their respective predecessors: nor does the Hindu astronomical system
acknowledge or make allowance for the alteration of position of the circles
of declination under the influence of the precession: their places, as data
for the calculation of conjunctions, are ostensibly laid down for all future:
time. For these various reasons, M. Biot's explanation is to be rejected
as insufficient. A more satisfactory one, in our opinion, may be found
in the fact, illustrated above (see Fig. 31, beginning of this note), that the
asterisms are in general so distributed 9s to accord quite well with 4
division of the ecliptic into twenty-seven equal portions, but not with a
division into twenty-eight equal portions; that the region where they are
too much crowded together is that from the 20th to the 23rd asterism,
and that, among those situated in this crowded quarter, Abhijit is farthest
removed from the ecliptic, and so is more easily left out than any of the
others, in dividing the ecliptic into portions. We cannot consider it at
all doubtful that Abhijit is as originally and truly a part of the system of
-_s asterisms as any other constellation in the series, which is properly comeee osed of twenty-eight members, and not of twenty-seven: the analogy of
Fe. ® the other systems, and the fact that treatises like this Siddhanta, which
F - reckon only twenty-seven divisions of the ecliptic, are yet obliged, tm
treating of the asterisms as constellations, to regard them as twenty-eight,
are conclusive upon’ this point. The whole difficulty and source of discordance seems to lie in this—how shall there, in any systematic method
division of the ecliptic, be found a place and a portion for twenty-eighth
terismn ? The Khanda-Kataka, «s cited by al-Ririni—in making out, by
| : O. ‘which is altogether irrespective of the actual positions of the
rt erisins with reference to the zodiac, the accordance already referred to
thei . portions and the moon's daily motions—allots to Abhijit 30
e ecliptic as is equivalent to the mean motion of the moon
+ of a day by which her revolution exceeds twenty-seven days.
“ - share in. the proper portions of the two neighbouring
Muhirta-Mala, a late work, of date unknown to us,
: of Uttara-Ashidha and the first fifteenth of (i avans
“— ; the

eas ees pid
Stirya-Siddhdanta
together constitute Abhijit: it is so to be accounted when twenty-eight
asterisms are reckoned; not otherwise.’’ Ordinarily, however, the division
of the ecliptic into twenty-seven equal “ portions "' is made, and Abhijit
is simply passed by in their distribution. After the introduction of the
modern method of dividing the circle into degrees and minutes, this last
way of settling the difficulty would obviously receive a powerful support,
and an increased currency, from the fact that a division by twenty-seven
gave each portion an even number of minutes, 800, while a division by
twenty-eight yielded the awkward and unmanageable quotient 7717.
Much yet remains to be done, before the history and use of the system
of usterisms, as « part of the ancient Hindu astronomy and astrology, shall
be fully understood. There is in existence an abundant literature, ancient
and modern, upon the subject, which will doubtless at some time provoke
laborious investigation, and repay it with interesting results. To us hardly
any of that literature is accessible, and only the final results of wideextended and long-continued studies upon it could be in place here. We
have already allotted to the nakahatras more space than to»some may seem
advisable: our excuse must be the interest of the history of the system, 4s
part of the ancient history of the rise and spread of astronomical science;
the importance attaching to the researches of M. Biot, the inadequate
attention hitherto paid them, and the recent renewal of their discussion
in the Journal des Savants; and finally and especially, the fact that in and
with the asterisms is bound up the whole history of Hindu astronomy, prior
to its transformation under the overpowering influence of western science.
In the modern astronomy of India, the nakshatras are of subordinate consequence only, and appear as hardly more than reminiscences of a former
order of things: from the Strya-Siddhirta might be struck out every line
referring to them, without serious alteration of the character of the treatise.
Before*bringing this note to a close, we present, in the annexed table,
a comparison of the true longitudes and latitudes of the junction-stars of
the twenty-cight asterisms, as derived by calculation from the positions
stated in our text, with the actual longitudes and latitudes of the stars with
which they are probably to be identified. In a single case (the 27th
asterism), we compare the longitude of one star and the latitude of another;
the reason of this is explained above, in connection with the identification
ef the asterism. We add columns giving the errors of the Hindu determinations of position: in that for the latitude north direction is regarded
as positive, and south direction as negative. » .
Upon examining the column of errors of latitude presented in this
table, it will be seen that they are too considerable, and too irregular, both
in amount and in direction, to be plausibly accounted for otherwise than as
direct errors of observation and calculation. The grossest of them, 48
has already been pointed out, are committed in the measurement of southern
latitudes, when of considerable amount, and they are all in the same
oF
—s La
a + tee eo

Of the Asterisms 243
Positions, and Errors of Position, of the Junction-Stars of the Asteriams.
eal
tpi en A. D. 5. Latitade. |
Name, 74 mi ee Pe | Kar compared.
Sida: [ro laste tne Hirde, | True. | Hindu |
. error.
Krttika, a9 68 —O 60/4 44 “| 4 1 “* [40 439 Tauri, Alcyone.
Part Pusbya, 106 o108 42,-2 42) 0 O o 4 “ |—oO 448 Cancri.
Virginis, Spica.
Bootis, Arcturus.
: ah Libra.
87 ** |—0 55)8 Scorpionis.
31 ** +0 41j«Scorp., Antares.
1442 62241 33)—L1L 4ii;s48 “ As 4a a5" i S6IA Scorpicnis.
ving the star 4 place too far to the north. The column of
Sait, on the other hand, shows © very marked preponderance
es minus errors, their sum being 88° 54’, while the sum of plus errors is
ead ies ro, et taking the difference of these sums, and dividing it by
2 eight, we find the average error of longitudes to be odf¥, the greatest

aa methods of observation employed by the Hindus for this purpose, such a
determination of date cannot, indeed, be relied upon as exact or conclusive,
yet it is the best and surest that we can attain. The general conclusion,
at any rate, stands fast, that the positions of the junction-stars of the
asterisms were fixed not far from the time when the vernal equinox coincided
with the initial point of the Hindu sidereal sphere, or during the sixth
century of our era.
Since, according to the Hindu theory, the initial point of the sidereal
sphere is also, for all time, the mean place of the vernal equinox, which
always reverts to it after a libration of 27° in either direction (see above,
iii. 9-12), we are not surprised to find the positions of the asterisms primarily
defined upon the supposition of their coincidence. But it is not a little
strange that the effect of the precession in altering the direction of the
circles of declination drawn through the junction-stars, and so the polar
longitudes and latitudes of the latter, should be made no account of (see,
however, the latter half of vy. 12, below, and the note upon it), and that
directions for calculating the conjunctions of the planets with the asterisms
according to their positions as thus stated should be given (vv. 14-15),
unaccompanied by any hint that a modification of the data of the process
would ever be found necessary. This carelessness is perhaps to be regarded
as an additional evidence of the small importance attached, after the reconstruction of the Hindu astronomy, to calculations in which the asterisms
were concerned; although it also tends strongly to prove what we have
suggested above (note to iii. 9-12), that in the construction of the Hindu
astronomical system the precession was ignored altogether. It is to be
noticed that the two systems of yogas (see above, ii. 65, and additional
note upon that passage), originally founded upon actual conjunctions with
the asterisms, have been divorced from any real connection with them.
A like consideration might restrain us from accepting the determinations of
position here presented as the best results which Hindu observers and
instruments were capable of attaming; yot, in the absence of other teste
in the nature of the ease, unattainable, it would of course be necessary to |
as | of the stars compared. This we have not thought it worth —
, to do. We may remark, however, that the janction-star
, = ge SES) ol te ph AT . me : n . any other iD »?
a
*In a compsrison in which » high degree of exactness was desired, and was not, =f
. if get & EA Se 7 RAS LO _
, allowed for determined by
itm. ee ee ‘ > would
Astr .» vol, xix,-dto, 1 angitude woul
_-_ . jpe has
Ti OF a sermrme >

p s = . : Pe ite if
zs » _ }, = J . > S aAL Unit
a ° a d , rw.
Tait ~~ ; :
s mae Oj the Asterisms ‘245
a OF their powers, we cannot well help drawing the conclusion that the
aceuracy of a Hindu observation is not to be relied on within a degree or
two. | |
a 10. Agastya is at the end of Gemini, and eighty degrees
south ; and Mrgavyadha is situated in the twentieth degree of —
Gemini ;
ie aL: His latitude (vikshepa), reckoned from his point of
a declination (apakrama), is forty degrees south: Agm (hutabhuyj)
fe and Brahmahrdaya are in Taurus, the twenty-second degree ;
F i | 12. And they are removed in latitude ( vikshipta), northward,
eight and thirty degrees respectively. - . .
the more proper subject of this chapter we also
and in a subsequent passage (vv. 20-21), the
fixed stars which are not included in the system
e definition is made in the same manner as before,
—séby:- polar longitudes and latitudes. It is not at all difficult to identify the
stars referred to in these verses; they were correctly pointed out by
_—- Golebrooke, in his article already cited (As. Res., vol. 1). Agastya is a
Navis, or Canopus, « star of the first magnitude, and one of the most
a - brilliant in the southern heavens. Its remote southern position, only 37°
“ii _ from the pole, renders it invisible to an observer stationed much to the
northward of the Tropic of Cancer. Its Hindu name is that of one of the
Re se old Vedie rahis, or inspired sages. The comparison of its true position with
at assigned it by our text—which, in this instance, does
reduced to true longitude and latitude—is as follows :
m4 In connection with
have laid before us, here
defined positions of a few
of zodiacal asterisms.— Th
cur not require to be
na Canopus ee 85° ly sae 75° 50" Ss.
siderable, and the variations of
fext are correspondingly grea!
the BrabmePm
7 The error of position is here very con
- Ps the ‘other authorities fromm the data of our
a wT » Siddhanta-¢ iromani and (according to Colebrooke)
—\ Siddbanta give Agastya 87° of polar longitude, and 77° of latitude, which
. is a fair approxir ation to the truth: the Graha-Laghava also places it
Fin lat. 76° S. but makes its longitude only 80°, which is a8 gross
, as hat of the Sirya-Siddhanta, but in the opposite direction.
7 anhit&é agrees precisely with our treatise as reapects the
e fou does generally in the numerica] data o!
Cakalya-
«sof these four stars, as it
Sage a aia
bet! 7
’ eer

} | gt us 7 ~ Per. a
te ae - J > i :
“ - Mrgavyaédha, " deer-hunter ""—it is also called Lubdhaka, ‘* hunter ''—
‘, isa Canis Majoris, or Sirius, the brightest of the fixed stars;
tah ae Mrgavyadbe vs 16" £8" . 89° 6Y B.
, oan Here, while all authorities agree with the correct determination of the
latitude of Sirius presented by our text, the Siddhénta-Ciromani cte.
“greatly reduce its error of longitude, by giving the star 86°, instead of 80°,
_ of polar longitude: the Graha-Laghava reads 81°.
The star named after the god of fire, Agni, and called in the text by
one of his frequent epithets, hutabhuj, ** devourer of the sacrifice,’’ is the
one which is situated at the extremity of the northern horn of the Bull,
or 8 Tauri: it alone of the four is of the second magnitude only :
a4
d
coon) 4". 'S ae” 4 B,
The very gross error in the determination of the longitude of this star
is but slightly redueed by the Graha-Laghava, which gives it 58°, imstead
of 52°, of polar longitude. The Siddhanta-Ciromani and Brahma-Siddhanta
omit ull notice of any of the fixed stars excepting Canopus and Sirius.
Brahmahrdaya, ‘* Brahma’s heart,’’ is a Aurigw or Capella :
Brabmabrdaya .. 60" 99" ww. «623° 69’ N.
The Graha-Lighava, leaving this erroneous determination of latitude
unamended, adds a great error of longitude, in the opposite direction ~ to
that of our text, by giving the star 4° more of polar longitude.
We shall present these cormparisons in 4 tabular form at the end of the
chapter, in connection with the other passage of similar import.
12. . . . Having constructed a sphere, one may examine the
corrected (sphuta) latitude and polar longitude (dhruvaka).
What is the true meaning and scope of this passage, is a question
with regard to which there may be some difference of opinion. The commentator explains it as intended to satisfy the inquiry whether the polar
longitudes and latitudes, ae-steted in the text, are constant, or whether J
they are subject to variation. Now although, he says, owing to the precession, the values of these quantities are not unalterably fixed, yet they
; the text as they were at its period, and as if they were constant, %

a
“ 3 CENTRAL UBRARY
a ew at - > ee ae
Fane ae
a ee aD
4 i a a > is -
a
ee le
‘re ny Of the Asterisms 247
3 representing the colures, the equator, and the ecliptic—and is to suspend
. upon its poles an »dditional movable circle, graduated to degrees: this
: would be, of course, a revolving circle of declination. The sphere is next
to be adjusted in such manner thet it axis shall point to the pole, and that
~ its horizon shall be water-level. Then, in the night, the junction-ster
of Revati (¢ Piscium) is to be looked at through a hole in the centre of
P the instrument, and the corresponding point of the ecliptic, which is LW’
— east of the end of the constellation Pisces, ix to be brought over it; after
that, it will be necessary only to bring the revolving cirele of declination,
ns observed through the hole in the centre of the mestrument, over any
other star of which it is desired to determine the position, and its polar
longitude and latitude may be read off directly upon the ecliptic and the
movable circle respectively.
>. Colebrooke (As. Res., ix. 826; Essays, ii. $24) found this passage
"ass similarly explained in other commentaries upon the Sdrya-Siddhanta to
which he had access, and also met with like directions in the commentaries
on the Siddhanta-Ciromani.
oS There are, however, very serious objections to such an interpretation
of the brief direction contained in the text. It is altogether inconsistent
with the whole plan and method of « Hindu astronomical treatise to leave,
and even to order, matters of this character to be determined by observa-
‘tion. Observation has no such important place assigned to it in the astronomical system: with the exception of terrestrial longitude and latitude,
wh 1, in the nature of things, are beyond the reach of a treatise, it is
intended that the astronomer should find in his text-book everything which
he needs for the determination of celestial phenomena, and should resort to
instruments and observation only by way of illustration. The sphere of
ee _ which the construction is prescribed in the thirteenth chapter ts Dot an
—s instrume at for observation: it is expressly stated to be “* for the instruction
bat: of the pupil,”" and it is encumbered with such «© number and variety of
s different circles, including parallels of declination for all the asteriamsa and
d fixed stars, that it could not be used for any other purpose :
that the commentary is itself obliged to order here
of the only applinances—the revolving circle of declination and
the centre—which make of it an instrument for observa.
original meaning of the passage seems to be that,
o sphere im the manner to be hereafter described, one
the asterisms as marked open it, and note their
positions of the stars in the heavens. And we
he other interpret ition as forced upon the passage by the
in order to ovoid the difficulty pointed out by us above
«“ 1 of the note on the lest passage but one) and to free the
ff n the impu ation of having neglected the precessional vannr . f declix ition. M. Biot pronounces the method of
3 pe 6.ba

Stirya-Siddhanta
observation explained by the commentators “‘ almost impracticable,’* and
it can, accordingly, hardly be that by which the positions of the asterisms
were at first laid down, or by which they could be made to undergo the
necessary corrections. Another method, more in accordance with the rules
and processes of the third chapter, and which appears to us to be more
authentic and of higher value, is described by Colebrooke (as above) from
the Siddhanta-Sarvabhiuma, being there cited from the Siddhanta-Sundara;
it is as follows:
‘A tube, adapted to the summit of the gnomon, is directed toward
the star on the meridian: and the line of the tube, pointed to the star, is
prolonged by a thread to the ground. The line from the summit of the
gnomon to the base is the hypothenuse; the height of the gnomon is the
perpendicular; and its distance from the extremity of the thread is the
basé of the triangle. ‘Therefore, as the hypothenuse is to its base, so is
the radius to a base, from which the sine of the angle, and consequently
the angle itself, are known. If it exceed the latitude [of the place of
observation], the declination is south; or, if the contrary, it is north. The
right ascension of the star is calculated from the hour of night, and from
the right ascension of the sun for that time. ‘The declination of the corresponding point of the ecliptic being found, the eum or difference of the
declinations, according as they are of the same or » different denominations,
is the distance of the star from the ecliptic. The longitude of the same
point is computed; and from these elements, with the actual precession
of the equinox, may be calculated the true longitude of the star; as also
its latitude on a cirele passing through the poles of the ecliptic.”’
The SiddhAnta-Sarvabhiuma also gives the true longitudes and latitudes of the asterisms, professedly as tnus obtained by observation and
calculation, and they are reported by Colebrooke in his general table of data
respecting the asterisms.
If we are not mistaken, the amount and character of the errors in the
stated latitudes of the asterisms tend to prove that this, or some kindred
process, was that by which their positions were actually determined.
13. In Taurus, the seventeenth degree, a planet of which
the latitude is a little more than two degrees, south, will split the
wain of Rohini.
The asterism Rohini, as has been seen above, is composed of the five
principal stars in the head of Taurus, in the constellation of which is seen
the figure of a wain. The divinity is Prajapati. The distances Of its stars
in longitude from the initial point of the sphere vary from 45° 46 (y) to
49° 45! (a): hagce the seventeenth degree of the second sign—the ee
commencing at the initial point of the sphere, taken as coinciding also W
the vernal equinox—is very nearly the middle of the wain, The latitude of

Of the Asterisms 249
its stars, again, varies from 2° 36/ («) to 5° 47! (6, S.; hence, to come into
collision with, or to enter, the wain, a planet must have more than two
degrees of south latitude. The Siddhanta does not inform us what would
be the consequences of such an occurrence; that belongs rather to the
domain of astrology than of astronomy. We cite from the Paficatantra
(vv. 288-241) the following description of these consequences, derived from
the astrological writings of Varaha-mihira :*
‘“When Saturn splits the wain of Rohini here in the world, then
Madhava rains not upon the earth for twelve years.
‘When the wain of Prajapati’s asterism is split, the earth, hoving
as it were committed a sin, performs, in 4 manner, her surface being strewn
with ashes and bones, the kdpdlika penance.
‘Tf Saturn, Mars, or the descending node splits the wain of Rohini,
why need I say that, in a sea of misfortune, destruction befalls the w.rld?
‘“\When the moon is stationed in the midst of Rohini’s wain, then
men wander recklessly about, deprived of shelter, eating the cooked flesh
of children, drinking water from vessels burnt by the sun.”
Upon what conception this curious feature of the ancient Hindu
astrology is founded, we are entirely ignorant.
14. Calculate, as in the case of the planets, the day and
night of the asterisms, and perform the operation for apparent
longitude (drkkarman), as before : tbe rest is by the rules for the
conjunction (melaka) of planets, using the daily motion of the
planet as a divisor : the same is the case as regards the time.
15. When the longitude of the planet is less than the polar
longicude (dhruvaka) of the asterism, the conjunction (yoga) is to
come; when greater, it is past: when the planet 1s retrograding
(rakragati), the contrary 15 to be recognized as true of the conjunction (samdgama).
The rules given in the preceding chapter for calculating the conjunction of two planets with one another apply, of course, with certain modif-
: cations, to the calculation of the conjunctions of the planets with the
\: asterisms. The text, however, omits to specify the most important of these
—- modifications—that, namely, in determining the apparent longitude of an
*Our translation representa the verses 45 amended in their readings by Benfey
, (Pantachatantra ete., @c Theil, on. 294-297). In the third of the verses, however, the
x, am reading of the published text, cai, moon,’” would seem decidedly preferable to cikhs.
oo = = descending node; '" since the node, being always necessarily im the ecliptic, can never
e? acne into collision with Robini's wain.
é

, a fit
Rt
Ai
ae . a a)
s it eo « .
- J By CENTRAL LIBRARY I La + eT
a > ae ae a a - J .
yt er; aaa
mee *
= tai ieiliaes
Stirya-Siddhdnta
asterism, one part of the process prescribed in the case of a planet, the
ayanadrkkarman, or correction for ecliptic deviation, is to be omitted altogether; since the polar longitude of the asterism, which is given, corresa ponds in character with the dyana graha, or longitude of the planet as
affected by ecliptic deviation, which must be ascertamed by the ayanadrkkar.
man, The commentary notices the omission, but offers neither explana.
tion nor excuse for it. The other essential modification—that, the asterism
heing fixed, the motion of the planet alone is to be used as divisor
in
dctermining the place and time of the conjunction—is duly noticed.
The inaccuracies in the Hindu process for determining apparent
longitudes, which, as above noticed, are kept within bounds, where the
planets alone are concerned, by the small amount of their latitudes, would
be liable in the case of many of the asterisms to lead to grave errors of
result
16. Of the two Phalgunis, the two Bhadrapadas, and likewise the two Ashdidhis, of Vicikha, Acvini, and Mrgacirsha
(sdumya), the junction-star (yogatdrd) is stated to be the northern
(uttara) -
17. That which is the western northern star, being the
second situated westward, that is the junction-star of Hasta; of
Cravishtha it is the western *
18. Of Jyeshtha, Cravana, Anuridha (maitra), and Pushya
(barhaspatya), it is the middle star : of Bharani, Krttika (dqneya),
and Magha (pitrya), and likewise of Revati, it is the southern :
19, Of Rohini, Punarvasu (dditya), and Mila, it is the
eastern, and so also of Aclesha (sdrpa) : in the case of each of the
others, the junction-star (yogatdrakd) is the great (sthiila) one.
We have had occasion above, in treating of the identification of the
asterisms, to question the accuracy of some of these designations of ahs
relative position of the junction-stars in the groups containing them. We
do not regard the passage as having the same authenticity and authority
with that in which the determinations of the polar longitudes and latitudes
ure given; and indeed, we are inclined to suspect that all which follows the
fifteenth verse in the chapter may be a later addition to its original content.
Ii is diMcult to see otherwise why the statements given in verses 20 and
21 of the positions of certain stars should be separated from those presented
above, in verses 10-12. A designation of the relative position of the
junction-star in each group ought also properly to be connected with a
“4s > . . - oe y+ . aS et at

¢ es
e
oe
x! oi
se
Pies i
ow °
Of the Asterisms 251
definition of the number of stars composing each, and a description of its
eonfiguration—such as are presented along with it by other treatises, as
the Cakalya-Sanhita. The first is even in some points ambiguous unless
uccompanied by the others, since there are cases in which the same star
has a different position in its asterism according as the latter is to be
regarded as including a less or a greater number of stars. In this respect
also, then, the passage looks like a disconnected fragment. Nor is the
method of designation so clear and systematic as to inspire us with confidence in its accuracy. Upon a consideration of the whole series of
asterisms, it is obvious that the brightest member of each group is generally
selected as its junction-star. Hence we should expect to find a general rule
to that effect laid down, and then the exceptions to it specially noted,
together with the cases in which such a designation* would be equivocal.
Instead of this, we have the junction-stars of only two asterisms containing
more than one star, namely Abhijit and C atabhisha), described by their
superior brilliancy, while that of the former is not less capable of being
pointed out by its position than are any of the others in the series. Again,
there are cases in which it is questionable which star is meant to be pointed
out in a group of which the constitution is not doubtful, owing to the very
near correspondence of more than one star with the position as defined.
And once more, where, in ‘a single instance, 4 special effort has apparently
been made to fix the position of the junction-star beyond all doubt or
cavil, the result is a failure; for ‘¢ still remains a matter of dispute how
the description is to be understood, and which member of the group is
intended. ‘The ease referred to is that of Hasta, which occupies nearly
all of verse 17. ‘That Colebrooke was not satisfied as to the meaning of the
description is clear from the fact that he specifies, as the star referred to,
‘'+ or 6 Corvi.” His translation of the verse, ““ 2nd W. of Ist N. W.,”
conveys to us ho intelligible meaning whatever, as applied to the actual
group. He evidently understood pagcimottaratdrdyad as & single word,
standing by euphony for tdrdyas, ablative of -téra. Our own rendering
supposes it divided into the two independent words pagcimottaratdrd yd,
cr the three pagcimd uttaratérd = yd. This interpretation is, in the first
piace, supported by the corresponding passage ip the Cakalya-Sanhita,
which reads, “‘ of Hasta, the north-western (vdyavi): ‘t is also the second
western.'’ Again, it applies without difficulty to one of the stars in the
group, namely to y, which we think most likely to be the one pointed out—
, because either of the others would admit of being more simply
and briefly designated, 6 a8 the northern, @ as the eastern, a as the southern,
and « as the western star. We should, then, regard the description as unambiguous, were it not for what is farther added, ‘* being the second
situated westward ;'’ for y is the first or most westerly of the five in longitude, and the third in right ascension, while the second in longitude and
in wight ascension respectively are the two faint stars « and a. We confess
bears = |

rat we do not see how the difficulty is to be solved without some emendu.
e. ge the text.
z Pa oe. We conceive ‘panealvos: to be justified, then, in regarding this passage
363 oF as of doubtful authenticity and inferior authority : as already partaking,
a ie in short, of that ignorance and carelessness which has rendered the Hindu
| astronomers. unable, at any time during the past thousand yeurs, to point
‘out in the heavens the complete series of the groups of stars composing
their system of asterisms. None of the other authorities accessible to us
gives a description of the relative places of the junction-stars, excepting
the Cakalya-Sanhita, and our manuscript of its text is so defective and
corrupt at this point that we are able to derive from it with confidence the
positions of only about a third of the stars. So far, it accords with the
Surya-Siddhanta, save that it points out as the junction-star of ParvaAshadha the brightest, instead of the northernmost, member of the group;
and here there is a difference in the mode of designation only, and not a
disagreement as regards the star designated.
| 20. Situated five degrees eastward from Brahmahrdaya is
. Prajapati: it is at the end of Taurus, and thirty-eight degrees
north. |
21. Apamvatsa is five degrees north from Citra : somewhat
greater than it, as also six degrees to the north of it, is Apas.
The three stars whose positions sre defined in this passage are not
mentioned in the Cakalya-Sanhita, nor in the SiddhantadJiromani and
(according to Colebrooke) the Brahma-Siddhanta; only the latter of them,
Apas, is omitted by the Graha-Liaghava, being noticed in the SdryaSiddhanta alone. It may fairly be questioned, for the reason remarked
above, whether the original text of our treatise itself contained the last
two verses of this chapter: moreover, at the end of the next chapter (ix. 18),
where those stars are spoken of which never set heliacally, on account of
their high northern situation, Prajapati_ is not mentioned among therm, as
it ought to be, if its position had been previously stated in the treatise,
Still farther on (xiii. 9), im the description of | the armillary sphere, it. is
referred to by the name of Brahma, which, to the commentary
on this passage, and to Colebrooke, . it also. customarily bears. maptige +
another evidence of the unauthenticity of the passage is to be seen in the ——
fact that the two definitions of the polar longitude of Prajapati do not, if |
- taken in connection with verse et ‘appear to_ agree with one another: a ‘Vy
star which is 5° east from the ‘position of Brahme ays, me thiore. hated, oo
is not ‘ at the end of Taurus,’ * but at ee ers

2 _ ty: i , Pes
Of the Asterisme 253
a which defines the positions of all these stars directly, by degrees of polar
ss dongitude and latitude, and not by reference either to the signs or to other
ss stars, gives Prajapati 61° of polar longitude, or 5° more than it assigned
* to Brahmahrdaya ; it also adds 1° to the polar latitude as stated in our
text. The star referred to can hardly be any other than that ip the head
‘of the Wagoner, or 6 Auriga (4):
Prajapati ES Os +.» 86° 40° N.
: ‘The error of latitude is about the same with that which was committed
_ with reference to Brahmahrdaya, or Capella. Why so faint and incon_—s 8picuous « star should be found among the few of which the Hindu astronoa > mers have taken particular notice is not easy to discover. .
| ~~ "Phe position of the star named Apamvatsa, “* Waters’ Child,” is
a, _ described in our text by reference to Citré, or Spica Virginis: it is said to
real be in the same longitude, 180°, and 6° farther north; and this, since Citra
ae itself is in lat. 2° S., would make the latitude of Apamvatsa 3° N- The
“Te Graha-Laghava gives it this latitude directly, and also makes its longitude
—suugree with that of Spica, which, as already noticed, it places at the distance
of 183° from the origin of the sphere. Apas, ‘* Waters “ (the commentary, '
+ _ however, treats the word as a singular masculine, Apa), is put 6° north of
— Apamvatsa, or in Int. 9° N_ It is identified by Colebrooke with 6 Virginis
a. (8). ‘and doubtless correctly : a Se. |
a
I 4 os
mat, 8 Virginie ee Ege 4 ~ 8° 36° N.
ss @glebrooke pronounces Apamvatsa to comprise “* the nebulous stars
¥. marked d-b 1, 2, 3’ in Virgo. We can find, however, no such stars upon
eR . — ible to us, and hence presume that
any map, or in any catalogue, access
Colebrooke must have been misled here by some
ste which he relied. There is, on the other hand, a star, @ Virginis (4), situated
an “directly between Spica and 6, and at such a distance from each as shows
error of the authority on
oe.” almost beyond question that it is the star intended :
a, oe vit ea. Aptsavetee i Len .» 178° 48 — 2° 45 SS.
"| Nee tS ees er, irginie 0 BS SES et ae SD Le Tp. #
less difficult in this than in the former case to account for the
these stars, among the hundreds equalling or excelling therm in
AC as objects of special attention to the astronomical observers of
In - Perhaps we have here only the scattered and disconnected
mor complete and shapely system of stellar astronomy,
ndia before the scientific reconstruction of the Hindu
red the field of labor of the astronomer from the skies
‘aud his tables of calculation.
» ee
b

r
wl
A,
pm
Ee tis a | alin tg vs #
Rea ene
7 3 “Twas f ates “rae "* ?
Strya-Siddhanta
The annexed table gives a comparative view of the positions of the
seven stars spoken of in this and « preceding passage (vy. 10-12) as defined
_ by our text and as determined by modern observers :
Positions of certain Fixed Stars.
Hindu Position :
Name.
True position : —
\pol. Saree, pol. lat. . lowe, | lab. |
eT a
lowe, | lat,
= Ww Ts
a
Mrgavyadha, | 80 0 0 OS.) 76 23 39 52 38.) 84 7 89 32 8.\e Canis Maj, Sirius.
Brabmabrdaya, 52 0 ON. Gv 29 mao 8.
75 50 a Argds, Canopus.
| G1 50 (22 52 N.'a Aurigw, Capella.
The gross errors in the determinations of position of these stars give
us a yet lower idea of the character of Hindu observations than we derived
from our examination of the junction-stars of the asterisms.
I'he essay of Colebrooke in the ninth volume of the Asiatic Researches,
to which we have already so often referred, gives farther information of
much interest respecting such matters connected with the Hindu astronomy
of the fixed stars as are passed without notice in our treatise. He states
the rules laid down by different authorities for calculating the time of
heliacal rising of Agastya, or Canopus, upon which depends the performance
of certain religious ceremonies. He also presents a view of the Hindu
doctrine of the Seven Sages, or rshis, by which name are known the bright
stars in Ursa Major forming the well-known constellation of the Wain, or
Dipper. To these stars the ancient astronomers of India, and many of the
modern upon their authority, have attributed an independent motion about
the pole of the heavens, at the rate of 8’ yearly, or of a complete revolution in 2700 years. ‘The Sdrya-Siddhinta alludes in a later passage (xm. 9)
to the Seven Sages, but it evidently is to be understood as rejecting the
theory of their proper motion, which is also ignored by the SiddhautaGromani. That so absurd a dogma should have originated and gained a
general currency in India, and that it should still maintain itself in many
of the astronomical text-books, is, however, too striking and significant a
circumstance to be left out of sight in estimating the character of the
ancient and native Hindu astronomy.

CHAPTER IX.
Or Heviacat RISINGS AND SETTINGS.
Conrents :-—1l, subject of the chapter; 2-3, under what circumstances, and at which
horizon, the planets rise and set heliacally; 4-5, method of ealculating their distances in oblique ascension from the sun; 6-9, distances from the sun at which
7; they disappear and re-appear ; 10-11, how to find the time of heliacal setting or
rising, past or to come; 12-15, distances from the «un at which the asteriams and
| fixed stars disappear and re-appear; 16-17. mode of determining their times of
rising and setting; 18, what asterisins and stars never set heliacally,
oh 1. Now is set forth the knowledge of the risings (udaya) and
| settings (astamaya) of the heavenly bodies of inferior brilliancy,
whose orbs are overwhelmed by the rays of the sun.
The terms used for the heliacal settings and risings of the heavenly
bodies, or their disappearance in the sun's neighbourhood and their return
ne to visibility, are precisely the same with those employed to denote their
+h ie rising (udaya) and setting (asfa, astamaya, astamdna) above and below
: the horizon. The title of the chapter, udaydstddhikdra, is literally translated in our heading.
2. Jupiter, Mars, and Saturn, when their longitude 1s
reater than that of the sun, go to their setting in the west ; when
it is less, to their rising in the east : so likewise Venus and Mercury,
when retrograding.
= | 3. The moon, Mercury, and Venus, having a swifter motion,
go to their setting in the east when of less longitude than the sun ;
- = +when of greater, to their rising in the west.
i. These specifications are ef obvious meaning and evident eorrectness
The planets which have a slower motion than the sun, and so are overtaken
yy him, make their last appearance in the west, after sunset, and emerge
again into visibility in the east, before sunrise: of those which move more
rapidly than the sun, the contrary is true: Venus and Mercury belong to
. either class, according as their apparent motion is retrograde or direct.
4. Caleulate the longitudes of the sun and of the planet—in
he west, for the time of sunset ; in the east, for that of sunrise—

gl
b
Ae
ade f= £5 . =i . ot tec bt, Bok, - fg 3A .
and then make also the calculation of apparent longitude (drkkarG4
man) of the planet.
fs.
re. 7
a; 6. | Then the ascensional equivalent, in respirations, of the
interval between the two (lagndntaraprands) will give, when
divided by sixty, the degrees of time (kdldngds) ; or, in the west,
a the ascensional equivalent, in respirations, of the interval between
the two when increased each by six signs.
Whether «a planet will or will not be visible in the west after sunset,
or in the east before sunrise, is in this treatise made to depend solely upon
the interval of time by, which its setting follows, or its rising precedes, that?
of the sun, or upon its distance from the sun in oblique ascension; to the
: neglect of those other circurnmstances—as the declination of the two bodies,
and the distance and direction of the planet from the ecliptic—which
variously modify the limit of visibility as thus defined. The ascertainment
of the distance in oblique ascension, then, is the object of the rules given .
in these verses. In explaining th: method of the process, we will consider
first the case of a calculation made for the eastern horizon. The time of
sunrise having been determined, the true longitudes and rates of motion
of the sun and the planet in question are found for that moment, as also
the latitude of the planet. Owing to the latter's removal in latitude from
the ecliptic, it will not pass the horizon at the same moment with the .
point of the ecliptic which determines its longitude, and the point with
which it does actually rise must be found by a separate process. This is
accomplished by calculating the appyrent longitude of the planet, according
to the method taught in the seventh chapter. There is nothing in the
language of the text which indicates that the calculation is not to be made
in full, as there prescribed, and for the given moment of sunrise: fs sO
conducted, however, it would evidently yield an erroneous result; for, the
planet being above the horizon, the point of the ecliptic to which it is then
© referred by a circle through the north and south points of the horizon 18
not the ene to which it was referred by the horizon itself at the moment
ef its own rising. The commentary removes this difficulty, by specifying
that the akshadrkkarman, or that part of the process which gives the
~ sorrection for latitude, is to be performed ** only es taught in the first half1, or
t i, ‘ Py f
as 3 eG *
é

o> teh “= Of Heliacal Risings and Settings 257
equator (see above, i, 11-12); they are reduced to degrees by dividing by
sixty: and the degrees thus found receive the technical name of “’ timedegrees "" (kdlangds, kdlabhdgds); they are also called below “ degrees of
setting "' (astdngds), and “* degrees of visibility "' drgydngds).
If the planet for which the calculation is made has greater longitude
than the sun, the process, being adapted to the time of sunset, and to the
western horizon, requires a slight modification, owing to the fact that the
equivalents of the signs in oblique ascension (iii. 42-45) are given only
as measured at the eastern horizon. Since 180 degrees of the ecliptic are
always above the horizon, any given point of the ecliptic will set at the
® same moment that another 180° distant from <t rises; by addimg, then,
£ix tigns to the calculated positions of the sun and the planet, and ascertaining, by iii. 50, the ascensional difference of the two points so found,
the interval between the setting of the sun and that of the planet will be
determined.
Before going on to explain how, from the result thus obtained, the
time of the planet's disappearance or re-appearance may be derived, the
text defines the distances from the sun, in oblique ascension or "' degrees
of time,”’ at which each planet is visible.
6. The degrees of setting (astdngds) are, for Jupiter eleven ;
for Saturn, fifteen ; for Mars, moreover, they are seventeen :
7. Of Venus, the setting in the west and the rising 1n the
east take place, by reason of her greatness, at eight degrees ; the
setting in the east and the rising in the west oceur, owing to her
inferior size, af ten degrees :
. 8. Soalso Mercury makes his setting and rising at a distance
from the sun of twelve or fourteen degrees, according as he is
retrograding or rapidly advancing.
9. At distances, in degrees of time (kdlabhdgas), greater
than these, the planets become visible to men, at less distances
they become invisible, their forms being swallowed up (qrasta)
by ~the brightness of the sun.
Oa: “shee The moon, it will be noticed, is omitted here; her heliacal rising and
\ setting are treated of at the beginning of the next following chapter.
In the case of Mercury and Venus, the limit of visibility is at a greater
33 distance from the sun according as the planet is approaching its
« Se
nee EVENT
d “aa 2
i o
i . wo
nferic ror 8 oO ‘conjunction, the diminution of the illuminated portion
th ng more than compensated by the enlargement of the disk
much nearer to the earth.

Stirya-Siddhdanta
ied oF é to ~¢
and then make also the calculation of apparent longitude (drkkarman) of the planet.
5. Then the ascensional equivalent, in respirations, of the
interval between the two (lagndntaraprdnds) will give, when |
divided by sixty, the degrees of time (kdldncds) ; or, in the west, |
the ascensional equivalent, in respirations, of the interval between
the two when increased each by six signs.
Whether a planet will or will not be visible in the west after sunset,
oy in the east before sunrise, is in this treatise made to depend solely upon
the interval of time by, which its setting follows, or its rising precedes, that *
of the sun, or upon its distance from the sun in oblique ascension; to the
neglect of those other c'rcumstances—is the declination of the two bodies,
and the distance and direction of the planet from the ecliptic—which
variously modify the limit of visibility as thus defined. The ascertainment te
of the distance in oblique ascension, then, is the object of the rules given .
in these verses. In explaining th: method of the process, we will consider
fret the case of a calculation made for the eastern horizon. The time of
sunrise having been determined, the true longitudes and rates of motion
of the sun and the planet in question are found for that moment, as also
the latitude of the planet. Owing to the latter’s removal in latitude from j
the ecliptic, it will not pass the horizon at the same moment with the. }
point of the ecliptic which determines its longitude, and the point with .
which it does actually rise must be found by a separate process. This is
accomplished by calculating the appyrent longitude of the planet, according ‘
te the method taught in the seyenth chapter. There is nothing in the 4
language of the text which indicates that the caiculation is not to be made ’
‘1 full. as there prescribed, and for the given moment of sunrise: fs 80
eonducted, however, it would evidently yield an erroneous result; for, the
planet being above the horizon, the point of the ecliptic to which it is then
referred by a circle through the north and south points of the horizon i5
not the ene to which it was referred by the horizon itself at the moment |
cf its own rising. The cormmentary removes this difficulty, by specifying
that the akshadrkkarman, oF that part of the process which gives the
correction for latitude, is to be performed ** only 25 talight in the first half-
*_ that is, according bo the former part of vii, 8, which contains the
amount of the correction at the horizon—omitting
the after process, by which its value is made to correspond to the altitude
of the planet at the given time. Having thus ascertained the points of
the ecliptic which rise with the sun and with the planet respectively, the
corresponding equatorial interval, or the distance of the planets in oblique
ascension, is found by 4 rule already given (111. 50). The result is expressed
in respirations of sidereal time, which are equivalent to minutes of the
yerse
rule for determining the

See es
ss Of:- Helliacal Risings and Settings 257
equator (see above, i. 11-12); they are reduced to degrees by dividing by
* Ns sixty : and the degrees thus found receive the technical name of ‘* timedegrees *’ (kdlangdés, kdlabhdgds); they are also called below ‘* degrees of
setting '' (astdngds), and ‘* degrees of visibility '' drgyangdas).
eee tT If the planet for which the calculation is made has greater longitude
; ; han the sun, the process, being adapted to the time of sunset, and to the
a, western horizon, requires a slight modification, owing to the fact that the
oe _ equivalents of the signs in oblique ascension (iii. 42-45) are given only
area as measured at the eastern horizon. Since 180 degrees of the ecliptic are
always above the horizon, any given point of the ecliptic will set at the
‘ | same moment that another 180° distant from it rises; by adding, then,
six signs to the calculated positions of the sun and the planet, and ascer1 ining, by iii. 50, the ascensional difference of the two points so found,
1e interval between the setting of the sun and that of the planet will be
ig
termined ; |
ae . 3efore going on to explain how, from the result thus obtained, the
of the planet's disappearance or re-appearance may be derived, the
east take place, by reason of her greatness, at eight degrees ; the
s¢ 7 the rising in the west occur, owing to her
8. So also Mercury makes his setting and rising at a distance
eA Rog ee CEES Sy ies ® : | .
no 1 sun of twelve or fourteen degrees, according as he 1s
ee 3
a Be waits anets become visible to men
“these, the planets become visible ,
+ < x Se
bey, Become »
by “the
ances, in degrees of time (kdlabhdgas), greater
nce ;
: =a - at less distances
Rao * it will be noticed, is omitted here; her heliacal rising and
ed of at the beginning of the next following chapter.
» of Mercury na. the limit of visibility is at 4 greater
C as the planet is approaching its
+TIO: the diminution of the illuminated portion
f the disk beit , more than compensated by the enlargement of the disk
If when sex sh nearer to the earth.
’ ty ‘n
ie a
a8

958° i oe. 5: "Strye-diddnints. |
_ Ptolemy treats, in ‘Ge last three shapes (sii. 7-9) of his work, of
the disappearance and re-appearance of the planets in the neighbourhood
“of the sun, and defines the limits of visibility of each planet when in the
sign Cancer, or where the equator and ecliptic are nearly parallel. His
4 limits are considerably different from those defined in our text, being, for
_ Saturn, 14°; for Jupiter, 12° 45': for Mars, 14° 30’; for Venus and Mercury,
} in the west, 5° 40’ and 11° 80’ respectively.
10. The difference, in minutes, between the numbers thus
stated and the planet’s degrees of time (kdldncds), when divided
by the difference of daily motions—or, if the planet be retr ograding,
. ky the sum of daily motions—gives a result which is the time, in
days, etc.
11. The daily motions, multiplied by the corresponding ascensional equivalents (tallagndsavas), and divided by eighteen
hundred, give the daily motions in time (kdlagati) ; by means of
these is found the distance, in days etc., of the time past or to
come.
Of these two verses, the second prescribes so essential a modification
of the process taught in the first, that their arrangement might have been
more properly reversed. If we have ascertained, by the previous rules, the
distance of a planet in oblique ascension from the sun, and if we know
the distance in oblique ascension at which it will disappear or re-appear,
the interval between the given moment and that at which disappearance
or re-appearance will take place may be readily found by dividing by the
rate of approach or separation of the two bodies the difference between
their actual distance and that of apparition and disparition: but the divisor
must, of course, be the rate of approach in oblique ascension, and not in
longitude. The former is derived from the latter by the following proportion: as a sign of the ecliptic, or 1800’, is to its equivalent in oblique aseension, as found by iii. 42-45, so is the are of the ecliptic traversed by
each planet in a day to the equatorial equivalent of that arc. The daily
rates of motion in oblique ascension thus ascertained are styled the ** time
motions "’ (kdlagati), as being commensurate with the * time- degrees "’
(kdlancgas).
“ and Magha become visible ars fourteen degrees ; also 2 Visa
aes Agvini. bp ; = oo. ‘s

Of Heliacal Risings and Settings 259
14. Krttika, Anuradha (maitra), and Mila, and likewise
Acleshaé and Ardré (rdudrarksha), are seen at fifteen degrees ; so,
too, the pair of Ashadhas. ;
15.° Bharani, Pushya, and Mrgacirsha, owing to their faintness, are seen at twenty-one degrees ; the rest of the asterisms
become visible and invisible at seventeen degrees.
These are specifications of the distances from the sun in oblique
ascension (kdlingds) at which the asterisms, and those other of the fixed
stars whose positions were defined in the preceding chapter, make their
oe heliacal risings and settings. The asterisms we are doubtless to regard as
ee represented by their junction-stars (yogatdrd). The classification here made
of the stars in question, according to their comparative magnitude and —
“3 brilliancy, is in many points a very strange and unaccountable one, and by
- _ mo means calculated to give us a high idea of the intelligence and care of
oh those by whom it was drawn up. The first class, comprising such as are
visible at a distance of 13° from the sun, is, indeed, almost wholly composed
ae = OF stars of the first magnitude; one only, Punarvasu (8 Geminorum), being
x of the first to second, and having for its fallow one of the first (a Geminorum).
®But the second class, that of the stars visible at 14°, also contains four
which are of the first magnitude, or the first to second; namely, Aldebaran
(Rohini), Regulus (Magha), Deneh or f Leonis (Uttara-Phalguni), and
e y Atair or a Aquile (Cravana) - and, along with these one of the second to
3 = third magnitude, § Leonis (Parva-Phalguni), three of the third, and one,
¢ Librm (Vigakha), of the fourth. In this last case, however, it might be
possible to regard a Libre, of the second magnitude, as the star which is
made to determine the visibility of the asterism. Among the stars of the
third class, again, which are visible at 15°, is one, a Orionis (Ardrd), which,
rae though a variable star, does not fall below the first to second magnitude;
iar * while with it are found ranked six stars of the third magnitude, or of the
third to fourth. The class of those which are visible at 17°, and which are
contains two stars of the fourth magnitude, but also two
“of which, a Andromede or y Pegasi (Uttara-Bhadrapada),
among those which are never obscured by the
The stars forming the class which are not
un are all of the fovrth magnitude, but they
inctly visible than two of those in the preceding class; and
ig : so, since it contains a star of the third
wh bove) to be regarded as its junction-star.
‘Brahma, Apimyatsa, and Apas are not specially mentioned,
ume that they all belong in the class of those visible at 17°,
ated by the commentator: the first of them (8 Tauri) is
ea ed

Stirya-Siddhanta
a star of the second magnitude; for the rest, see the last note to the
preceding chapter.
Some of the apparent anomalies of this classfication are mitigated or
removed by making due allowance for the various circumstances by which,
apart from its absolute brilliancy, the visibility of a star in the sun’s neighbourhood is favoured or the contrary—such as its distance and direction
from the equator and ecliptic, and the part of the ecliptic in which the sun
is situated during its disappearance. Many of them, bowever, do not admit
of such explanation, and we cannot avoid regarding the whole scheme of
classification as one not founded on careful and long-continued observation,
but hastily and roughly drawn up in the beginning, and perhaps corrupted
later by unintelligent imitators and copyists.
16. The degrees of visibility (dr¢ydngds), if multiplied by
eighteen hundred and divided by the corresponding ascenstonal
equivalent (udaydsavas), give, as a result, the corresponding
degrees on the ecliptic (Ashetrangds) ; by means of them, likewise,
the time of visibility and of invisibility may be ascertained.
his verse belongs, in the natural order of sequence, not after the
passage next preceding, with which it has no special connection, but after
verse 11. Instead of reducing, as taught in that verse, the motions upon
the ecliptic to motions in oblique ascension, the ‘‘ degrees of time
(kdlancés3) may themselves be reduced to their equivalent upon the corresponding part of the ecliptic, and then the time of disappearance or of reappearance calculated as before, using as a divisor the sum or difference of
daily motions along the ecliptic. The proportion by which the reduction is
made is the converse of that before given; namely, as the ascensional
equivalent of the sign in which are the sun and the planet is to that sign
itself, or 1800’, so are the ‘‘ degrees of visibility "' (drgyadngds, or kdldngds)
of the planet to the equivalent distance upon that part of the ecliptic in
which it is then situated. The technical name given to the result of the
proportion is kshetrdngés: kshetra is literally “‘ field, territory,’ and the
meaning of the compound may be thus paraphrased: “‘ the limit of visibility,
m degrees, moasured upon that part of the ecliptic which is, at the time,
the territory occupied by the planets in question, or their proper sphere.”
vf
rf
iv. Their rising takes place in the east, and their setting 1
the west ; the calculation of their apparent longitude (drkkarman)
is to be made according to previous rules; the ascertainment ol
the time, in days etc., is always by the daily motion of the sun
alone.

does not.
Of Heliacal Risings and Settings 261
This verse should follow immediately after verse 15, to which it
attaches itself in the closest manner. The dislocation of arrangement in
the latter part of this chapter is quite striking, and is calculated to suggest
& suspicion of interpolations.
The directions given in the verse require no explanation: they are just
such an adaptation of the processes already prescribed to the case of the
fixed stars as that made in verse 14 of the last chapter. The commentary
points out again that the calculation of the correction for latitude (akshadrkkarman) is to be made only for the horizon, or as stated im the first halfverse of the rule.
18. Abhijit, Brahmahrdaya, Svati, Cravana (vdtshnava),
Cravishtha (vdsava), and Uttara-Bhadrapada (ahirbudhnya),
owing to their northern situation, are not extinguished by the
sun’s rays.
It may seem that it would haye been a mere orderly proceeding to
omit the stars here mentioned from the specifications of verses 12-15 above;
but there is, at least, no mconsistency or inaccuracy in the double statement
of the text, since some of the stars may never attain that distance in oblique
ascension from the sun which is there pointed out as their limit of visibility.
We have not thought it worth the trouble to go through with the calculations, and ascertain whether, according to the data and methods of this
treatise, these six sturs, and these alone, of those which the treatise notices,
would never becoms invisible at Ujjayini. It is evident, however, as has
already been noticed above (viii. 20-21), that the star called Brahma or
Prajapati (8 Aurigw) is not here tuken into account, since it is 8° north of
Brahmabrdaya, and consequently cannot, become inyisible where the latter

CHAPTER X. |
Or THE Moon’s RIsmING AND SETTING, AND OF THE ELEVATION
oF HER Cusps.
Cowrents :—1, of the heliacal rising and setting of the moon; 2-5, how to find the
interval from sunset to the setting or rising of the moon; 6-8, method of determining the moon's relative sltitude and distance from the sun at sunset; 9, to ascertain the measure of the illuminated part of her disk; 10-14, method of delineating the moon’sa appearance at sunset; 15, how to make the same calculation
and delineation for suprise.
1. The calculation of the heliacal rising (udaya) and setting
(asta) of the moon, too, is to be made by the rules already given.
At twelve degrees’ distance from the sun she becomes visible in
the west, or invisible in the east.
In determining the time of the moon's disappearance in the neighbourhood of the sun, or of her emergence into visibility again beyond the sphere
of bis rays, no new rules are required; the same methods being employed as
were made use of in ascertaining the time of heliacal setting and rising of
the other planets: they were stated in the preceding chapter. The definition
of the moon's limit of visibility would have been equally in order in the
cther chapter, but is deferred to this in order that the several processes in
which the moon is concerned may be brought together. The title of the
chapter, ¢crngonnatyadhikdra, ‘‘ chapter of the elevation of the moon's
cusps "" crnga, literally ‘‘ horn "'), properly applied only to that part of it
which follows the fifth verse.
The degrees spoken of in this verse are, of course, ‘‘ degrees of time "
(kdlangds), or in oblique ascension.
2. Add six signs to the longitudes of the sun and moon
respectively, and find, as in former processes, the ascensional
equivalent, in respirations, of their interval (lagndntardsavas) : if
the sun and moon be in the same sign, ascertain their interval in
minutes.
3. Multiply the daily motions of the sun and moon by the
result, in nfdis, and divide by sixty ; add to the longitude of each
the correction for its motion, thus found, and find anew their
interval, in. respirations ;

i: - Moon's Rising & Setting, & the Elevation of Her Cusps 263
4. And so on, until the interval, in respirations, of the sun
and moon 1s fixed : by so many respirations does the moon, in
the light half-month (cukla), go to her setting after the sun.
5. Add half a revolution to the sun’s longitude, and calculate
the corresponding interval, in respirations : by so many respirations
does the moon, in the dark half-month (krshnapaksha), come to
her rising after sunset.
The question here sought to be solved is, how long after sunset upon
any given day will take place the setting of the moon in the crescent halfmonth, or from new to full moon, and the rising of the moon in the waning
half-month, or from full to new moon. The general process is the same
with that taught in the last chapter, for obtaining a like result as regards
the other planets or fixed stars: we ascertain, by the rules of the seventh
ehapter—applying the correction for the latitude according to its value at
: the horizon, as determined by the first part of vii. 8—the point of the
, ecliptic which sets with the moon: and then the distance in oblique ascension between this and the point at which the sun set will measure the
required interval of time. An additional correction, however, needs to be
ts applied to the result of this process in the case of the moon, owing to her
Tes rapid motion, and her consequent perceptible change of place between the
| time of sunset and that of her own setting or rising: this is done by calculating the amount of her motion during the interval as first determined,
and adding its equivalent in oblique ascension to that interval; then calculating her motion anew for the increased interval and adding its ascensional equivalent d so on, until the desired degree of accuracy is attained.
The process thus explained, however, is not precisely that which is
prescribed in the text. We are there directed to calculate the amount
of motion both of the sun and moon during the interval between the setting
of the moon, and, having applied them to the longitudes
to take the ascensional equivalent of the distance
as thus doubly corrected, for the precise time
of the setting of the moon after eunset. In one point of view this is false
sun has once passed the horizon, the interval to
moon will be affected only by her motion, and not at
er light, the process does not lack reason: the allowvalent to a reduction of the interval from
ae)
to
eee measuring time is unknown elsewhere in

264 Stirya-Siddhdnta
(Gi. 59) to the sixty nadis which constitute a sidereal day so much sidereal
time as is needed to make out the length of a day that is reckoned by any
other method. It seems necessary, then, cither to suppose a notable
blunder in this passage, or to recognize in it such a departure from the
usual methods of the treatise as would show it to be an _ interpolation.
Probably the latter is the alternative to be chosen: it is, at any rate, that
which the commentator prefers: he pronounces the two verses beginning
with the second half of verse 2, and ending at the middle of verse 4, to be
spurious, and the true text of the Siddhanta to comprise only the first half
of verse 2 and the second of verse 4; these would form together a verse
closely analogous in its method and expression with verse 5, which teaches
the like process for moon-rise, in the waning half-month. Fortified by the
authority of the commentator, we are justified in assuming that the SuryaSiddhanta originally neglected, in its process for calculating the time of the
moon's setting, her motion during the interval between that time and sunset, and that the omission was later supplied by another hand, from some
other treatise, which reckoned by solar time instead of sidereal. This does
not, however, explain and account for the second half of the second verse;
which, if it has any meaning at all, different from that conveyed in the
former part of the same verse, seems to signify that when the sun and
moon are sO near one another as to be in the same sign, the discordance
between distances on the ecliptic and their equivalents upon the equator
may be neglected, and the difference of longitude in minutes taken for the
interval of time in respirations.
If the time is between new and full moon, the object of the process is
to obtain the interval fromm sunset to the setting of the moon; as both take
place at the western horizon, the two planets are transferred to the eastern
horizon, in order to the measurerment of their distance in ascension: if, on
the other hand, the moon has passed her full, the time of moonrise is
sought; here the sun nione is transferred, by the addition of 180° to his
longitude, to the custern horizon, as taught in verse 6. The equation to
be applied to the longitude of both piunets is found by the familiar proportion—as sixty nidis are to the given interval in nadis, 50 is the true daily
motion of the planet to its actual motion during that interval.
6. Of the declinations of the sun and moon, if their direction be the same, take the difference ; in the contrary case, take
the sum: the corresponding sine is to be regarded as south or
north, according to the direction of the moon from the sun.
7. Multiply this by the hypothenuse of the moon's mid-day
shadow, and, when it is north, subtract it from the sine of latitude
(aksha) multiplied by twelve ; when it is south, add it to the same.

op SO et
y Kong ‘ —
ne oer _s p
st s Rising & Setting, & the Elevation of Her Cusps 265
eS.
id \«
s oA
8. ~=The result, divided by the sine of co-latitude (lamba),
a gives the base (bhuja), in its own direction ; the gnomon is the
aes perpendicular (koti) ; the square root of the sum of their squares
is the hypothenuse.
FF
la In explaining the method of this process, we shall follow the guidance
= of the commentator, pointing out afterwards wherein he varies from the
Pearse letter of the text: for illustration we refer to the accompanying figure
aa The figure represents the south-western quarter of the visible sphere,
Big. 92. seen as projected upon the plane of
the meridian; Z being the zenith, Y
the south point, WY the intersection
of the horizontal and meridian planes,
and W the projection of the west
point. Let ZQ equal the latitude of
the place of observation, and let QT
and QO be the declinations of the
sun and moon respectively, at the
given time: then WQ, ST, and NO
will be the projections of the equator
_ and of the diurnal circles of the sun
¥ and moon. Suppose, now, the sun
it
> ry
ee ee ee = —_——--
vi by "he A
\ ms
hree of the triangle SLM, in order to the delineation of the
on” ce when at M, or at the mement of sunset.
Now MM. A dently the sine of the moon's altitude at the given
4 ma e found by methods already more than once described
An SL is composed of the two parts SN and NL, of
d pends upon the distance of the moon in declination
. © latter upon the moon's altitude.
-# ngled triangle, ‘n which the angle NSh is equal to the
iti e, and Nb to the sum of the sine of declination of the
+ ain, LMN:: ML: NL
> 6 ain MN
© oe, a tle , at
vain. lat. sin alt. : NL
a
and NL=(sin alt, <sio let.)+sin colat.
| Vee ee

We have thus found the values of MIL and the two parts of SI. in
terms of the general sphere, or of a circle whose radius is tabular radius -
it is desired farther to reduce them to terms of a circle in which MIL shal!
equal the gnomon, or twelve digits. And since the gnomon is equal to the
sine of altitude in a circle of which the hypothenuse of the corresponding
shadow is radius (compare above, iii. 25-27 etc.), this reduction may be
effected by multiplying the quantities in question hy the hypothenuse of the
shadow and dividing by radius. That is to say, representing the reduced
values of SN and NIL by sn and nl respectively,
R: byp.sbad. :: ML: gnom.
R: byp.shad.:: SN:¢n
KR: hyp.shad.:: NOU:nl
Substituting, now, in the second and third of these proportions the values
of SN and NL found for them above, and substituting also in the third
the value of the hypothenuse of the shadow derived from the first, we have
R: byp. shad -: Rxsom sin decl. . .. and Rs 2 gn0m. .; sin alt. x sin lat...)
sin co-lat. ain lat. sip co-lat.
which reduce to
_ hyp. shad. xaam sin decl. 6a) ale ait lat. »® gnom.
sin co-lat. sin ¢o-lat
on
Hence, if the perpendicular ML be assumed of the constant value of the
gnomon, or twelve digits, we have
ay, — (hyp. shad. x sum sin deci.) + (sin lat x gnom.)
sin co-lat.
In the case thus far considered the sun and moon have been supposed upon
opposite sides of the equator. If they are upon the same side, the sun
setting at S’, or if their sines of declination, S’d and Ne, are of the same
direetion, the value of S‘N, the corresponding part of the base S’/L, will
be found by treating in the same manner as before the difference of the
sines, S’e, instead of their sum. In this case, too, the value of 5S’e being
north, S’N will have to be subtracted from NIL to give the base S'L. Other
positions of the two luminaries with respect to one another are supposable,
but those which we have taken are sufficient to illustrate all the conditions
of the problem, and the method of its solution.
It is evident that, in two points, the process as thus explained by the
commentator is discordant with that which the text prescribes. The latter,
in the first place, tells us to take, not the sum or difference of the sines
of declination, but the sine of the sum or difference of declinations,
as the side bN of the triangle SNb. This seems to be a mere inaccuracy
on the part of the text, the difference between the two quantities, which

Moon's Rising & Setting, & the Elevation of Her Cusps 26%
could never be of any great arnount, being neglected: it is, however, very
hard to see why the less accurate of the two valuations of the quantity
in question should have been selected by the text for it is, if anything,
rather less easy of determination than the other. The other discordance
_is one of much more magnitude and importance: the text speaks of the
** hypothenuse of the moon's mid-day shadow “ (madhydhnenduprabha_ karna), for which the commentary substitutes that of the shadow cast by
the moon at the given moment of sunset. The commentator attempts to
reconcile the discrepancy by saying that the text means here the moon's
shadow as calculated after the method of a noon-shadow; or again, that
the time of sunset is, in effect, the middle of the day, since the civil day
is reckoned from sunrise to sunrise: but neither of these explanations can
ia be regarded as satisfactory. The commentator farther urges in support of
ae his understanding of the term, that we are expressly taught above (vii. 11)
¥ that the ealculation of apparent longitude (drkkarman) is to be made in
the process for finding the elevation of the moon's cusps; while, if the
- ‘hypothenuse of the moon’s meridian shadow be the one found, there arises
ik > ‘no occasion for making that calculation. It seems clear that, unless the
C: commentators understanding of the true scope and method of the whole
___- process be erroneous, the substitution which he makes must necessarily
re be admitted. ‘This is a point to which we shall recur later.
i 9. The number of minutes in the longitude of the moon
ae diminished by that of the sun gives, when divided by nine hundred,
sah her illuminated part (gukla) : this, multiplied by the number of
digifs (angula) of the moon's disk, and divided by twelve, gives
the same corrected (sphuta).
My .
z ra ‘The rule laid down in this verse, for determining the measure of the
i z illuminated part of the moon, applies only to the time between new moon
and full moon, when the moon is less than 180° from the sun: when her
<p excess of longitude is more than 180°, the rule is to be applied as stated
below, jn verse 15. As the whole diameter of the moon is illuminated
when she is half a revolution from the sun, one half her diameter at 4
quarter of a revolution’s distance, and no part of it at the time of conjuncFe tion, it jis assumed that the illuminated portion of her diameter will var
as the part of 180° by which she is distant from the sun; and hence that,
| 1e measure of the diameter of her disk to be twelve digits, the
ligits: illuminated may be found by the following proportion: as
nt ov q n, or 10,800’, ia to twelve digits, 5° is the moon’s distance
nthe sun in. minutes to the corresponding part of the diameter illum.
sd: the subs jitution, in the first ratio, of 900: 1 for 10,800; 12, xIves
| : . the toxt. Here, it will be noticed, we have for the
"Dah +,
7 : ina
» reek ‘6 os : , ba fe
= 9 ee ne
oe » role " ait os ‘
gay ie aoe
Bs —> e - b
We =» at

Be ee — Stirya-Siddhanta
‘ ‘S rey he , , :
Winns as Oey , , ‘ » -.
e we, r ‘
' . : CENTRAL LIBRARY A , i.
a i
4 fn
Pee fires and only RES ‘the Greek a ‘of meesuriig the moon's diameter,
of le twelfths, or digits : from this scale a farther reduction is made
to the proper Hindu scale, as determined by the methods of the fourth
~ chapter (see above, iv. 2-3, 26), by another proportion: as twelve is to the
| pe _ true diameter in digits, so is the result already found to the true measure <—
of the part of the diameter illuminated.
It is not to be wondered at that the Hindus did not recognize the
ellipticity of the line forming the inner boundary of the moon's illuminated
part: it is more strange that they ignored the obvious fact that, while the
illuminated portion of the moon's spherical surface visible from the earth
varies very nearly as her distance from the sun, the apparent breadth of
the bright part of her disk, in which that surface is seen projected, must —
_ vary rather as the versed sine of her distance. = <.
: 10. Fix a point, calling it the sun: from that lay off the
base, in its own proper direction ; then the perpendicular, towards
the west ; and also the hypothenuse, passing through the extremity
of the perpendicular and the central point.
11. From the point of intersection of the perpendicular and
the hypothenuse describe the moon’s disk, according to its dimensions at the given time. Then, by meane of the hypothenuse, —
first make a determination of directions ; -
12. And lay off wpon the hypothenuse, from the point of its tg
intersection with the disk, in an inward direction, the measure of 5 a
the illuminated part: between the limit of the illuminated part:
and the north and south points draw two fish-fignres Gnatsya) >
13. From the point of intersection of the lines ‘passing
r
~F
through their midst describe an are touching the three points : ee a a.
the disk already drawn appears, such is the moon “upon that Gay. — “a
14. After making a determination of directions by. nveeg ie “ar
bar.
the perpendicular, point out the elevated (unnata) cusp at.
extremity of the cross-line ; having made the per tbat
to be erect (unnata), that is the sppeee pens of the ne |
15. In the dark half-month subtract re: te of
i) increased by six signs from that ol the :
if the same manner as before, her dart
yo oe the base in a reverse: direction, , and the

~ CENTRAL UBRARY
-* Moon's Rising & Setting, & the Elevation of Her Cusps 269
~ Having made the calculations preseribed in the preceding passages,
we are now to project their results, and to exhibit a representation of the
moon as she will appear at the given time. The annexed figure (Fig. 33)
will illustrate the method of the projection ;
We first fix upon « point, as 5, which shall represent the position of
the sun's centre upon the western horizon at the moment Of sunset, and
we determine, in the manner taught at the beginning of the third chapter,
the lines of cardinal direction of which it is the centre. From this pomt
we then lay off the base (bhuja) SL, according to its value in digits as
ascertained by the previous process, and northward or southward, according
ea to its true direction as determined by the same process. From IL, ite
has extremity, is laid off the perpendicular (/eti), which has the fixed value of
ke twelve digits. This, being a line perpendicular to the plane of the horizon,
i may be regarded as having no proper direction of its own upon the surface
of projection : but the text directs us tc lay it off westward from lL,
apparently in order that the observer,
Fig. 33 standing upon the eastern side of his base
SL, and looking westward toward the
setting sun, may have his figure duly
before him. The western extremity of the
perpendicular, M, represents the moon's
place, and from that as a centre, and with
a radius equal to the semi-diameter of the
moon in digits, a ascertained by calcula
tion for the given moment, 4 circle 1s
: . described, representing the moon ‘s disk.
Next we are to prolong the hypothenuse, SM. to e, and to draw, by the
< usual means, the line «n at right angles to it; the directions upon the disk
thus determined by* the hypothenuse, as the text phrases it, are called by
the commentary ~ moon-directions ~~ (candradigas). The sun being at 5,
the illuminated half of the moon’s circumference will be aun, the cusps wii
- be at» and n, and w will be the extremity of the diameter of greatest
illamination. From w, then, lay off upon the hypothenuse an amount, “2,
sequal to the measure in digits of the illuminated part of the diameter, and
‘through s, 7, and nw deseribe an are of a circle, in the manner alread) more
in 7 than once explained (see above, wi. 14-16); the crescent swir will represent
the amount and direction of the moon's iluminated part the give
: time _ Now we once more make determination of directions upon the
disk a cordi ig to the perpendicular LM; that is to say, We prolong I.M to
Mt and draw sn! at right angles to it: the directions tus established are
str lee in he commentary ** sun-directions " (siryadicas), although without!
obvio " propriety : they might rather be called “ apparent directions, © or
present a line parallel with
ety
=r Fj ;
~ hee.
q
a
on. hi sphere,” since «‘n’ should re
sae one perpendicular to ib, he line an’ 15 eulled iu
y rf

Earle .
Sdrya-Siddhanta
the text the ‘‘ cross-line “ (tiryakstitra), and whichever of the moon's
cusps is found upon that line is, we ara told, to be regarded as the clevated
(unnata) cusp, the other being the depressed one (mata), Whenever there
is any base (bhuja), as SL, or whenever the moon and sun are not upon
the sume vertical line ML, there will take place, of course, a tilting of the
moon's disk, by which one of her cusps will be raised higher above the
horizon than the other; the relative value of the base to the perpendicular
will determine the amount of the tilting, and of the deflection of the points
of direction nesw from n’e's'u"; and the elevated cusp will always be
that upon the same side of the perpendicular on which the base lies. What
is meant by the latter half of verse 14 is not altogether clear. The commentator explains it in quite a different manner from that in which we
have translated it: he understands koti as meaning in this instance “* cusp,
which signification it is by derivation well adapted to bear, and does actually
receive, although not in any other passage of this treatise: and he explains
the verb krtvd, ‘‘ having made," by drshtvd, ** having seen ": the phrase
would then read ** beholding the elevated cusp.’’ We cannot accept this
explanation as a plausible one: to us the meaning seems rather to be that
whereas, in the projection, the perpendicular (koti) LM is drawn on a
ohrizontal surface, we are, in judging of the projection as an actual representation of the moon's position, to conceive of that line as erected, set up
perpendicularly.
We have thus far only supposed a case in which the calculations are
made for the moment of sunset, the situation of the moon being in the
western hemisphere of the heavens. In the text, however, there is nothing
whatever to limit or determine the time of calculaticn, and it is evident that
the process of finding the base and perpendicular will be precisely the same,
if S (Vig. 82) be taken upon the eastern horizon, and the triangle SLM in
the eastern hemisphere. The last verse supposes these to be the conditions
of the problem, and lays down rules for determining in such a case the
amount of illumination, and for drawing the projection. As regards the
measure of the illuminated part, we are to follow the same general method
as before, only substituting for the moon’s distance in longitude from the
sun her distance from the point of opposition, and regarding the result
obtained as the measure of that part of the diameter which is obscured
(asita, ** black “’); since, during the waning half-month, darkness grows
gradually over the moon’s face im the same manner as illumination had 4
done during the crescent half-month. But why the base (bhuja) is now ~
to be laid off in the opposite to its calculated direction, we find it yery hard
to see. The commentator says it is because all the conditions of the problem
ure reversed by our having to calculate and lay off the obscured, instead of
the illuminated, part of the moon's disk: but the force of this reason is not
apparent. The establishment in the projection of o point representing the
position of the sun is, in effect, the one condition which sufficiently dateraa, 2 S - =| ) os : “ Wiis oa a

Moon's Rising & Setting, & the Elevation of Her Cusps 2i1
Be sek: Hg te fo male» prvnction corroding to.
the base in ite true Theo ana iver pte ought, it should seem, to draw
, 3 c . stationing the observer upon the western
side of it, looking eastward, to lay off the perpendicular away from him,
toward the east; and then to proceed as before, only measuring the obscured
part of the ddiameter from its remoter extremity, instead of from that next
the sun. This latter direction is regarded by the commentator as actually
conveyed in the final clause of verse 15: he interprets ‘‘ the circle
(mandala) of the moon "' to mean the dark part of the moon's disk, or that
which is to be pointed out as increasing during the waning half-month, and
‘‘on the west ’’ to mean on the western side of the complete disk, which
is the side now turned away from the sun. It seems to us exceedingly
questionable whether the passage fairly admits of this interpretation, but
we have no other explanation of it to offer—unless, indeed, it is to be looked
upon as a virtual repetition of the former direction to lay off the perpendigular, which determines the position of the moon's disk, towards the west.
; We must confess that we feel less satisfied with our comprehension of
the scope and methods of this chapter than of any that precedes it. We
are disappointed at finding the result arrived at one of so indefinite a
character, and of so little significance. The whoie laborious calculation
. seems to be made simply for the sake of delineating the appearance of
‘the moon at a given moment, and pointing out which of her two horns
has the greater altitude. No determination is made of the amount of
angular deflection, upon which any consequences, meteorological, astrological, or of any other character, could be founded; nor is any hint given of
the way in which the results of the process are to be turned to account.
Too: Moreover, while the object aimed at seems thus to be merely a projection,
es
Wa
Hy
| a2 time is selected at which the moon is not ordinarily visible, so that she
cannot be seen to exhibit an accordance with her delineated appearance !
Oo faulty one: it is, in fact.
visible disk can be
ig mee more, the whole process is an extremely
tS. only when the moon is herself at the horizon that her
regarded as in the same plane with lines parallel with and perpendicular
to the horizon, or that ctw! and n/s’ (Fig. 38) represent actual direction*
cS iy on her face: anywhere else, the relations ef the moon’s disk at M in the
rat 82) and at M in the other figure (Fig. 33) are 50 different
cannot fairly represent the former. It would seem, indeed.
as i eetting or rising were the one for which
‘such this would have most sionificance : at
f one of her horns before the
thi | time, the disappearance oer appearance 0 :
Se SOL jioht seem to a Hindu astronomer
othe be such a phenomenon as might seem ‘as
wort 1 the trouble of delineating, 95 4 decisive proof of the accuracy of his
scientifi » knowledge. We have not found it possible, however, to m ake
he rules of the text apply to auch a case, and the commentary is explicit
{ts definition of the time of the calculation, as sunset or sunrise alone, to
bd
a
FST
a oy ng °
t, “as
4 Jee?

h ‘discordance existing at more
the sila betweccills teat cad tho « commentary suggests
e that the original design of the one and the traditional inter-
.: seh of it represented by the other may be at variance, and we sre
Stet > no ; without suspicions that the text may have been altered, 80 as not now
5% 2. _ forrly and accurately to represent any one consistent process. A_ better
understanding - of the general object of the calculation «nd the use made
of its results, and an sacquaintance with the solutions of the problem
F i presented by other astronomical treatises, might throw additional light upon
a these points; but we are not able at present fully to avail ourselves of such
assistance, nor is the importance of the subject such as to render incumbent upon us its fuller elucidation
f

= es
Tes!
ia Ie
| = ‘oie See CHAPTER XI.
Nek’ Or Certain MALIGNANT ASPECTS OF THE Sun AND Moon.
| Contexts :—1-5, definition and description of the malignant aspects of the sun ane
< 4 moon, when of equal — declination; 6-11, to find the longitude of the sun and
moon when their declinations are equal; 12-13, to ascertain the corresponding
Lets time ; 14-15, to determine the duration of the aspect, and the moment of ite be-
: te ginning and end; 16-18, its continuance and its influences; 19, when such an as-
’ pect, may occur more than once, or not at all; 20, occurrence of the yogs of like
name and character ; 21, of unlucky points in the circle of asterisms; 22, caution
as ch these unlucky ‘napects aod points; 23, introductory to the following chapters.
ef: When the sun and moon are upon the same side of either
Pies: and when, ‘the sum of their longitudes being a circle, they
*; are ue equal declination, it is styled vdidhrta.
Pc . When the moon and sun are upon opposite sides of either
latice. and their minutes of declination are the same, it 1s
eg Bum: of their sing ‘of tt oe a half-circle.
ey ee (pata) at this time often causes ‘the destrucjhe
rtals, it is: known as Uv! yatipata, or, by a difference of
= 2 black, of Righttal shape, bloody-eyed, big-bellied,
ae ta nisfortune to. all, it is produced again and again.
a aN chapters in the treatise, this is the one which has least
st and Tt is styled patadhikdra, *' chapter of the patas,*’ and
serns it self Te Sig ook description | of the malignant character of the
d moon have equal declination, upon the same or
: equntor and with laying down rules by which the time
malignant aspects may be calculated. The latter
alle iatesin. the province of an astronomical treatis¢
e » "oe
si vm. - e
i aa

hs ‘
274 Stirya-Siddhanta
like the present: the other would better have been left to works of a professedly astrological character. The term pdta, applied to the aspects in
question, means literally ‘' fall," and hence also cither ** fault, transgression,"’ or ** calamity."’ We have often met with it above, in the sense of
“node of a planet’s orbit "’; as so used, it was probably first applied to
the moon’s nodes, because they were the points of danger in her revolution,
near which the sun or herself was liable to fall into the jaws of Rahu
(see above, iv. 6); and it was then transferred also, though without the
same reason, to the nodes of the other planets. As it is employed in this
chapter, we translate it simply ‘‘ aspect."" Why the time when the sun
and moon are equally distant fron, the equator should be looked upon as so
especially unfortunate is not easy to discover, notwithstanding the lucid
explanation furnished in the third verse. For the “* provector '’ (pravaha),
the wind which carries the planets forward in their orbits, see above, i. 3.
When the equal declinations are of opposite direction, the aspect is denominated vdidhrta, or vdidhrti. This word is a secondary derivative from
vidhrti, ‘* holding apart, withholding,”’ or from vidhrta: it has been noted
above (under ii. 65) as the mame of the last yoga; and its use here is not
discordant with that, since the twenty-seventh yoga also occurs when the
sum of the longitudes of the sun and moon is 360°. The title of the other
aspect (pdta), which occurs when the sun and moon are equally removed
from the equator upon the same side of it, is vyatipdta, which may be
rendered ‘* very excessive sin or calamity."’ This, too, is the name of one
of the yogas, but not of that one which occurs when the sum of fongitudes |
of the sun and moon is 180°: the discordance gives occasion for the explanation contained in verse 20, below. ‘The specification of the text, that the
aspects take place when the sum of longitudes equals a circle or a half- |
circle respectively, or when the two luminaries are equally distant from \
either solstice, or either equinox, is not to be understood as exact: this --——
would be the case if the moon had no motion tm latitude; but owing to
that motion, the equality of declinations, which is the main thing, occurs
at a time somewhat removed from that of equality of distance from the
equinoxes: the latter is called in the commentary madhyapdta, ‘* the mean
occurrence of the aspect."’ The terms translated by us “* upon the same
and upon the opposite sides of either solstice '' are ekdyanagata and
viparitdyanagata, literally ** situated in the same and in contrary ayanas "’;
ayana being, as already pointed out (end of note to iii, 9-12), the mame of -™"
the halves into which the ecliptic is divided by the solstices. : -
al
6G. When the longitudes of the sun and moon, being increased
by the degrees, etc., found for the coincidence of the solstice with
its observed place, are together nearly a circle or nearly a_halfcircle, calculate the corresponding declinations.

e
of Certain Malignant Aspects of the Sun and Moon 275
q uadraht, is, when corrected by her latitude (vikshepa), grea ates
than the declination of the sun, the aspect (pdta) is already past ;—
lie 8. If less, it is still to come : in an even. quadrant, the
te contrary is the case. If the moon's declination is to be subtracted
re Esco her latitude, the rules as to the quadrant are to be reversed.
ae ‘Then, if the declination of the moon, she being in an odd
“s Pe As in other processes of a similar character (see above, iv. 7-8; vil.
<7 2-6), we ate supposed to have found by trial, for the sectinie-pokat of the
_ present caleulation, the midnight next preceding or following the occurrence
of the aspect in question, and to have determined for that moment the
_ Tongitudes and rates of motion of both bodies, and the moon ‘s latitude.
n finding the longitudes, we are to apply the correction for precession; this
: is the meaning of the expression in verse 6, drktulyasddhitangdd, which
may be literally translated ** degrees, ete., calculated for accordance with
sbserved piace Hts, the reference is to the similar expression for the precession
ontained in iii. ha Next the declinations are to be found, and that ot
the moon as corrected | for her latitude. And since, in the odd quadrants—
chat i is to say, the first and third, counting from the actual vernal equinox
it declination is increasing, while in the others it is decreasing, if the
a 3 de clination in an odd quadrant: of the moon, the swifter moving body, is
alr sady greater ‘than that of the sun, the time of equality of declination is
eviden already past, and the converse. But if, on the other hand, the
on s eclination (using that term in its Hindu sense) is so small, and
ee tatiana! 30 great, being of opposite directions, that her actual distance
s from the equat tor r is measured by the excess of the latter above the former,
and £0 i is of direction contrary to that of her declination, then, as declination
" incre 2ases, distance from. the equator diminishes, or the contrary, and the
- conc cael as formerly stated are reversed throughout.
$ tie gs: Multiply the sines of the two declinations by radius, and
di vide by ‘the sine of greatest | declination : the difference of the
ares c =p onding to the results, or half that difference, 1s to be
jo the moon’ Ss Tongitude when the aspect (pata) is to come ;
_ And is to be subtracted from the moon's longitude when
ect is past. It the same quantity be multiplied by the
otior and divided by the moon's motion, the result is an
ee on. s in _ minutes, which is to be | applied to the sun’s place, in
the sa me d rec ate n as the other to the moon's.
ar also i s to be applied, in the contrary direction, a like
: ace of the moon 's node. This operation is to
poe ies
equa ation to he plac
ee
H,
Lome
y svident
AP ae

ih ont wr me we .
nt ‘repeated, until: the Riatinations of the two bodies come to be
the same.
By this process are ascertained the longitudes of the sun and moon
at the time when their declinations are equal. Its. method may be briefly
explained as follows. At the midnight assumed as the starting-point of
the whole calculation there is found to be a certain difference in the two
declinations : we desire to determine how far the paths of the two luminaries
must be traced forward or backward, in order that that difference may be
removed; and this must be effected by means of a series of approximations.
We commence our calculation with the moon, as being the body of more
rapid motion. By a proportion the inverse of that upon which the rule
for deriving the declination from the longitude (ii. 28) is founded, we
ascertain at what longitude the moon would have the sun’s actual declination, and at what longitude she would have her own actual declination,
as corrected by her latitude: the difference between the two results
if @ measure of the amount of motion in longitude, forward or backward,
by which she would gain or lose the difference of declination, if the sun
remained stationary and her own latitude unchanged. Since, however, that
is not the case, we are compelled to calculate the corresponding motion of
the sun, and also the moon's latitude in her new position; and in order to
the latter, we must correct the place of the nore also for ite retrograde
motion during the interval. The motions of the sun and node are found
by the following proportion: as the moon's daily motion is to that of the
sun, or to that of the node, so is the correction applied to the mvon’s place ;
to that which must be applied to the place of the sun, or to that of the —
node. A new set of positions in longitude having thus been found, the
declinations are again to be calculated, and the same approximative process
repeated—and so on, until the desired degree of accuracy is attained,
The text permits us to apply, as the correction for the place of the —
moon, either the whole or the half of the difference of longitude found as
the result of the first proportion: it is unessential, of course, in a process —
of this tentative character, what smount we assume as that of the first
correction, provided those which we apply to th» places of the sun and &
node be made to correspond with it: and there may be cases in which we
should be conducted more directly to the final result of the os by =
taking only half of the difference.
12. The aspect (pata) is at the time of equality of declina>
tions ; if, then, the moon's longitude, as thus increased or diminished, be less than her longitude at $mlanigh the “ep Fi is ) past; it
greater, it is to come.
> ee Ve ie « ay “ a a
—. Ph Eo 2 ape pets Ba oa ir) /
“_—- ; a 29 borge se ' = bg « 7 eur eines ; ‘
a Po + bt le s .. cede. s

Of Certain Malignant Aspects of the Sun and Moon 277
13. The minutes of interval between the moon's longitude
as finally established and that at midnight give, when multiplied
by sixty and divided by the moon's daily motion, the time of the
aspect, in nadis. . >
We had thus far found only the lorigitudes of the sun and moon at
the time of equality of declination, and not that time itself: the latter is
now derived from the former by this proportion: as the moon's daily
motion is to a day, or sixty nadis, so is the difference between the moon's
longitude at midnight and at the time of the aspect to the interval between
the latter time and midnight.
14. Multiply the half-sum of the dimensions (mdna) of the
sun and moon by sixty, and divide by the difference of their daily
motions : the result is half the duration (sthiti), in nadi, etc.
15. The corrected (sphuta) time of the aspect (pata) is the
middle: if that be diminished by the half-duration, the result is
the time of the commencement ; if increased by the same, it is the
time of the end. |
1G. The time intervening between the moments of the beginning and end is to be looked upon as exceedingly terrible, having
the likeness of a consuming fire, forbidden for all works.
The continuance of the centres of the sun and moon at the point «t
equality of declination is, of course, only momentary; but the aspect aud
its malignant ‘nfluences are to be regarded as lasting as long 4s there is
virtual contuct of the two disks at that point, or as long as a central eclipse
of the sun would last if it took place there. Its half-duration, then, or the
interval from its middle to its beginning or end respectively, 1s found by a
proportion, as follows: if in a day, or sixty nadis, the two centres of the
sun and moon become separated by a distance which is equal to the differi ence of their daily motions, in how many nadis will they become separated
ze : by a distance which is equal to the sum of their semi-diameters? or
mB, ‘ diff. d. motions :,60:: sum semi-diam. : balf-duration.
Ana if this amount be subtracted from and added to the time of equality
re of declination, the results will be the moments at which the aspect will
bogin and end respectively. |
-—s- Buch is the plain and obvious méaning of the text in this passage.
The comment: tor, however, in accordance with his interpretation of the
next following verse (see below), declares that the aspect actually lasts
? | tie ¥ rik *) ge ny ,
ig as any portion of the moon's disk has the same declination wit?:

278 | Surya-Siddhdanta
any portion of that of the sun; and that, accordingly, it commences—the
moon's declination being supposed to be increasing—whenever her remoter
limb comes to have the same declination with the nearer limb of the sun,
and ends when her nearer limb comes to have the same declination witb
the remoter limb of the sun—the contrary being the case when her declination is decreasing. He acknowledges that the text does not seem to teach
this, but puts in the plea which is usual with him when excusing a palpable
inaccuracy in the statements or processes of the treatise; namely, that the
blessed author of the work, moved by pity for mankind, permitted here
the substitution of difference of longitude for difference of declination, im
view of the greater ease of its calculation, and the imsignificance of the
error involved. That error, however, is quite the reverse of msignificant;
it is, indeed, so very gross and palpable that we cannot possibly suppose
it to have been committed intentionally by the text; we regard it as the
easier assumption that the conditions of the continuance of the aspect are
differently estimated in the text and in the commentary, being by the former
taken to be as we have stated them above, in our explanation of the
process. ‘The view of the matter taken by the commentator, it is true, ts
decidedly the more natural and plausible one: there seems no good reason
why an aspect which depends upon equality of declination should be determined as to continuance by motion in longitude, or why the aspect should
only occur at all when the two centres are equally distant from the equator;
why, in short, there should not be partial aspects, like partial eclipses of
the sun. If the doctrine of the commentary is a later development, or
an independent form, of that which the text appears to represent, it is a
naturally suggested one, and such us might have been expected to arise.
17. While any parts of the disks of the sun and moon have
the same declination, so long is there a continuance of this aspect,
causing the destruction of all works.
18. So, from a knowledge of the time of its occurrence, very
great advantage is obtained, by Means of bathing, giving, prayer,
ancestral offerings, vows, oblations, and other like acts.
We have translated verse 17 in strict accordance with the ‘nterpretation of it presented in the commentary, although we must acknowledge
that we do not see how that interpretation is to be reconciled with the
actual form of the text. The term eckdyanagata, which the commentator
renders ‘* having equal declination,”’ is the same with that which in the
first verse signified “‘ situated in the same ayana “'; mandala, although it
is sometimes used with the meaning ‘* disk,’ here attributed to it by him,
is the word employed in that same verse for a “’ circle,’’ or * 860° '’; and
antara, which he explains by ckadega, *" any part,’’ never, so far as we
Nea

o
ac f Certain Malignant Aspects of the Sun and Moon 279
4 ‘know, is properly used in that sense, while it is of freque nt occurrence elses. ee etisre in this treatise with the meaning “‘ interval.’’ The natural rendering
of the line would seem to be ‘‘ when there is between the sun and moon
di , the interval of a circle, situated in the same ayana'’ This, however, yields
ea Bis: useful meaning, since such a description could only apply to an actual
selene of the sun and moon. We do not see how the difficulty 1s to
be solved, unless it be allowed us, in view of the discordance already pointed
rm as existing between the plain meaning of the previous passage and that
attributed to it by the commentator, to assume that the text has been
tampered with in this verse, and made to furnish a different sense from
that it originally had, partly by a forced interpretation, but partly also by
"y ‘such an alteration of its readings as disables it from yielding any other
. se. ntelligible meaning.
Re : 19. - When the equality of declinations of the sun and moon
takes place i in the neighbourhood of the equator, the aspect may —
Se then again occur a second time: in the contrary case, it may fail —
rato Coonr.
. Near the equinox, where declination changes rapidly, the moon, as
the swifter moving body, may come to have twice, in rapid succession,
the: same ‘declination with the sun, and upon the opposite sides of the
uator. — Near the solstice, on the other hand, where the ecliptic and
ie: ‘oe are nearly parallel, the moon—if she happens to be nearer the
: uator tor than the sun is, owing to her latitude—may psss the region in
Oe aspect would otherwise be lable to occur, without having had
fare ‘meus in amount to that of the sun.
de
being divided by the ‘portion ‘eaiaa): of an asterism
*e quotient | between sixteen and seventeen, there 1s
* , vyatipata. ”
mply a special application of the rule formerly given (ii. 65),
any given time, the current period named yoga. The
1 of the rit 28, as is shown by the list there given, has the same
a oe Sone. of the aspects treated of in this chapter: judging
s fro ais , it is also Tegarded as possessing a like portentous
a ac ic 1 maligna Ve a acter.
J
1. OF bs the asterisms (dhishnya) Aglesha (sdrpa), Jyeshtha
(dine u dra), and Re y uti (pmishnyady, tb the last quarters are junctions of
m he as iste risms (dha: andhi) ; the first quarter in the asterisms following thes “Se > re specti\ Mt uy yi i pases. pees:
Ne ay
ie a ler dy
a) rey

Sdrya-Siddhdanta
| 22. In all works, one must avoid the terrible trio of vyatipatas, as also the trio of ganddntas, and this trio of junctions of
asterisms.
The division of the ecliptic into twenty-seyvenths, or asterisms, coincides with its division into twelfths, or signs, at the ends of the ninth,
eighteenth, and twenty-seventh asterisms, which are also those of the
fourth, eighth, and twelfth signs respectively. To this innocent circumstance it seerns to be owing that those points, and the quarters of portions,
or arcs of 200’, on either side of them, are regarded and stigmatized as
unlucky and ominous. Hence the title bhasandhi; sandhi is literally
** putting together, joint,’’ and bha is, as has been noticed elsewhere (note
to iii. 9-12), a name both of the asterisms and of the signs. In which of
its various senses the word ganda is used in the compound ganddnta, we
do not know,
23. Thus hath been related that supreme, pure, excellent,
mysterious, and grand system of the heavenly bodies: what else
dost thou desire to know?
In this verse re-appears the personality of the revealer of the treatise,
the incarnation of a portion of the sun, which has been lost sight of since
near the beginning of the work (i. 7). The questions addressed to him, in
answer to this appeal, by Maya, the recipient of the revelation, introduce
the next chapter, which, with the two that follow it, contains the additional
explanations and instructions vouchsafed in reply, The last three chupters
confessedly constitute a separate portion of the work, which is here divided
into a parva khenda and an uttara khanda, or a “* former Part "" and #
‘‘ latter Part."’ It is by no means impossible that the whole second Part
is an appendix to the text of the Siddh&nta as originally constituted.
The title of the next following chapter is bhiigolidhydya, ** chapter of
the earth-globe “": in the second part of the trentise the chapters are étyled
aihydya, ** lection,’’ instead of, as hitherto, adhikdra, ~ heading.”’
aa
ee

CHAPTER XII.
CosmMoGony, GEOGRAPHY, DIMENSIONS OF THE CREATION.
Contents :-—1-9, inquiries; 10-28, development of the creative agencies, of the element«
and of the existing creation; 29-31, form and disposition of the stellar and planetary
systems ; 92-44, situation, form, structure, and divisions of the earth; 45-72, varying
phenomena of night and day in different latitudes and xones ; 73-77, revolutions of
the stars and planets; 75-79, regents of the different divisions of tume; 80-50,
dimensions of the planetary, stellar, and ethereal orbits,
1. Then the demon Maya, prostrating himself with hands
suppliantly joined before him who derived his being from the part
of the Sun, and revering him with exceeding devotion, inquired
as follows :
2. O blessed one! of what measure is the earth? of what
form? how supported? how divided? and how are there in it seven
interterranean (pdtdla) earths?
3 And how does the sun cause the varying distinction of .
day and night? how does be revolve about the earth, enlightening
all creatures?
Z 4. For what reason are the day and night of the gods and
Por the demons opposed to one another? or how does that take place
by means of the sun’s completion of his revolution ?
ee. 5. Why does the day of the Fathers consist of a month, but
that of mortals of sixty nadis? for what reason is not this latter
everywhere the case?
bars. 6. Whence is it that the regents of the days, years, months,
and hours (hora) are not the same? How does the circle of asf terisms (bhagana) revolve? what is the support of it with the
planets? :
“s, le : 7. The orbits of the planets and stars, uplifted from the
5 earth one above another—what are their heights? what their intervals? what their dimensions ? and what the order in which thes
are fixed? |

282 3 Stirya-Siddhanta
8. Why are the rays of the sun hot in the summer, and not
30 in the winter? how far do his rays penetrate? How many
modes of measuring time (mdna) are there? and how are they
employed ?
9. Resolve these my difficulties, O blessed one, creator of
creatures! for there is not found besides thee another resolver,
who beholdeth all things.
The proper answers to these inquiries commence at about the twentiyseventh verse of the chapter, the preceding philosophical history of the
development of the existing creation being apparently volunteered by
the revelator. All the questions then find their answers in this chapter,
excepting that as to the methods of measuring time, which is disposed
of in the fourteenth and concluding chapter. The subject of the thirteenth
chapter also seems not to be contemplated in the laying out, in this
passage, of the scheme of subjects to be treated of in the remainder of the
treatise.
10. Having heard the words thus uttered with devotion by
Maya, he then again promulgated this mysterious and supreme
Book (adhydya) :
11. listen with concentrated attention : I will proclaim the
secret doctrine called the transcendental (adhydtma): there is
nothing which may not be bestowed on those who are exceedingly
devoted to me.
12. WaAsudeva, the supreme principle of divinity (brahman)
whose form is all that is (tat), the supreme Person (purusha), unmanifested, free from qualities, superior to the twenty-five principles, imperishable,
13. Contained within matter (prakrti), divine, pervading
everything, without and within, the attractor—he, having in the
first place created the waters, deposited in them energy.
14. That became a golden egg, on all sides enveloped in
darkness : in it first became manifested the unrestrained, the everlasting one.
15. He in the scripture (chandas) is denominated the
golden-wombed (hiranyagarbha), the blessed ; as being the first
(Adi) existence, he is called Aditya ; as being generator, the sun.

Pe tah
“y Ieee SRSA See > ~S | | : : : :
oe ‘Cosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 283
| 16. This sun, likewise named Savitar, the supreme sources
of light (jyotis) upon the border of darkness—he revolves, bringing
_ beings into being, the creator of creatures.
es: eet a LT. He is extolled as natural illuminator, destroyer of darkness, great. The Hymns (reas) are his disk, the iene (sdmant)
end his, beams, the Liturgy (yajinshi) his form.
i: \ gga Eee S CR the blessed one, is composed of the trio of sacred
7 scriptures, the soul of time, the producer of time, mighty, the
+, : soul of the universe, all-penetrating, subtle : in him is the universe
peste.
a ie 19.- Having made for his chariot, which is composed of the
. eee _mnirerse, a wheel consisting of the year, and having yoked the
: metres as his steeds, he revolves continually.
a: Pag Three quarters are immortal, secret; this one quarter
| hath becom 1e manifest. In order to the production of the animated
ation, he, the mighty one, produced Brahma, the principle of
‘eae Se sriciouances (ahankdra).
21. Bestowing upon him the Scriptures (veda) as cifts, and
hie: ishing him within the egg as" grandfather of all worlds, he
= ‘2 a T nself then revolves, causing existence.
3 82. ‘Then Brahma, wearing the form of the principle of
PAS Pike ousness (ahankédra), produced mind in the creation: from
bare aut nd was, born the moon ; from the eyes, the sun, the repository
i mind, ‘the ether ; thence, in succession, wind, fire,
se five | elements (mahdbhita) were produced by
cesslv ree of one quality. :
pret ieee: ‘Soma, the sun and moon: then Mars ete.
a ae
produced, Pa eeerecion, from light, earth, ether, water,
ea Se
. ‘ W Jt
26. Ag sain, ‘dividing: himself twelve-fold, he, the mighty one,
pro ou ced a :] at is known as ‘signs ; and yet farther, what has
f the asterisms (nakshatra), twenty-seven- -fold.
et Pher 16 wrought out the whole animate and inanimate
or ie from the gods downward, producing forms of matter
(prakrti). fr oni the upper, oT , middle, and lower currents (srotas).

- 4 - bat as = oe Mi he - - ~ me 2 rh i, * ™ rye s ; 2 ” i : c os
| gikie Real (A eee
ae Mr aT. Having produced them in succession, as stated, by a
difference of quality and function, he fashioned the distinctive
character of each, according to the showing of the Scripture
- (veday—
28. That is, of the planets, asterisms, and stars, of the
‘eurth, and of the universe, he the mighty one ; of gods, demons,
und mortals, and of the Perfected (siddha), in their order.
We do not regard ourselves as called upon to enter into any detailed
examination of this metaphysical scheme of development of the creation,
or to compare it critically with the similar schemes presented in other
Hindu works, as Manu (chap. i), the Puranas (see Wilson’s Vishnu Purana,
Book I), etc. We will merely explain a few of its expressions, and of the
allusions it contains. Vasudeva is an ordinary epithet of Vishnu, and its
use in the signification here given it seems indicative of Vaishnava tendencies on the part of the author of the scheme. ‘The twenty-five principles
referred to in verse 12 are those established by the Sankhya philosophy.
The reference in verse 15, first half, is to Rig-Veda x. 121. In the
second half of the same verse we have a couple of false etymologies:
dditya comes, not from ddi, ‘* first," but from aditi, ** eternity ";
and to derive sirya, ** sun,’’ from the root si, “* generate (from which
savitar actually comes), is beyond the usual measure of Hindu theologicophilosophical etyrnologizing. The Hymns, Songs, and Liturgy are the three
bodies of scripture commonly known as the Rig-Veda, Sama-Veda, and
Yajur-Veda. The “‘ seven metres (v. 19) are those which are most often
employed in the construction of the Vedic hymns: in parts of the Veda
itself they are personified, and marvellous qualities and powers are ascribed
to them. ‘he obscure statement contained in the first half of verse 20
comes from verses 8 and 4 of the purusha-hymn (Kig-Veda x, 90; the hymn
is also found in others of the Vedie texts), The second half of verse 22
also nearly coincides with a passage (v. 13) in the same hymn. Of the five
elements assumed by the Hindu philosophers, the first, ether, is said to
be endowed only with the quality of audibleness; the second, air, has that
of tangibility also; the third, fire, has both, along with color; to these
qualities the fourth element, water, adds that of savor; the last, earth,
possesses audibility, tangibility, color, savor, and odor: this is according to —
the doctrines of the Sankhya philosophy, In verses 24 and 25 we have
specifications introduced out of consideration for the general character and
author. For the beings called in verse 28 the “ perfected "" (siddha), see —
Nios below, ‘verses 8) and 400 9 ge se esa: Se he
- oe “=a te es a bg
> Ll a
3 rl

* Cosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 285
29. This Brahma-egg is hollow; within it is the universe,
consisting of earth, sky, etc. ; it has the form of a sphere, lke a
receptacle made of a pair of caldrons.
30. A circle within the Brahma-egg is styled the orbit ol
the ether (vyoman) : within that 1s the revolution of the asterisms
(bha) ; and likewise, in order, one below the other,
31. Revolve Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, the sun, Venus,
Mercury, and the moon; below, in succession, the Perfected
(siddha), the Possessors of Knowledge (vidyddhara), and the
clouds.
he order of proximity to the earth in which the seven planets are
here arranged is, as noticed above (i. 51-52), that upon which depends
the succession of their regency over the days of the week, and so also
the names of the latter. So far as the first three and the last are concerned, it is a naturally suggested arrangement, which could hardly fail
to be hit upon by any nation having sufficient skill to form an order of
succession at all: the order in which the sun, Mercury, and Venus are made
to follow one another is, on the other hand, a matter of more arbitrary
determination, and might have been with equal propriety, for aught we can
see, reversed or otherwise varied. Of the supernatural beings called the
‘* possessors of knowledge "' (vidyadhara) we read cnly in this verse: the
** perfected "" we find again below, im verse 40, as inhabitants of a city on
the earth's surface.
32. Quite in the middle of the egg, the earth-globe (bhugola)
‘stands in the ether, bearing the supreme might of Brahma, which
is of the nature of self-supporting force.
Ps 33. Seven cavities within it, the abodes of serpents (naga)
and demons (asura), endowed with the savor of heavenly plants,
delightful, are the interterranean (pdtdla) earths.
ee a. 34. A collection of manifold jewels, a mountain of gold, 1s
ng XN eru, passing through the middle of the earth-globe, and prone _truding on either side.
be AS a eels! ee At its upper end are stationed, along with Indra, the
4, ds. and the Great Sages Qnaharshi) ; at its lower end, in like
r es
r, the emons (asura) have their place—each the enemy of
nas ™—-= 1, be
= the other. . ;

286 Stirya-Siddhanta
36. Surrounding it on every side is fixed next this great
ocean, like a girdle about the earth, dividing the two hemispheres
of the gods and of the demons.
37. And on all sides of the midst of Meru, in equal divisions
of the ocean, upon islands (dvipa), in the different directions, are
the eastern and other cities, fashioned by the gods.
38. At a quadrant of the earth's circumference eastward, in
the clime (varsha) Bhadracva, is the city famed as Yamakoti,
having walls and gateways of gold.
89 'Tlo the southward, in the clime Bharata, is in like
manner, the great city Lanka: to the west, in the clime called
Ketumiala, is declared to be the city named Romaka.
40. Northward, in the clime Kuru, is declared to be the city
called that of the Perfected (siddha) ; in it dwell the magnanimous
Perfected, free from trouble.
41. ‘These are situated also at a distance from one another of
a quadrant of the earth's circumference ; to the north of them,
at the same distance, is Meru, the abode of the gods (sura).
42. Above them goes the sun when situated at the equinoxes ;
they have neither equinoctial shadow nor elevation of the pole
(akshonnatt).
43. In both directions from Meru are two pole-stars (dhruradra), fixed in the midst of the sky : to those who are situated in
places of no latitude (niraksha), both these have their place in
the horizon.
44. Hence there is in those cities no elevation of the pole,
the two pole-stars being situated in their horizon ; but their degrees
of co-latitude (lambaka) are ninety : at Meru the degrees of latitude (aksha) are of the same number.
In these verses we have so much of geography as the author of the
chapter has seen fit to connect with his astronomical explanations. For
«a Hindu account of the earth, it is wonderfully moderate, and free from
falsehood. ‘The absurd fictions which the Puranas put forth as geography
are here for the most part ignored, only two or three of the features of their
descriptions being retained, and those in an altered form. To the Pur&nas
(see especially Wilson’s Vishnu Purina, Book II., chap. ii-vi), the earth
is a plain, of immense dimensions. Precisely in the middle of it rises

Cosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 287
Mount Meru, itself of a size compared with which the earth, as measured
by the astronomers, is as nothing: it is said to be 84,000 yojanas high,
and buried at the base 16,000 yojanas; it has the shape of an inverted cone,
being 82,000 yojanas in diameter at its upper extremity, and only 16,000
at the earth’s surface. Out of this mountain the astronomical system
makes the axis of the earth, protruding at either extremity, indeed, but of
dimensions wholly undefined. As the Puranas declare the summit of
Meru, and the mountains immediately supporting it, to be the site of the
cities inhabited by the different divinities, so also we have here the gods
placed upon the northern extremity of the earth's axis, while their foes,
the spirits of darkness, have their seat at the southern. The central
circular continent, more than 100,000 yojanas in diameter, in the midst of
‘which Meru lies, is named Jambidvipa, ‘‘ the island of the rose-apple tree “.
it is intersected by six parallel ranges of mountains, running cust and west,
and connected together by short cross-ranges: the countries lying between
these ranges are styled varshas, ‘‘ climes,’’ and are all fully named and
described in the Puranas, as are the mountasin-ranges themselves. The
half-moon-shaped strips lying at the bases of the mountains on the eastern,
southern, western, and northern edges of the continent, are called by the
same names that are given by our text to the four insular climes which it
sets up. Bharata is a real historical name, appearing variously in the
early Hindu traditions; Kuru, or Uttara-Kuru, is « title applied in Hindu
geography of a less fictitious character to the country or people situated
beyond the range of the Himalaya; the other two names appear to be
altogether imaginary. The Puranas say nothing of cities in these four
climes. Lanka, as noticed above (i. 62), is properly an appellation of the
island Ceylon; and Romaka undoubtedly comes from the name of the great
city which was the mistress of the western world at the period of lively
commercial intercourse between India and the Mediterranean : the other
two cities are pure figments of the imagination. Our treatise, it will be
observed, ignores the system of continents, or dvipas, and simply = surrounds the earth with an ocean in the midst, like a girdle: the Puranas
encompass Jambidvipa about with six other dvipas, or insular ring-shaped
continents, each twice as vast as that which it encloses, and each separated
from the next by an ocean of the same extent with itself. Of these seven
oceans, the first, which washes the shores of Jambidvipa, is naturally
oe 4: enough acknowledged to be composed of salt water: but the second is of
Ny
‘syrup, the third of wine, the fourth of clarified butter, the fifth of whey,
the sixth of milk, and the last of aweet water. Outside the latter is an
- _ wninhabited land of gold, and on its border, as the outmost verge of
creation, ig the monstrous wall of the LokAloka mountains, beyond which
The author of the Siddhanta-Ciromani, more submissive than th.
: - of our chapter to the authority of tradition, uccepts (Goladhy., chap.

Stirya-Siddhdnta
ii) the series of concentric continents and oceans, but gives them all a
place in the unknown southern hemisphere, while he regards Jambidvipa as
occupying the whole of the northern,
The pdfdlas, or interterranean cavities, spoken of in verse 33, are also
an important feature of the Puranic geography. If our author has not
had the good sense to reject them, along with the insular continents, he
at least passes them by with the briefest possible notice. In the Puranas
they are declared to be each of them 10,000 yojanas in depth, and their
divisions, inhabitants, and productions are described with the same ridiculous detail as those of the continents on the earth's surface.
It will be observed that the text, although exhibiting in verse 41 a
distinct apprehension of the fact that the pole is situated to the northward of all points of the equator alike, yet, in describing the position of
the four great cities, speaks as if there were a north direction from Meru,
jn the continuation of the line drawn to the latter from Lanka, and an east
and west direction at right angles with this.
for the terrestrial equator, considered as a line or circle upon the
earth’s surface, there is no distinctive name; it is referred to simply as the
place ** of no latitude *’ (niraksha, vyaksha).
45. In the half-revolution beginning avith Aries, the sun,
being in the hemisphere of the gods, is visible to the gods: but
while in that beginning with Libra, he is visible to the demons,
moving in their hemisphere.
46. Hence, owing to his exceeding nearness, the rays of the
sun are hot in the hemisphere of the gods in summer, but in
that of the demons in winter: in the contrary season, they are
sluggish.
47. At the equinox, both gods and demons see the sun in the
horizon ; their day and night are mutually opposed to each other.
48. The sun, rising at the first of Aries. while moving on
northward for three signs, completes the former half-day of the
dwellers upon Meru ;
49. In like manner, while moving through the three signs
beginning with Cancer, he completes the latter half of their day
he accomplishes the same for the enemies of the gods while
moving through the three signs beginning with Tuibra and the
three beginning with Capricorn, respectively.
50. Hence are their night and day mutnally opposed to one
another; and the measure of the day and night is by the completion of the sun’s revolution.

‘Cosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 289
ha 61. Their mid-day and midnight, which are opposed to one
a another, are at the end ‘of each half-revolution from solstice to
solstice (ayana). The gods and demons each suppose themselves
to be uppermost.
> 52. Others, too, who are situated upon the same diameter
(samasttrastha), think one another underneath—as the dwellers
‘in Bhadragva and in Ketumila, and the inhabitants of Lanka
Xe and of the city of the Perfected, respectively.
mL 2 53. And everywhere upon the globe of the earth, men think
ber their own place to be uppermost : but since it is a globe in the
pis ether, where should there be an upper, or where an under side
‘BA. _ Owing to tie littleness of their own bodies, men, look-
= ing in 1 every direction from the position they occupy, behold this
a ocean although it is globular, as having the form of a wheel.
BB. To the gods, this sphere of asterisms revolves toward
| a the pant: ie the enemies of the gods, toward the left ; in a situarite. ion of 0 latitude, directly o overhead—always in a westerly direca
oa
soap in) the latter situation, the day is of thirty
ght likewise : : in the two hemispheres of the gods
er tae wed a deficiency and an excess, always
er.
g tl 2 2 half-revolution beginning with Aries, there
S ssa the day to the north, in the hemisphere of
ae 0! ing to distance north—and a correspond-
> nig ght ; i in the Ratotaphere of the demons, the
re olution beginning with Libra, both the
of day and night i in the two hemispheres are
the method of determining them, \ which 1s
aaa (deca) and declination, has been
paxth’ s ‘circumference by the sun’s declination in x » by the munaber ‘of degrees in a circle:

Pais result; ‘in yojanas, is the distance from the place of no latitude
where the sun is passing overhead.
60. Subtract from a quarter of the earth's circumference
the number of yojanas thus derived from the greatest declination :
at the distance of the remaining number of yojanas
61. There occurs once, at the end of the sun’s half-revolution
from solstice”™to solstice, a day of sixty nfdis, and a night of the
same length, mutually opposed to one another, in the two hemispheres of the gods and of the demons.
62. In the intermediate region, the deficiency and excess of
day and night are within the limit of sixty nadis ; beyond, this
sphere of asterisms (bha) revolves perversely.
63. Subtract from a quarter of the earth's circumference the
number of yojanas derived from the declination found by the sine
of two signs : at that distance from the equator the sun is not seen,
in the hemisphere of the gods, when in Sagittarius and Capricorn ;
64. So also, in the hemisphere of the demons, when in
Gemini and Cancer: in the quarter of the earth’s circumference
where her shadow is lost, the sun may be shown to be visible.
65. Subtract from the fourth part of the earth's periphery
(kakshd) the number of yojanas derived from the declination found
by the sine of one sign: at the distance from the place of no
latitude of the remaining number of yojanas,
66. The sun, when situated in Sagittarius, Capricorn,
Scorpio, and Aquarius, is not seen in the hemisphere of the gods ; :
in that of the demons, on the other hand, when in the four signs
commencing with Taurus.
67. At Meru, the gods bahiala the sun, after but a single
rising, during the half of his revolution beginning with Aries ; the
demons in like manner, during that beginning with Libra. a
68. The sun, during his northern and southern progresses"
(ayana) revolves directly over a fifteenth part: of the earth's circumference, on the side both of the gods and of the demons.
69. Between those limits, the shadow is cast both wiathwark: ,
and northward ; perond. them, it falls toward the aes of ei ither

Gosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 21
70. When passing overhead at Bhadragva, the sun is rising
in Bharata: it is moreover, at that time, midnight in Ketumala,
and sunset in Kuru.
71. In like manner also he produces, by his revolution, in
Bharata and the other climes, noon, sunrise, midnight, and
sunset, reckoning from east to west.
72. ‘To one going toward Meru, there take place an elevation
of the pole (dhruva) and a depression of the circle of asterisms ;
to one going toward the place of no latitude, on the contrary, 4
depression of the former and an elevation of the latter.
his detailed exposition of the varying relations of day and night in
different parts of the globe is quite creditable to the ingenuity, and the
distinctness of apprehension, of those by whom it was drawn out. It is
for the most part so clearly expressed as to need no additional explanations:
we shall append to it only a few brief remarks.
How far, in verse 46, a true statement is given of the cause of the
heat of surmmer and the cold of winter, may be made a matter of some
question: the word which we have translated “* nearness "’ (dsannatd) has
no right to mean ~ directness, perpendicularity,”’ and yet, when taken in
connection with the preceding verse, it may perhaps admit that signification.
The second chapter shows that the Hindus knew very well that the sun is
actually nearer to the whole earth in winter, or when near his perigee,
than in summer.
The expression ayandnta, “ at the end of an ayana,’’ employed in
verses 51 and 61, and which we have rendered by a paraphrase, might
perhaps have been as well translated, briefly and simply, ** at either
solstice."’ Probably ayana, as used in the sense of “ solstice "" (see above,
| ‘end of note to iii. 9-12), is an abbreviated form of ayandnta, like jyd for
>. jyardha (ii. 15-27), and aksha for akahonnati (i. 60).
In verse 55, we have translated by “* toward the right *’ and ‘* toward
the left "’ the adverbs savyam and apasavyam, which mean literally ** leftwise "" and “* right-wise "’; that is to say, in such a manner that the left
side or the right side respectively of the thing making the revolution is
_ turned toward that about which the revolution is made, this being the
(he natural measure of the day and of the night is assumed in verse
56 ete. to be the half of a whole day, or thirty naédis, and any deviation
from that nc garded as an excess (dhana, vrddhi) or a deficiency
e former processes referred to at the end of verse

Surya-Siddhanta
We have already above (note to i. 63-65) called attention to the fact
that all the Hindu measurements of longitude and latitude upon the earth's
surface are made in yojanas, and not in degrees.
The expression ** perversely ‘' (wiparita) in verse 62 1s explained by
the commentator to mean *‘ in such manner that the rules as already
given cannot be applied “'; since the sine of the ascensional difference
(cara—see ii. 61) as found by them would be greater than radius.
The latter half of verse G4 is obscure: its meaning seems to be, as
explained by the commentator, that over a corresponding portion of the
earth’s surface in the contrary hemisphere the sun is continuously visible
during the same period, the shadow of the earth, which 1s the cause af
night, not covering that portion.
73. he circle of asterisms, bound at the two poles, impelled
by the provector (pravaha) winds, yevolves eternally : attached to
that are the orbits of the planets, in their order.
74. The gods and demons behold the sun, after it is once
risen, for half a year ; the Fathers (pitaras), who have their station
in the moon, for a half-month (paksha) ; and men upon the earth,
during their own day.
75. The orbit (kakshd) of one that is situated higher up 1s
large ; that of one situated lower down is small. Upon a great
orbit the degrees are great; so also, upon a small one, they are
small.
76. A planet situated upon a small circuit (bhramana)
traverses the circle of constellations (bhagana) in a little time ; one
revolving on a large circle (mandala), in a long time.
77. The moon, upon a very small orbit, makes many revolutions: Saturn, moving upon a great orbit, makes, as compared
with her, a much less number of revolutions.
The connection and orderly succession of subjects is by no means
strictly maintained in this part of the chapter, The seventy-fourth verse
is palpably out of place, and is, moreover, in great part superfluous; for
the statement contained in its first half bas already twice been made, in
verses 45 and 67, and in the latter passage in nearly the same terms 4s
here: its last specification, too, is of a matter too obvious to call for notice.
Nevertheless, the verse cannot well be spared from the chapter, since it
contains the only answer which is vouchsafed to the question of verse 5,
above, respecting the day and night of the Fathers. In the assignment of
the different divisions of time, as single days, to different orders of beings,

-——s- Gosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 293
/ the month has been given to the pitaras, ‘‘ Fathers,” or manes of the
departed, and they are accordingly located in the moon, each portion of
whose surface enjoys # recurrence of day and night once in each lunar month.
‘The next following verses, 75 to 77, are a rather unnecessary amplification
e of the idea already expressed in i. 26-27; but they answer well enough here
~~ special introduction to the detailed exhibition of the measurements of the
fe _ planetary orbits which is to follow. Before that is brought in, however,
| a we have the connection again broken, by the intrusion of the two following
_——s verses, respecting the regents of years, months, days, and hours.
cae : 78. Counting downward from Saturn, the fourth successiveae ly is regent of the day ; and the third, in like manner, 1s declared
to be the regent of the year;
c 79. Reckoning upward from the moon are found, im succession, the regents of the months ; the regents of the hours (hora),
also, occur in downward order from Saturn.
ee ¥ ‘This passage appears to be intr luced here as answer to the inquiry
r ~ _ propounded in verse 6, above. Instead, however, of explaining why the
different divisions of time are placed under the superintendence and pro-
; tection of different planets, the text contents itself with reiterating in a
different form, what had already been said before (i. 51-52) respecting the
4 order of succession of the regents of the successive periods; but adding
. also the important and significant specification respecting the hours, or
Sad
nty-fourths of the day. We have sufficiently illustrated the subject, in
} on with the other passage; we will only repeat here that, the
being regarded as standing in the erder in which they are mentioned
in ‘ . 81, above, their successive regency over the hours is the one
ental fact upon which all the rest depend, euch planet being con-
(oa rd 4 > of the day whose first hour is placed under his charge,
es
a
a
f
tource whence the whole system was introduced into India.
Bir rudel Fue Rw ie ae : ‘eae
=a 80. orbit (kakshd) of the asterisms (bha) 1s the circuit
»S Si
the orbit of the ether: so far do the rays of the sun
OS Bs 2 Oe
aah newyTy ms ie
be known as the
ong
Ran eee ¥ er
penetrate. |
try wT e. So r] i= - ‘
a

"Séryo-Siddhant
“92. af this be divided by the number of revolutions of any
planet in an A£on (kalpa), the result will be the orbit of that
planet: divide this by the number of terrestrial days, and the
result is the daily eastward motion of them all.
83. Multiply this number of yojanas of daily motion by the
orbit of the moon, and divide by a planet's own orbit ; the result
is, when divided by fifteen, its daily motion in minutes.
84. Any orbit, multiplied by the earth’s diameter and
divided by the earth’s circumference, gives the diameter of that
orbit ; and this, being diminished by the earth's diameter and
halved, gives the distance of the planet.
85. The orbit of the moon is three hundred and twenty-four
thousand yojanas: that of Mercury's conjunction (¢ighra) is one
million and forty-three thousand, two hundred and nine :
86. ‘That of Venus’s conjunction (¢gighra) is two million, six
hundred and sixty-four thousand, six hundred and thirty-seven :
next, that of the sun, Mercury, and Venus is four million, three
hundred and thirty-one thousand, five hundred :
87. That of Mars, too, is eight million, one hundred and
forty-six thousand, nine hundred and nine; that of the moon's
apsis (ucca) is thirty-eight million, three hundred and twentyeight thousand, four hundred and eighty-four :
88. That of Jupiter, fifty-one million, three hundred and
seventy-five thousand, seven hundred and sixty-four : of the moon's
node, eighty million, five hundred and seventy-two thousand, eight
hundred and sixty-four :
89. Next,of Saturn, one hundred and twenty-seven million,
six hundred and sixty-eight thousand, two hundred and fifty-five :
of the asterisms, two hundred and fifty-nine million, eight hundred
and ninety thousand, and twelve :
90. The entire circumference of the sphere of the Brahmaegg is eighteen quadrillion, seven hundred and twelve trillion,
eighty billion, eight hundred and sixty fore ‘million : within this
is the pervasion of the sun’ ‘8 aa ? =

Cosmogony, Geography, Dimensions of the Creation 295
We present below the numerical data given in these verses, in a form
easier of reference and of comparison with the like data of other treatises :
Planet otc. Orbit, in yojanas.
Mercory (conjunction), 1,043,209
Venus (conjunction), 2 664,637
Jupiter, 51,575,764
Aateriams, 250 890,012
We have already more than once (see above, notes to i, 25-27, and
iv. 1) had occasion to notice upon what principles the orbits of the planets,
as here stated, were constructed by the Hindus. That of the moon (see
note to iv. 1) was obtained by a true process of calculation, from genuine
data, and is a tolerable approximation .to the truth: all the others are
manufactured out of this, upon the arbitrary and false assumption that the
mean motion of all the planets, each upon its own orbit, is of equal absolute
amount, and hence, that its apparent value in each case, as seen by us,
is inversely as the planet’s distance, or that the dimensions of the orbit
are directly as the time employed in traversing it, or as the period of
sidereal revolution. These dimensions, then, may be found by various
methods: upon dividing the circumference of the moon's orbit by her time
of sidereal revolution, we obtain as the amount of her daily motion in
yojanas 11,858.717 nearly (more exactly 11,858.71693 +); and multiplying
_ this by the time of sidereal revolution of any planet, we obtain that planet's
orbit. This is equivalent to making the proportion
moon's sid, rev. : planet's sid, rev, : ; moon’s orbit : planet's orbit
» | And since the times of siderea] revolution of the planets are inversely
ss «s«the mumber of revolutions made by them in any given period, this
_ proportion, again, is equivalent to
ot planet's no. of rev. in an ion : moon’s do. :: moon's orbit : planet's orbit
oo) SAN :
Gg ig the form of the proportion from which is derived the rule as stated
designates the product of the multiplication of
_ buting to the outermost
i an Aion (Kealpa), of 4,820,000,000 years,

Sarya-Siddhdanta
There is one feature of the system exposed in this passage which to
us is hitherto quite inexplicable: it is the assignment to the asterisms of
an orbit sixty times as great as that of the sun. This, according to all the
analogies of the system, should imply a revolution of the asterisms eastward about the earth once in each period of sixty sidereal years. The
same orbit is found allotted to them in the Siddhdinta-Ciromani (Ganitfidhy.,
iv. 5), and it is to be looked upon, accordingly, as an essential part of the
general Hindu astronomical system. We do not see how it is to be brought
inte connection with the other doctrines of the system, or what can he its
origin and import—unless, indeed, it be merely an application to the
asterisms, in an entirely arbitrary way, of the general law that everything
must be made to revolve about the earth as a centre. We have noticed
above (note to iii, 9-12) its inconsistency with the doctrine of the precession
adopted in this treatise.
The dimensions of the several orbits stated in the text are for the
most part correct, being such as are derived by the processes above explained
from the numbers of sidereal revolutions given in a former passage (i. 29-34).
here is, however, one exception: the orbit of Mercury, as so derived, is
1.048.207.8. and the number adopted by the text—tvhich rejects fractions
throughout, taking the nearest whole number—should be, accordingly,
_208, and not—209. If we took as divisor the number of Mercury's revolutions in an Aton as corrected by the bija (see note to i. 29-34), we should
actually obtain for his orbit the value given it by the text; the exact quotient
being 1,048,208.78. But as none of the other orbits given are such as
would be found by admitting the several corrections of the bija, it seems
preferable to assume that the text has at this point become corrupt, or else
that the author of the chapter made a blunder in one of his calculations.”
The value of a minute of are upon the moon’s orbit being fifteen
yojanas (see note to iv. 2-8), the value, in minutes, of any planet's mean
daily motion may be readily found from its orbit by the proportion of which
the rule given in verse 83 is a statement, as follows: as the distance, or
the orbit, of the planet: in question is to that of the moon, 60 is the moon's
mean motion in minutes, or 11,858.717 + 15, to that of the planet.
In verse 84 we are taught to calculate the distance of any planet from
the earth’s surface: in order to this, we are first to find the diameter of
*‘The last ix verses of the chapter, which contain the numerical data, may very
possibly be o Ister addition to its original content : the Ayin-Akbari (as translated by
Gladwin), in ita account of the astronomy of the Hindus, which it profeasedly bases upon
the Sfirys-Siddhénta, gives these orbita (6vo. edition, Lendon, 1800, ii. 306), but with
the fractional parte of yojenas, as if independently derived from the data and by the
rules of the text: the orbit of Mercury it states correctly, 95 1,043,207] yojauas.

iat. ee, Sikeaes orbit, Pesonting: as the ratio of the diameter to the circumference, that of the diameter to the circumference of the earth—the former, of course, as calculated (i. 59) by the false ratio of 1: ¥ 10. After being
gait of so gross an inaccuracy, it is quite superfluous, and a mere affedéta-
; Aaah of exactness, to take into account so trivial a quantity as the radius
of the earth, in estimating the planet's distance from the earth.
+ In the doctrine of the orbits of the planets, as here laid down, we
a ieee more a total negation of the reality of their epicyclical motions,
nd of their en? varying distances from the earth in different parts
a
; a eis Ayah.) 2!
ay : Fey ry by a { |
‘Wives it weey: ty iuP ay > &
7 Ta Do ‘Uy ft a AL alate —

CHAPTER XIII.
Or THE ARMILLARY SPHERE, AND OTHER INSTRUMENTS.
Contents :—1-13, construction and equipment of the armillary sphere; 13-15, position of
certain points and sines upon it; 15-16, its adjustment and revolution; 17-25, other
instruments, especially for the determination of time.
1. Then, having bathed in a secret and pure place, being
pure, adorned, having worshipped with devotion the sun, the
planets, the asterisms ( bha), and the elves (quhyaka),
2. Let the teacher, in order to the instruction of the pupil—
himself beholding everything clearly, in accordance with the
knowledge handed down by successive communication, and learned
from the mouth of the master (quru)j—
3. Prepare the wonder-working fabric of the terrestrial and
stellar sphere (bhiibhagola).
We have already remarked above (note to xii. 1-9) that the sulject
of this chapter is one respecting which no inquiries were addressed at
the beginning of the preceding chapter by the recipient to the communicator of the revelation, and that the chapter accordingly wears in some
measure the aspect of an interpolation. It comes in here as furnishing
a means of illustrating to the pupil the mutual relations of the earth
and the heavens as explained in the last chapter—and yet not precisely
as there explained; for it gives a representation only of the earth and
of the one starry concave upon which the apparent movements of all
the heavenly bodies are to be traced, and not of the concentric spherés
and orbits out of which the universe has been declared to be constructed.
The chapter has a peculiar title, unlike that of any other in the treatise:
it is styled jyotishopanishadadhydya, *’ lection of the astronomical Upaniehad.'’ Upanishad is the name ordinarily given to such brief treatises,
of the later Vedie period, or of times yet more modern, as are regarded
as inspired sources of philosophical and theological knowledge, and are
looked upon with peculiar reverence: its application to this chapter 1s
equivalent to an assumption for it of especial sanctity and authority. It

Of the Armillary Sphere, and other Instruments 299
may possibly also indicate that the chapter is originally an independent
treatise, incorporated into the text of the Sodrya-Siddhanta,
The word bha, in verse 1, may mean either the asterisms proper
(nakshatra), or the signs (rdgi), and is explained by the commentator as
mtended to include both. ‘The gulyakas, * secret ones,” are a class of
demigods who attend upon Kuvera, the god of wealth, and are the
keepers of his treasures: why they are mentioned here, as objects of
especial reverence to the astronomical teacher, is not obvious. The com-
-mentator explains the word by ~ Yakshas etc., lesser divinities." In our
translation of verse 3 we have followed the reading of the published
text, which Colebrooke also appears to have had before him: our own
manuscripts read, instead of bhibhagola, bhimigola and bhumergola,
‘‘ sphere of the earth “ simply.
Colebrooke, in his essay On the Indian and Arabian Divisions of the
Zodiac (As. Res., ix. 325 etc.; Essays, ii. 821 etc.) to which we have
already so often had occasion to refer, gives a translation of part of this
chapter, from the beginning of the third to the middle of the thirteenth
verse, a5 also a brief sketch of the armillary sphere of which the construction is taught in the Siddhanta-CGiromant. He farther furnishes 4
description, and a comparison with these, of the somewhat similar instruments employed by the Greeks, the Arabs; and the early European
astronomers. It has not seemed to us worth while to extract these
descriptions and comparisons, or to draw up others from independent and
original sources: the object of the Hindu instrument is altogether different from that of the others, since it is intended merely as an illustration
of the positions and motions of the heavenly bodies, while those are
meant to subserve the purposes of astronomical observation; and its
relation to them is determined by this circumstance: while it, of course,
-:possesses some of the circles which enter into the construction of the
others, it is, upon the whole, a very different and much more complicated
and cumbersome structure. There is nothing in the way of supposing
that the first hint of its construction may have been borrowed from the
, instruments of western nations: but, on the other hand, it may possibly
admit also of being regarded as an independent Hindu device.
3. . . . Having fashioned an earth-globe of wood, of the
, rts Rita: Fix a staff, passing through the midst of it and protruding
eer ye . v cae a - 8
at either side, for Meru ; and likewise a couple of sustaiming hoops
> paar? Sp Se si . - .
% f (kakshd), and the equinoctial hoop ;
° be in -
These are to be made with graduated divisions (angula)
y rie
18 0 the circle (bhagana). .- -
© ell

‘The fixing of a solid globe of wood, representing the earth, in the
of this instrument, is of itself enough to render impracticable its
to purposes of astronomical observation. For Meru, the
poles of the eurth, see verse 34 of the preceding chapter. We
: informed of what relative size the globe and the encompassing
hoops are to be made; probably their relation is to be such that the
globe will be a small one, contained within an ample sphere. The two
** supporting hoops,’’ to which are to be attached all the numerous parallels of declination hereafter described, are, of course, to be fastened to
the axis at right angles to one another, and to represent the equinoctial
und solstitial colures. The commentary directly prescribes this, and the
text also assumes it in a later passage (v. 10).
Colebrooke, following the guidance of the commentators, treats the
former half of verse 5 as belonging to the following passage, mstead of
the preceding. It can, however, admit of no reasonable question that
the connection as established in our translation is the true one: it is
demanded by the natural construction of the verses, and also yiclds a
decidedly preferable sense.
5. . . . Farther—by means of the several day-radii, as
adapted to the scale established for those other circles,
6. And by means of the degrees of declination and latitude
(rikshepa) marked off upon the latter—at their own respective
distances in declination, according to the declination of Aries ete.,
three
7. Hoops are to be prepared and fastened : these answer also
inversely for Cancer, ete. In the same manner, three for Libra
etc., answering also inversely for Capricorn, etc.,
8. And situated in the southern hemisphere, are to be made
and fastened to the two hoop-supporters. . . .
‘The grammatical construction of this passage is excessively cumbrous
and intricate, and we can hardly hope that the version which we have
given of it will be clearly understood without farther explanations. Its
meaning, however, is free from ambiguity. We have thus far only three
of the circles out of which our instrument is to be constructed, namely
those intended to represent the two colures and the equator: we are ~

Of the Armillary Sphere, and other Instruments SOL
at the end of Taurus and at the Lege rar nrage of Leo, and one for the sun
at the end of Gemini and the beginning of Cancer, or at the solstice :
also, in the southern hemisphere, three others corresponding to these.
he dimensions of which they must be made are to be determined by
their several radii (which are called day-radii—see above, 1. O)), as
ascertained by calculation and reduced to the same scale upon which the
colures and equator were constructed. They are then to be attached to
the two general supporting hoops, or eolures, cach at its proper distance
from the equator; this distance is ascertained by calculating the declhination of the sun when at the points in question, and ts determined
upon the instrument by the graduation of the two supporting hoops.
This graduation is in the text called that for declination (krdnti) and
latitude (vikshepa): it will be remembered that, according to Hindu
F usage, the latter means distance from the ecliptic as measured upon 4a
—— girele of declination.
«gz. Those likewise of the asterisms (bha) situated in the
~ gouthern and northern hemispheres, of Abhijit,
he 9. Of the Seven Sages (saptarshayas), ol Agastya, of
| Brahma etc., are to be fixed... -
re If the orders given in these verses are to be strictly followed, our
instrument toust now be burdened with forty-two additional circles of diurnal
. revolution, namely those of the twenty-seven junction-stars (yogatdrd)
of the asterisms and of that of Abhijit—which is here especially men-
+g tioned, «as not being always runked among the asterisms (see above,
: p. 240 ete.)—those of the seven other fixed stars of which the positions
no stated in the éighth chapter (vv. 10-12 and 20-21), and also those
for of the Seven Sages, or the conspicuous stars in Ursa Major (see end of
a the last note to the eighth chapter). Such jmpracticuble directions,
Ps however, cannot but inspire the suspicion that the inatrument may never
have been constructed except upon paper:
Sea 9... - . Just in the midst of all, the equinoctial (vdishuvati)
‘th
(a
a)
10. Above the points of intersection of that and the supporting - hoops are the two solstices (ayana) and the two equinoxes
Ys Ser Pe aiscendy noticed (note to iii, 6) that the celestial equator
= e ¥ ia Nie. eH from the equinoxes through which it passes. Tt seems a
“V8 RT are Op © that the adjustinent af the hoop representing it to the two
supporting hoops, which we should naturally regard as the first step in
iy
os SE et oe
a
< aa

Se Ee £ pig 4 A
_ re al “nen, as a Lbetaaben | 4
| ge rn ey ee oe ; 5 ‘
ins th 2 const uction of the instrument, is here assumed to be deferred until
“i tuft x all the other circles of declination are fixed in their places.
Me ne word translated ** above "' (firdhvam) in verse 10 requires to be
ia understood in two very different senses, as is pointed out by the commentator, to make the definitions of position of the solstices and of the
equinoxes both correct: the latter are situated precisely at the intersection of the equinoctial colure with the equator; the former at a distance
of 24° above and below the intersection of the equator with the other
colure, or at the intersection of the colure with the third parallel of the
sun's declination, on either side of the equator.
We are next taught how to fix in its proper position the hoop which
is to represent the ecliptic. ,
10. . . . From the place of the equinox, with the exact
number of degrees, as proportioned to the whole circle,
11. Fix, by oblique chords, the spaces (kshetra) of Aries and
the rest: and so likewise another hoop, running obliquely from —
solstice (ayana) to solstice,
12. And called the circle of declination (krdnti) : upon that
the sun constantly revolves, giving light : the moon and the other
planets also, by their own nodes, which are situated in the ecliptic
(apamandala),
13. Being drawn away from it, are beheld at the limit of
their removal in latitude (vikshepa) from the corresponding point
of declination. .. .
Instead of simply directing that a circle or hoop, of the same dimensions as those of the equator and colures, be constructed to represent the
ecliptic, and then attached to the others at the equinoxes and solstices,
the text regards it as necessary to fix, upon the six diurnal circles of
the sun of which the construction and adjustment were taught above,
in verses 5-8, the points of division of all the twelve signs, before
the ecliptic hoop can be added to the instrument. In the compound
liryagjya, in verse 11, which we have rendered *‘ oblique chords,"’ we
conceive jyd to have its own more proper meaning of “ chord,"’ instead of
that of "* sine,”’ which, by substitution for jydrdha (see note to ii, 15-27,
near the end), it has hitherto uniformly borne. We are to ascertain by
calculation the measure of the chord of 30°, to reduce it to the scale Chet 4
dimensions adopted for the other great circles of the instrument, and —
then, commencing from cither equinox, to lay it off, in an oblique dire
. <5 ae een OTe ear, t a
northward and southward, thus =~
EN ee ee ne 2 allants tard? eens
“a “a oat . te LR <=) ¢
ys
aol * bs
P a 7 z
Oe Neat
+ a a I i pal
o.4 oe et L = ~~ i
aah

Of the Armillary Sphere, and other Instruments 303
fixing the positions upon them of the initial and final points of the
twelve signs; and through all these points the ecliptic hoop isa to be
made to pass. |
It does not appear that separate hoops for the orbits of the other
planets, attached to the ecliptic at their respective nodes, are to be added
to the instrument.
In verse 12 we have a name for the ecliptic, apamandala, which does
not occur elsewhere in the treatise. The word might be literally translated ‘* off-circle,"" and regarded as designating the circle which deviates
in direction from the neighbouring equator; but it is more probably an
abbreviation for apakramamandala, which would mean, like the ordinary
terms krdntimandala, krantivrtta, *’ cirele of declination.”’
13. . . . The orient ecliptic-point (lagna) is that at the
orient horizon ; the occident point (astamgachat) is similarly determined.
14. The meridian ecliptic-point (madhyama) is as calculated
by the equivalents in right ascension (lankodayds), for mid-heaven
(khamadhya) above. The sine which is between the meridian
; (madhya) and the horizon (kshitija) is styled the day-measure
——— (antyd).
Ne 15. And the sine of the sun's ascensional difference
Vas (caradala) is to be recognized as the interval between the equator
y (wishuvat) and the horizon. . - .
> These verses contain an unnecessary and fragmentary, as also a conot fused and blundering, definition of the positions upon the sphere of 4
few among the points and lines which have been used in the calculations
oo: of the eurlier parts of the treatise. We are unwilling to believe that
< the passage is anything but a late interpolation, made by an awkward
a hand, For the point of the ecliptic termed lagna, or that one which is
; x at any given moment passing the eastern horizon. or rising, see iii. 46-48,
ee and note upon that passage. The like point ot the western horizon,
6 tonal which the commentator here calls astalagna, ** lagna of setting,”” and
f, c which the text directs us to find ** in a corresponding manner,”* has never
been named or taken into account anywhere im the treatise: we have
geen above (as for instance, in ix. 4-5) that all its processes into which
distance in ascension enters a8 an element are transferred for ealeulation
fron the oc ident to the orient horizon. For madhyalagna, the point
the ecliptic situated upon the meridian, see above, iii. 49 and note.
ugh we have ordinarily translated the term by ‘‘ meridian eclipticthis being a convenient and exact definition of the point actually

referred to, we do not regard the word madhya, occurring in it, as meaning © meridian “ in the sense in which it is used in modern astronomy,
namely the great circle passing through the observer's zenith and the
north and south points of his horizon, For it deserves to be noted that
the text has no distinctive name for the meridian, and nowhere makes
any reference to it as a circle on the sphere: it will be seen just below
that, while the position of the horizon is defined, the meridian is not
contemplated as a circle of sufficient consequence to require to be represented upon the illustrative armillary sphere. The commentator not
very infrequently has occasion to speak of the meridian, and styles it
yadmyottaravrtta, ** south and north circle,"" or “érdhvaydmyottaravurtta,
‘uppermost south and north circle.’’ In the latter half of verse 14,
where we have translated madhya by “‘ meridian,’’ it would have been
more exact to say ‘' mid-heaven,’’ or “* the sun at the middle of his visible
revolution,’’ or “‘ the sun when at the point called madhyalagna."’
For the ‘* day-menasure'’ (antyd), see above, iii. 34-36. Its definition
given here is as bad as it could well be: for, passing over the fact that
the line in question is not properly a sine, and moreover that the text
does not tell us in which of the numberless possible directions it is to be
drawn from the meridian to the horizon, the line which it is attempted
to deseribe is not the one which the treatise regards as the antyd, but
the correspondent of the latter in the small cirele described by the sun.
That is to say, the text here substitutes the line DA in Fig. 8, nbove
(p. 101), for the line EG, A similar blunder is made in defining the
sine of the sun’s ascensional difference (carajyd): the line AB in the
same figure, which is the “* earth-sine "' (kujyd, kehitijyda), is taken, instend of its equivalent in terms of a great circle, CG. Moreover, the
text reads ** equator ’’ (vishuvat—EC in the figure) here for ~ east and
west hour-circle ’’ (unmandala—CP): the commentator restores the
latter, and excuses the substitution by a false translation of the latter
half of iii. 6, making it mean “* the east and west hour-circle is likewise
denominated the equinoctial circle.’ |
In verse 14, lankodayds ia substituted for the more usual term lankadaydsavas (see above, iii, 49, and note), in the sense of ** equivalents of
the signs in right ascension,’” literally, “' at Lanka,”
15. . . . Having turned upward one’s own place, the circle
of the horizon is midway of the sphere.
16. As covered with a casing (vastra) and as left uncovered,
it is the sphere surrounded by Lokéloka. . . -
The simple direction to turn upward one’s own situation upon the
central wooden globe which representa the earth does not, it is evident,
contemplate any very careful or exact adjustment of the instrument.

Of the Armillary Sphere, and other Instruments 305
Verse 16 ia very elliptical and obscure in its expressions, but their
general meaning is plain, and is that which is attributed to them by the
commentator, ‘The proper elevation having been given to the pole of
the sphere, a circle is by some means or other to be fixed about its
midst, or equally distant from its zenith and nadir, to represent the
horizon. ‘Then the part below is to be encased in a cloth covermg, the
upper hemisphere alone being left open. As thus arranged, the sphere
is, as it were, girt about by the Lokiloka mountains. Lokaloka is, as we
have seen above (note to xii, 32-44), the name of the giant mountainrange which, in the Puranic geography, is made the boundary of the
universe: it is apparently so called because it separates the world (loka)
from the non-world (aloka); and as out of the Puranic Meru the new
astronomical geography makes the axis and poles of the earth, so out of
these mountains it makes the yisible horizon.
The ‘' wonder-working fabrie of the terrestrial and stellar sphere "" is
now fully constructed, and only requires farther, in order to its completion as an edifying and instructive illustration of the relations of the
heavens to the earth, to be set in motion about its fixed axis.
16. . . . By the application of water is made ascertainment
of the revolution of time.
17. One may construct a sphere-instrument combined with
quicksilver : this is a mystery ; if plainly described, it would be
generally intelligible in the world.
18. Therefore let the supreme sphere be constructed according to the instruction of the preceptor (guru). In each successive
age (yuga), this construction, having become lost, is, by the Sun's
19. Favor, again revealed to some one or other, at his
pleasure. . . +
Here we have another silly mystification of 4 simple and comparatively insignificant matter, like that already noticed at the end of the
sixth chapter. The revolution of the machine of which the construction
has now been explained, in imitation of the actual motion of the heavens
out the earth, is something so calculated to strike the minds of the
‘uninitiated with wonder, that the means by which it is to be accom:
opt 1ed) must not be fully explained even in this treatise, lest they should
become too gene known: they must be learned by ench pupil directly
‘from his teacher, as the latter haa received them by successive tradition,
from the original and superhuman source whence they came. It is perfectly
evident. tt at such a fabric could only be made to revolve in a rude and

cot
u
oe ol
fA
- . ni ee oa . Sat — | h- “ae
toward the sun, or in such:
_. 4 “ae ee
a " ee ee > -
srs Sen sataiil <= * ) ete ‘ oi) p »
_ imperfect way; that it
period
_ period to correspond in position with the actual sphere, is impossible.
should have marked time, and continued for any
__ he word which, upon the authority of the commentator, we have
rendered ee water,"’ in verse 16, is amrtasrdva, literally ‘* having an immortal flow "': perhaps the phrase should be translated rather, ‘‘ by
managing a constant current of water.’’
19. . . . So also, one should construct instruments (yantra)
in order to the ascertainment of time.
20. When quite alone, one should apply quicksilver to the
wonder-causing instrument. By the gnomon (canku), staff
(yashti), arc (dhanus), wheel (cakra), instruments for taking the
shadow, of various kinds,
21. According to the instruction of the preceptor (guru), 18
to be gained a knowledge of time by the diligent. . . .
The commentator interprets the first part of verse 20 in correspondence with the sense of the preceding passage; the application of mercury
to a revolving machine, in order to give it the appearance of automatic
motion, must be made privately, lest people, understanding the method
too well, should cease to wonder at it. ‘The instruments mentioned in the
latter half of the same verse are explained in the commentary simply by
citations from the yantraédhydya, “ chapter of instruments,’’ of the
Siddhinta-Ciromani (Goladhy., pp. 111-186, published edition). We will
that of the sphere, or to tabular radius. 1 :
tained, and its east and west and north and south diameters are drawn.
From the former, at either extremity, he of a ud
(agra) ascertained by calculation for the given day: the points thus determined upon the circumference of the circle represent the points on the
horizon at which the sun rises and sete. Another c
. ra ce as
n the of the
Ni
a fs
we ee.
i. he
:.. ag od
_ a be

Of the Armillary Sphere, and other Instruments 307
then represents the place of the sun at the moment upon the sphere.
Measure, by a stick, the distance of that extremity from the point of sunrise
or of sunset: this will be the chord of that part of the diurnal circle which
is intercepted between the sun’s actual position and the point at which
he rose, or will set: the value of the corresponding are in niadis may be
_ ascertained by applying the stick to the lesser graduated circle. The result
is the time since sunrise, or till sunset.
The ‘‘ wheel '’ (cakra) is a very simple instrument for obtaining, by
observation, the sun’s altitude and zenith-distance. It is simply a wheel,
suspended by a string, graduated to degrees, having its lowest point and
the extremities of its horizontal diameter distinctly marked, and with a
projecting peg at the centre. When used, its edge is turned toward the
sun, so that the shadow of the peg falls upon the graduated periphery,
and the distances of the point where it meets the latter from the horizontal
and lowest points of the wheel respectively are the required altitude and
zenith-distance of the sun. From these, by the methods of the third
chapter (iii. 87-39), the time may be derived.
Tho ‘* are '’ (dhanus) is the lower half of the instrument just described
—or, we may also suppose, 4 quadrant of it; since only 4 quadrant is
required for making the observations for which the instrument is employed.
21. By water-instruments, the vessel (kapdla), etc., by the
peacock, man, monkey, and by stringed sand-receptacles, one may
determine time accurately.
92. Quicksilver-holes, water, and cords, ropes (gulba), and
f oil and water, mereury, and sand are used in these : these applications, too, are difficult.
The instruments and methods hinted at in these verses are only partially and obscurely explained by the commentator. The kapdla, ** cup ”
ox” hemisphere,"’ ie doubtless the instrument which is particularly described below, in verse 23. The nara, ** man,” is also spoken of below,
in verse 24, and is simply a gnomon, it ia perhaps one of a particular
construction and size, and so named from having about the height of a
man. The peacock and monkey are obscure. The ‘‘ sand-vessels "
(renugarbha), which are ‘* provided with cords "’ (sastitra), are probably
guspe ‘instruments, of the general character of our hour-glasses. The
‘commentator connects them also with the ‘* peacock,” as if the latter
were a figure of the bird having such a vessel in his interior, and letting
ect he san nd pour out of his mouth. In illustration of the * quicksilver-holes
—. he ) r yap ki - js cited from the SiddhAnta- (© iroman (as above),
in the description of an instrument in which they are applied. It is a

a . ; tee er ce 4
. P % rs - a . 7 . » - “\ M ENTRAL mune : if
a * ~ is _ ra
wheel, having on its outer edge a number of holes, of equal size, and at
equal distances from one another, but upon a zig-zag line: these holes are
filled half full of mercury, and stopped at the orifice: and it is claimed
that the wheel will then, if supported upon an axis by a couple of props,
revolve of itself. The application of this method may well enough be
styled ‘* difficult "": if a machine so constructed would work, the Hindus
would be entitled to the credit of having solved the problem of perpetual
motion. The descriptions of one or two other somewhat similar machines
are also cited in the commentary from the Siddhanta-Qiromam : the only
new feature worthy of notice which they contain is the application of the
siphon, or bent tube, in emptying a vessel of the water it contains.
It will have been noticed that, throughout the whole of this chapter,
the ditferent parts or passages end in the middle of a verse. In _ the
twenty-first verse the coincidence between the end of a passage and the
end of a verse is re-established, but it is at the cost of such an irregularity
as is nowhere else committed in the treatise: the verse 1s made to consist
of three half-clokas, instead of two, the whole chapter being thus allowed
to contain an uneven number of lines. There are two or three very superfluous half-verses at the beginning of the chapter, the omission of any on¢
ef which would seem an easier and preferable method of restoring the
regular and connected construction of the text.
23. A copper vessel, with a hole in the bottom, set ina basin
of pure water, sinks sixty times in a day and night, and is an
accurate hemispherical instrument.
This instrument appears to have been the one most generally and
frequently in use among the Hindus for the measurement of time: it is the
only one described in the Ayin-Akbari (ii. $02). One of the common
names for the sixtieth part of the day, ghatt or ghatikd, literally ‘* vessel,”’
is evidently derived from it: the other, nddi or nddikd, ‘‘ reed,’’ probably
designated in the first place, and more properly, & measure of length, and
not of time. A verse cited in the commentary to this passage gives the form
and dimensions of the vessel used: it is to be of ten palas’ weight of copper,
six digits (angula) high, and of twice that width at the mouth, and is to
contain sixty palas of water: the hole in the bottom through which it is
to fill itself is to be such as will just admit a gold pin four digits long, and
weighing three and a third mdshas. The description of the Ayin-Akbari
does not precisely agree with this; and it is, indeed, sufficiently evident
that an instrument intended for such a purpose could not be accurately
constructed by Hindu workmen from measurements alone, but would
have to be tested by comparison with some recognized standard, or by
actual use.

| f the Apniliaey Sphere, and other Instruments 309
oe 24. So also, the man-instrument (narayantra) is good in the
a Pay dine, and when the sun is clear. The best determination of
= time by means of determinations of the shadow has been explained.
id
i We have already noticed above, under verse 21, that the nara was @
é Sites. simple gnomon. ‘The explanations here referred to are, of course, those
ie are presented in the third chapter.
_—s ‘Whe concluding verse of the chapter is an encouragement held out to
the ‘astronomical student. :
-- 95. +~He who thoroughly knows the system of the planets and
asterisms, and the sphere, attains the world of the planets in the
- -suecession of births, his own possessor.
re
Baya SA ‘pete: . , 2
ake rat a pbk! wo tk ee
: oe ents Oars Saul Tse
on SS a] te
te ee ae
DAR peers Togs an Reis
ar yet 4] may tal \ zal?
at esi") ea at ety
are ats p > Se Se ae . |
“i - jaca Pie. . et
pA « iy y ANY e a, 7€:

CHAPTER XIV.
Or THE DIFFERENT MODES OF RECKONING TIME.
Contents :-—1-2, enumeration of the modes of measuring time, and gencral explanation
of their uses; 3, solar time; 4-6, of the periods of eighty-six days; 7-11, of points
and divisions in the sun's revolution; 12-13, lunar time; 14, time of the Fathers;
15, sidereal time; 15-16, of the months and their asterisms; 17, of the twelve-year
cycle of Jupiter; 18-19, civil, or mean solar, time; 20-21, time of the gods,
Prajipati, and Brahma; 22-26, conclusion of the work.
1. The modes of measuring time (mdna) are nine, namely
those of Brahma, of the gods, of the Fathers, of Prajapati, of
Jupiter, and solar (sdura), civil (sdvana), lunar,
and sidereal
time.
2. Of four modes, namely solar, lunar, sidereal, and civil
time, practical use is made among men; by that of Jupiter is to
be determined the year of the cycle of sixty years; of the rest, no
use ls ever made.
This chapter contains the reply of the sun's incarnation to the last of
the questions addressed to him by the original recipient of his revelation
(see above, xii. 8). The word mdna, which gives it its title of mdnddhydya, and which we have translated ** mode of measuring or reckoning
time,’’ literally means simply ** measure '’: it is the same term which we
have already (iv. 2-3) seen applied to designate the measured disks of the
sun and moon.
3. By solar (sdura) time are determined the measure of the
day and night, the shadagitimukhas, the solstice (ayana), the
equinox (vishuvat), and the propitious period of the sun’s entrance
into a sign (sankrdntt).
The adjective saura, which we translate ‘‘ solar,’" is a secondary
derivative from sfirya, “‘ sun."’ It is applied to those divisions of time
which are dependent on and determined by the sun’s actual motion along
the ecliptic. The ‘‘ day and night ’’ measured by it are probably those of
the gods and demons respectively; seo above, xii. 48-50. The solar year,
as already noticed (note to i. 12-18), is sidereal, not tropical; it commences

Of the Different Modes of reckoning Time 311
whenever the sun enters the first sign of the immovable sidereal zodiac, or
when he is 10 minutes east in longitude from the star ¢ Piscium. The
solar month is the time during which he continues in each successive sign,
er are of 80°, reckoning from that point. The length of the solar year
and month is subject only to an infinitesimal variation, due to the slow
motion, of 1/ in 517 years, assumed for the sun’s line of apsides (see above,
i. 41-44); but it is, as has been shown above (note to 1. 20-34, near the end),
somewhat differently estimated by different authorities. The precise length
of the solar months, as reckoned according to the ‘Strya-Siddhanta, is
thus stated by Warren (Kala Sankalita, p. 69): |
Duration of the several Solar Months.
No. Name. Duration. Sum of duration.
ain Wh as on Ve
The former passage (i. 12-13) took no note of any solar day; in this
oF shapter, however, such a division of time is distinctly contemplated: it
i “a --g also recognized by the Siddhanta-Ciromani (Ganitadhy., ii. 8), and
t
_ ; Faden. to be, for certain uses, generally accepted. The solar day is the
time during which the sun traverses each successive degree of the ecliptic,
am with his tr ye motion, and its length accordingly varies with the rapidity
of his motion: three hundred and sixty such days compose the sidereal year.
In order to determine the solar day corresponding to #ny given moment it
is, of course, only necessary to calculate, by the methods of the second

312 - Stirya-Siddhdnta
chapter, the sun’s true longitude for that moment. Hence it is a matter
of very little practical account: all the periods regarded as determined by
it may be as well derived directly from the sun’s longitude, without going
through the form of calling its degrees days. It is thus with the equinuxes,
solstices, and entrances of the sun into a sign (sankrdinti, ** entrance upon
connection with °'): for the latter, and for the continuance of the propitious
influences which are believed to attend upon it, see below, verse 11. The
shadacitimukhas form the subject of the next following passage.
The manuscript without commentary inserts here the following verse:
‘the day and night of the gods and demons, which is determined by
the sun's revolution through the circle of asterisms (bhacakra), and the
number of the Golden (k&rta) and other Ages, as already stated, is to be
known."’
4. Beginning with Libra, the shadagitimukha is at the end
of the periods of eighty-six (shadagiti) days, in succession : there
are four of them, occurring in the signs of double character (dvisvabhdva) ;
5. Namely, at the twenty-sixth degree of Sagittarius, at the
twenty-second of Pisces, at the eighteenth degree of Gemini, and
at the fourteenth of Virgo.
6. From the latter point, the sixteen days of Virgo which
remain are suitable for sacrifices : anything given to the Fathers
(pitaras) in them is inexhaustible.
We have not been able to find anywhere any explanation of this
curious division of the sun’s path into arcs of 86°, commencing from the
autumnal equinox, and leaving an odd remnant of 16° at the end of Virgo.
The commentary offers nothing whatever in elucidation of their character
and significance. ‘The epithet *‘ of double character “ (dvisvabhdva) belongs
to the four signs mentioned in verse 6; judging from the connection in which
it is applied to thern by Variha-Mihira (Laghujatoka, 1. 8, in Weber's
Indische Studien, ii. 278), it designates them as either variable (cara) or
fixed (sthira), in some astrological sense. The term shadacilimukha is
composed of shadagiti, ** eighty-six,’’ and mukha, ‘* mouth, face, beginning."’ We do not understand the meaning of the compound well enough
to venture to translate it.
7. In the midst of the zodiac (bhacakra) are the two
equinoxes (vishuvat), situated upon the same diameter (sama- 9
~ os

a ae ee SS SEE
aa —— ik
ue. 2 Us 9a 3
heed, A ' _
a: ee
rs i < Of the Different Modes of reckoning Time 313
‘sitraga), and likewise the two solstices (ayana); these four are
ie well known.
8. Between these are, in each case, two entrances
(sankranti) ; from the immediateness of the entrance are to be
known the two feet of Vishnu.
| Q. From the sun’s entrance (sanikrdnti) into Capricorn, SIX
| months are his northern progress (uttardyana) ; so likewise, from
di _ the beginning of Cancer, six months are his southern progress
(da kshind yana).
i eens 10. Thence also are reckoned the seasons (riu), the cool
i Dp Shave, and the rest, each prevailing through two signs.
oot ai twelve, Saas with Aries, are the months; of them
nee. Or gomicneatatow: explains samasitraga, like samasitrastha above
ea (xin. 52), to mean ‘situated at opposite extremities of the same diameter of
we ree or -antipodal to one another. |
he technical term for the sun’s entrance into a sign of the zodiie is,
oticed already, sankrdnti (the commentary also presents the equivalent
ey of these there take place two between each equinox
ad. phe receding or following solstice. The latter half of verse 8 is quite
obs cure. The commentator appears to understand it as signifying that,
% in each quadrant, the entrance (sankranti) immediately Pw" _the
3 pues or pees is styled —
y, Vishnu is the sun, especially considered as occupying successiveee st: ations of the orient horizon, the meridian, and the occident
and At ee steps by which he strides through the sky are his
ne " characteristic. ‘These three steps, then, appesr under
€ oc afi te Jater Vaishnava mythology, and there is plainly some
a en , -e to them in this designation of the sun’s entrances into the signs.
Sr a ft t would em easiest and most natural to recognize in the three signs interme ch e uinox and solstice Vishnu's three steps. and to
n Siute entrances as the marks of bis feet this may
e figure re inten ded to be conveyed by the language of the text.
a a
be “means originally and literally any determined period of
in the most general sense of the term; but tt has also
cn early times to designate the various divisions
ce ere. enaieatly reckoned as three, five, six, or seven;
the only one in use in later times, is that
ing avi ae ‘ieira, Vasanta, ‘Grishma, Varsha, Carad, and
He co d by cool season, spring, summer.
Re PRS
a aa venin g siphons

ms
oe
| © xatey ee autumn, and Winter? gi igira, begins: with the month Magha,
Fr 3 : oe about the middle of January (see note to i. 48-51, and the table given
below, under vy. 15-16), and each season in succession includes two solar
months. .
i. Multiply the number of minutes in the sun’s measure
(ména) by sixty, and divide by his daily motion : a time equal to
half the result, in nadis, is propitious before the sun’s entrance
into a sign (sankrdnti), and likewise after it.
The propitious influences referred to above, in verse 8, as attending
upon the sun’s entrance into a sign, are regarded as enduring so long as
any part of his disk is upon the pojnt of separation between the two signs.
This time is found by the following proportion: as the sun’s actual daily
motion, in minutes, is to a day, or sixty nfdis, so is the measure of his
disk, in minutes, to the time which it will occupy in passing the point
referred to.
12. As the moon, setting out from the sun, moves from day
to day eastward, that is the lunar method of reckoning time
(mdna): a lunar day (tithi) is to be regarded as corresponding to
twelve degrees of motion.
13. The lunar day (tithi), the karana, the general cere- —
monies, marriage, shaving, and the performance of vows, fastings,
and pilgrimages, are determined by lunar time.
14. Of thirty lunar days is composed the lunar month,
which is declared to be a day and a night of the Fathers : the end
of the month and of the half-month (paksha) are at their mid-day
and midnight respectively.
For the tithi, or lunar day, see above, ii. 66: for the karana, gee
ii, 67-69. For the month considered as the day of the pitaras, or manes
of the departed, see note to xii, 73-77. Manu (i. 66) pronounces the day
of the Fathers to be the dark half-month, or the fortnight from full moon
to new moon, and their night to be the light half-month, or the fortnight —
from new moon to full moon, With this mode of division might be made —
to accord that stated in the latter part of verse 14, by rendering eimai eS
** between,’’ instead of “* at the middle point of "*: we have translated —
atin to the age of the commentator. vant Sh ee
TP dies constant | aren of the
is called a aidere dag! oy
- ty f = neat <¢ “we te
7 oe apes Y ci oA ;
aa 5.) babe lle
at > oS ,
ang

Of the Different Modes of reckoning Time 315
by the names of the asterisms (nakshatra), according to the conjunction (yoga) at the end of a lunar period (parvan).
16. To the months Karttika etc., belong, as concerns the
conjunction (samayoga), the asterisms Krttika etc., two by two:
but three months, namely the last, the next to the last, and the
fifth, have triple asterisms.
‘The subject of sidereal time, although one of prominent importance
in the present treatise, since the subdivision of the day is regulated entirely
by it, is here very summarily dismissed with half a verse, while we find
appended to it in the same passage matters with which it has nothing
properly to do.
We have already (note to 1. 49-51) had occasion to notice that the
months are regarded as having received their names from the asterisms
(nakshatra) in which the moon became full during their continuance.
According to Sir William Jones (As. Res. ii. 206), it is asserted by the
Hindus ** that, when their lunar year was arranged by former astronomers,
the moon was at the full in each month on the very day when it entered
the nakshatra, from which that month is denominated.’ Whether this
assertion is strictly true admits of much doubt. Our text does not imply
any such claim: it only declares that the month is to be called by the
name of that asterism with which the moon is in conjunction (yoga) at the
end of the parvan: this latter word might mean either half of a lunar
month, but is evidently to be understood here, as explained by the commentary, of the light half (gukla paksha) alone, 50 that the end of the
parvan (parvdnta) is equivalent to the end of the day of full moon
(piirnimdnta), or to the moment of opposition in longitude. Now it is
evident that, owing to the meommensurability of the times of revolution
of the sum and moon, as also to the revolution of the moon’s line of apsides,
full moon is liable to occur in succession in all the asterisms, and at all
points of the zodiac; so that although, at the time when the system of
names for the months originated and eatablished itself, they were doubtless
strictly applicable, they would not long continue to be so. Instead, however, of being compelled to alter continually the nomenclature of the year,
we are allowed, by verse 16, to call a month Karttika in which the full of
the moon takes place either in Krttika or in Rohini, and so on; the twentyseven asterisms being distributed among the twelve months as evenly as the
nature of the case admits.
At what period these names were first introduced into use is unknown.
It must have been, of course, posterior to the establishment of the system
of asterisms, but it was probably not much later, as the names are found
in some of the earlier texts which contain those of the nakshatras them-

816 Surya-Siddhanta
selves. We can hardly suppose that they were not originally applied independently to the lunar months; and certainly, no more suitable derivation could be found for the name of a lunar period than from the asterism
in which the moon attained during its continuance her full beauty and
perfection. In later times, as we bave already seen (note to i. 48-51), the
true lunar months are entirely dependent for their nomenclature upon the
solar months, according to the determination of the latter, as regards their
commencement and duration, by the data and methods of the modern astronomical scienee. There has been handed down another system of names
for the months (see Colebrooke im As. Res., vii. 284; Essays, 1. 201), which
have nothing to do with the asterisms: whether they are to be regarded as
more ancient than the others we do not know. They are—commencing
with the first month of the season Vasanta, or with that one which in the
other system is called Ciéitra—as follows: Madhu, Madhava, Qukra, Cucis
Nabhas, Nabhasya, Isha, Urja, Sahas, Sahasya, Tapas, Tapasya.
For the sake of a clearer understanding of the relations of the
asterisins, months, and seasons, we present their correspondences below in a
tabular form :
Benson. Month. fall maton nae coms
{ Haxttike. Erttika.
Varad Ulan) Robigt.
M&rgac!reha. { Mrgaciraha.
(Nov.-Dec.) Ardra.
Hemanta.
Pusha. Ponarvasu.
(Dec.-Jan.) Pushya.
Maghba § Acleaha.
ae (Jan.-Feb.) ( Magha.
ra
vii PhA&lgups. ae a aca
(Feb.-Mar.) esta’ gant.
ae Citra,
(Mar.-Apr) Svat.
Vasantla .
Vaichikha Vichkh
(Ane eaay.) Anuré@ dba.
Jyhish Jyesbtha.
eee eae ) ; Mata.
on ; Asbidhe HBr, pireeniee
° PES )
Ort (rare.
vapa.
(Joly-Aug.) CQutahinba
Varaba. Bhtdre {Paka
(Aug.- ) LU.-Bhidrapada
Qarad. f » argh ee F ‘

ss Of the Different Modes of reckoning Time 317
Me Davis (As. Res., iii, 218) notices that some of the ancient astronomers
have divided the asterisms somewhat differently, giving to Cravana the three
beginning with Cravana, to Bhadrapada the three beginning with PorvaBhadrapada&, and to Acvina only Agvini and Bharani. It seems, indeed,
that the selection of the three months to which three asterisms, instead of
two, were assigned, must have been made somewhat arbitrarily.
1t will be noticed that in this passage Karttika is treated as the first
‘ of the series o7 months, while above (v. 10) Gicira was mentioned as the first
season, and while in practice (see note to i. 48-51) Vaicakha is treated as
the first of the solar months, and Caitra of the lunar. Another name for
Margacirsha, also, is Agrahayana, which appears to mean ** commencement of the year.’’ How much significance these variations of usage may
have, and what is their reason, is not known to us. As regards Vaigakha
and Caitra, indeed, the case is clear, and we may also regard the rank
= assigned to Karttika as due to the ancient position of Krttika, as first anm.ong
the lunar mansions. — |
17. In Vaigikha ete., a conjunction (yoga) in the dark
half-month (krshna), on the fifteenth lunar day (tithi), determines
in like manner the years Karttika etc. of Jupiter, from his heliacal
getting (asta) and rising (udaya).
We have already, in an early part of the treatise (i. 55), made aca cycle of the planet Jupiter. composed of sixty years; In
troduced to our notice a second one, containing twelve
nat g to a single sidereal revolution of the planet. The
hich its nomenclature is based is very evident. Jupiter 5
ted as if, like that of the sun, it determined a year, and
each quite nearly equalling a solar year (see note to i. 55),
divided, are, by the same analogy, accounted as months,
: the names of the solar months, The appellations
in their order, we are directed to determine by
hatra) in which the planet is found to be at the time of
| nm the sun's rays, and its disengagement from them :
uld, of course, set and rise heliacally twelve times in each revolu-
} eacl bout a month later than before. The name of the
the month in which the rising
six months farther
the month is named from the asterism with
an < acim opposition, but the year of the cycle from that with
ccnp onjunction. The terms in which the rule of the text 1s
‘lincether unambiguous: there is no expr essed grammatical
te ae orp halves of Whovverse, and we are, compelled to
aad ees a e r
WV ue "
re ,
ti
2 on,
i Bea : t agree with that of
es
o
o
ro
ae
fa oe,
g? ee
nt _
a om | a2 « _ cl. * oe

318 . Surya-Siddhania
add in our translation the important word ‘* determines,’' which links
them together. The meaning, however, we take’ to be as follows: if, in
any given year, the heliacal setting of Jupiter takes place in the month
Vaicikha, then the asterism with which the moon is found to be in conjunction at the end of that month—which will be, of course, the asterism
in which the sun is at the same time situated—will determine the name
of the year, which will be Karttika: and so on, from year to year, The
expression “* in like manner,’’ in the second half of the verse, is interpreted
as implying that to the years of this cycle is made the same distribution
of the asterisms as to the months in the preceding passage: the second
and third columns of the last table, then, will apply to the cycle, if we
alter their headings respectively, from *‘ month "' to “* year of the cycle,"’
and from ‘* asterisms in which full moon may occur "’ to “’ asterisms in
which Jupiter's heliacal setting and rising may occur.”
There is one untoward circumstance connected with this arrangement
which is not taken into account by the text, and which appears to oppose
a practical difficulty to the application of its rule. The amount of Jupiter's
motion during a solar year is not precisely one sign, but perceptibly more
than that, so that the mean interval between two successive heliacal
settings is a little more than a solar month; and this difference accumulates
so rapidly that the thirteenth setting would take place about four degrees
farther eastward than the first, so that, without some system of periodical
omissions of a month, the correspondence between the names of the years,
if applied in regular succession, and the asterisms in which the planet
disappeared would, after a few revolutions, be altogether dislocated and
broken up. If the cycle were of more practical consequence, or if it were
contemplated as one of the proper subjects of this treatise, we might expect
to find some method of obviating this difficulty prescribed. Warren, however, in his brief account of the cycle of twelve years (Kala Sankalita,
p. 212 etc.), states that he knows of no nation or tribe making any use of
it, but only finds it mentioned in the books. According to both him and
Davis (As. Res., iii. 217 ete.), the cycle of twelve years is subordinate to
that of sixty, the latter being divided imto five such cycles, to which
special names are applied, and of each of which the BUCCERSIVE years receive
in order the titles of the solar months. The appellations of the cycles
themselves are those which properly belong to the years of the lustrum
(yuga), or cycle of five years, by which, as already noticed (note to i, 56-58),
the Hindus appear first to have regulated time, and effected by intercalation the coincidence of the solar and lunar years: they are Samvatsara,
Parivatsara, Idavateara, Idvatsara (or Anuvatsara), and Vatsara (or
Idvatsara, or Udravatsara). It would appear, then, either that the cycle
of sixty years was derived from and founded upon the ancient lustrum,
being an imitation of its construction in time of the planet Jupiter, of
which a month equals a solar year, or else that the already existing cycle

——e eae ~*~. =F . ee
Of the Different Modes of reckoning Time 319
had been later fancifully compared with the lustrum, and subdivided after
its model into sub-cycles for years, and years for months: of these two
suppositions we are inclined to regard the latter as decidedly the more
probable.
18. From rising to rising of the sun, that is called civil
(sdvana) reckoning. By that are determined the civil days
(sdvana), and by these is the regulation of the time of sacrifice ;
19. Likewise the removal of uncleanness from child-bearing
etc., and the regents of days, months, and years ; the mean motion
of the planets, too, is computed by civil time.
The term sdvana we have translated ** civil,”” as being a convenient
way of distinguishing this from the other kinds of time, and as being very
properly applicable to the day as reckoned in practical use from sunrise
to sunrise: in the more general sense, as denoting the mode of reckoning
the mean motions of the planets, and the regency of successive periods,
sdvana corresponds to what we call “" mean solar "" time. ‘The word itself
seems to be a derivative from #avana, ~ libation,’’ the three daily savanaz,
or the sunrise, noon, and sunset libations, being determined by this.
reckoning.
20. The mutually opposed day and night of the gods (sura)
and demons (asura), which has been already explained, is time
of the gods, being measured by the completion of the sun's
revolution.
21. The space of a Patriarchate (manvantara) is styled time
of Prajipati: in it is no distinction of day from night. An Aon
(kalpa) is called time of Brahma.
. It may well be said that the mode of reckoning by time of the gods
aa has been already explained: the length of a day of the gods, with the
. termination, has been stated and dwelt upon, in almost
over and over again (see i. 15-14; xii. 45-50, 67, 74;
| verse after xiv. 3), almost as if it were so new and
d and bear repeated inculcation. For the
od of 808,448,000 years, see above, i. 18:
unit of time which the treatise contains.
of 4,320,000,000 years, us constituting a day of
erses are simply the conclusion of the treatise.

320 Strya-Siddhdnta
22. Thus hath been told thee that supreme mystery, lofty
and wonderful, that sacred knowledge (brahman), most exalted,
pure, all guilt destroying ;
23. And the highest knowledge of the heaven, the stars, and
the planets hath been exhibited: he who knoweth it thoroughly
obtaineth in the worlds of the sun etc. an everlasting place.
24. With these words, taking leave of Maya, and being suitably worshipped by him, the part of the sun ascended to heaven,
and entered his own disk.
25. So then Maya, having personally learned from the sun
that divine knowledge, regarded himself as having attained his
desire, and as purified from sin.
26. Then, too, the sages (rshi), learning that Maya had
received from the sun this gift, drew near and surrounded him, and
reverently asked the knowledge.
27. And he graciously bestowed upon them the grand system
of the planets, of mysteries in the world the most wonderful, and
equal to the Scripture (bralman).
The Sdrya-Siddhinta, in the form in which it is here presented, as
accepted by Ranganitha and fixed by his commentary, contains exactly
five hundred verses. This number, of course, cannot plausibly be looked
upon as altogether accidental: no one will question that the treatise has
been intentionally wrought into its present compass. We have often
found occasion above to point out indications, more or less distinet and
unequivocal, of alterations and interpolations; and although in some
cases our suspicions may not prove well-founded, there can be no reasonable doubt that the text of the treatise has undergone since its origin
not unimportant extension and modification. Any farther consideration
of this point we reserve for the general historical summary to be presented
at the end of the Appendix.
ee

an
oak
APPENDIX :
ConTAINING ADDITIONAL NoTEs AND TABLES, CALCULATIONS OF
EcLIPsEs, A STELLAR MAP, ETC.
4. p. ii. ‘The name siddhdnta, by which the astronomical textbooks are generally called, has, by derivation and original meaning, nothing
to do with astronomy, but signifies simply “ established conclusion; "’ and
it is variously applied to other uses in the Sanskrit literature.
_ It may not be uninteresting to present here a summary view of the
existing astronomical literature of the Hindus, as derived from such
sources of information upon the subject as are accessible to us, even
though such a view must necessarily be imperfect and incomplete. We
commenée by giving a list of works furnished to the translator, at his
request, by the native Professor of Mathematics in the Sanskrit College
at Pina, and which may be taken as representing the knowledge possessed,
and the opinions held, by the learned of Western India at the present
time. Along with it is offered the list of nine treatises given in the modern
Sanskrit Encyclopedia, the Cabdakalpadruma, as entitled to the name of
Siddhanta. ‘The longer list was intended to be arranged chronologically;
the remarks appended to the names of treatises are those of its compiler.
1. Brabma-Siddbinota. Brahma-Siddhinots.
Q. Sdrya-Siddbinta. Sdrya-Siddhanta.
8. Soma-Siddhinta. Soma-Siddhanta.
4. Vhasishtha-Siddhbints . Brhaspati-Siddhinta.
6. Romaka-Siddhinta. Garga-Siddhinta.
6. Péulastya-Siddhdnta. Nirada-Siddbinta.
7. Brhaspati-Siddhinta,
8. Garga-Siddbinta.
9, Vyisa-Siddhinta.
10. Péricara-Siddhints.
‘Ql. Bhoja-Siddbanta; earlier than the Qiromani.
12. Vardha-Siddhinta; earlier than the Qiromani.
13. hm Siddhanta; earlier than the Qiromagi.
24, Siddbinta-Qiromani; caka 1072 (A.D. 1150).
Péricara-Siddhints.
Paulastya-Siddhinta.
Vasish{ha-Siddbints.
CPO ee
‘Sundara-Siddhinta; about 400 years ago.
Tattva-Viveka-Siddhints; in the time of the reign of Jaya Sinha, about 250
’ {years sgo.
‘47. BarvabbAuma-Siddhinta; in the time of the reign of Jaya Sinha.
: Laghu-Arya-Siddhinta r
19. Brhad-Arya-Siddhante an Ne

322 Strya-Siddhanta
It is obvious that these lists are uncritically constructed, and that
neither of them is of a nature to yield valuable information without
additional explanations. ‘The one is most unreasonably curt, and seems
founded on the principle of allowing the title of Siddhanta to no work
which is the acknowledged composition of a merely human author, while
the other contains treatises of very heterogeneous character and value:
and neither list distinguishes works now actually in existence from those
which have become lost, and those of which the existence at any period is
questionable. A more satisfactory account of the Siddhanta literature may
be drawn up from the notices contained in the writ'ngs of Western scholars,
and especially from the various essays of Colebrooke. For what we shall
here offer, he is our main authority.
in the present imperfect state of our knowledge of the subject, there
is perhaps no better method of classifying the Hindu astronomical treatises
than by dividing them into four classes, as follows: first, those which
profess to be a revelation on the part of some superhuman being; second,
those which are attributed to ancient and renowned sages, or to other
supposititious or impersonal authors; third, those regarded as\the works
of actual authors, astronomers of an early and uncertain pericd; fourth,
later texts, of known date and authorship, and mostly of a less independent
and original character.
I. The first class comprises the Brahma, Sdrya, Soma, Brhaspati,
and Narada Siddhantas.
1. Brahma-Siddhanta. The earliest treatise bearing this name is
said to have formed a part of the Vishnudharmottara Purana, a work
which seems to be long since lost, and scarcely remembered except in
connection with the Siddhanta, ‘The latter, too, is only known by a few
citations in astronomical writings, and by the treatise of Brahmagupta
(see below, third class) founded upon it. Another work laying claim to
the same title is that which we have many times cited above as the
Cakalya-Sanhita. Sanhité, “‘ text, comprehensive work,’’ is a term employed to denote a complete course of astronomy, astrology, horoscopy,
ete.: this treatise, according to the manuscript in our possession, farms
the second division (pragna) of such a course. It professes to be revealed by Brahma to the semi-divine personage Narada, Of its relation
to the Strya-Siddhinta we have spoken above (note to wi. 10-12), It
does not appear to be referred to as an independent work in either of the
native liste we have given.
2. Stirya-Siddhanta, This is the treatise of which the translation has
been given above, and of which, accordingly, we do not need to apeak here
more particularly.
8. Soma-Siddhénta, Judging from its title, this work must profess
to derive its origin from the moon (soma), as the preceding from the
sun (sirya), Bentley speaks of it as following in the main the system

Appendix 323
of the Sarya-Siddhanta. There is a manuscript of it in the Berlin Library
Weber's Catalogue, No. 840), and Colebrooke seems also to have had
it in his hands.
4. Brhaspati-Siddhénta. Brhaspati is the name of a divine personage, priest and teacher of the gods, as also of the planet Jupiter. No
work bearing this name is mentioned, so far a5 we can ascertain, by any
European scholar, although Brhaspati is not mfrequently referred to in
native writings as an authority in astronomical matters.
5. Ndrada-Siddhaénta. A WNa&radi-Sanhité, or course of astrology, im
the Berlin Library (Weber, No. 862), and an occasional reference to
Narada, among other divine or mythical personages, as an astronomical
authority, are all the indications we find justifying the introduction of this
name into the list of the Cabdakalpadruma.
II. In the second class we include the Garga, Vyasa, Paracara,
_ -Pauliga, Paulastya, and Viasishtha Siddh4ntas. Garga, Paracgara, Vyasa,
Pulastya, and Vasishtha are prominent among the sages of the ancient
period of Hindu history: the two latter are of the number of those who
give name to the etars in Ursa Major (they are 8 and ¢ respectively).
‘hey cannot possibly have been the yeritable authors of Siddhantas, or
works presenting the modern astronomical system of the Hindus: but—
and this seems to be especially the case with regard to Garga and Pari¢ara
—one and another of them may have distinguished themselves In connéction with the older science, and so have furnished some ground for the part
oi, attributed to them by the later tradition, and for the fathering of .astrono-
--—- mical works upon them.
a = ‘ ae Garga-Siddhdnta. Astronomical treatises and commentaries upon
them: occasionally offer citations from Garga (see, for instance, Cole2 _brooke’s Essays, ii, 856; Sir William Jones in As. Res., ii. 397), but of
io a Siddhanta, or text-book of astronomy, bearing his name, we find nowhere
any mention excepting in these lists.
"(a> oe Vydsa-Siddhdnta. This name, too, is known to us only from the
list above given.
. iz $8. Péradgara-Siddhanta. According to Bentley, the second chapter
a
» Arya-Siddhanta contains an extract from this work, im which are
ad the elements of the ‘mean motions of the planets adopted by it.
ce ‘The
work itself appears to be lost; unless, indeed, it may have been conned in a manuscript of the Mackenzie Collection, which in Wilson's
ogue (i. 120) is called Vriddha-Parasara, and said to be “* a system
of a bre og , attributed to Parasara, the father of Vyasa.” |
ire 4. Pduliga-Siddhdnta. The planetary elements of this treatise also are
ese ved in later commentaries, and are stated by Bentley and Colehave noticed above (note to i. 4-6) that al-Birdini attributes
F th Gh " ; whence Weber (Ind. Lit., p. 226) conjectures that
‘the » of Paulus Alexandrinus. If this account

fy of its origin be correct, the Puliga to whom the later Hindus attribute it is
a fictitious personage, whose name is manufactured out of Pauliga. The
work, it will be seen, is not mentioned in either of the lists we have given,
its place appearing to be taken by the Pulastya-Siddhanta. According to
the Hindu tradition, the school represented by the Piulica-Siddhinta was
the rival of that of Aryabhatta.
5. Pulastya-Siddhénta, Of this SiddhAnta we find mention only in
such native lists as omit the preceding. Hence we are led to conjecture
that the two names may indicate the same work; an attempt, founded
upon the similarity of the names, haying been made by some to attribute
the Paulica-Siddhanta to a known and acknowledged Hindu gage.
6. Vasishtha-Siddhénta. This work is spoken of as actually in
existence by both Colebrooke and Bentley, and the latter states its system
to correspond with that of the Sirya-Siddhanta. More than one treatise
bearing the name is referred to, the older one being of unknown authorship,
and the other a later compilation founded upon this, by Vishnu-candra,
who is said also to have derived his material in part from Aryabhatta. A
copy of a Vrddha-Vasishtha-Siddhinta formed a part of the Mackenzic
Collection (Wilson’s Catalogue, i. 121).
Iii. To the third class may be assigned the Siddhintas of Aryabhatta,
Varaha-mihira, and Brahmagupta, and the Romaka-Siddhanta, as well as
the later version of the Vasishtha-Siddhinta, last spoken of. The first
three names are those of greatest. prominence and highest importance in
the history of Hindu astronomical science, and there is every reason to
believe that the sages who bore them lived about the time when the modern
system may be supposed to have received its final and fully developed
form, or during the fifth and sixth centuries of our era.
1. Arya-Siddhdnta. ‘The two principal works of Aryabhatta appear
to have been originally entitled the Arydshtagata, ‘‘ work of eight hundred
verses,’ and Dacagitikaé, ** work of ten cantos.’’ Colebrooke knew neither
of them excepting by citations in other astronomical text-books and commentaries. Bentley had in his hands two treatises which he calls the
Arya-Siddhanta and the Laghu-Arya-Siddhanta, which are possibly identical
with those above named.* The Berlin Library also contains (Weber,
No. 834) a work which professes to be a commentary on the Dacgagitiké.
2. Varéha-Siddhdnta. The only distinctively astronomical work of
Varaha-mibira appears to have been his Pafica-siddhantika, or Compendium
of Five Astronomies, of which we have already spoken (note to i. 2-8), and
which was founded upon the Brahma, Surya, Pauliga, Vasishtha, and
Romaka Siddhantas, It is supposed to be no longer in existence, although
* See an article by Fits-Edward Hall, a On the Arya-Siddhinta, in the Journal
of the American Oriental Society, Vol. VI, 1860. ag

Appendix 395
the astrological works of the same author have been carefully preserved,
and are without difficulty accessible.
| 3. Brahma-Siddhdnta. ‘The proper title of the work composed by
Brahmagupta, upon the foundation of an earlier treatise bearing this name,
is Brahma-sphuta-Siddhanta, ‘* corrected Brahma-Siddhanta,’’ but the
word sphuta, *’ corrected,’’ is frequently omitted in citing it, as has been
our own usage in the notes to the Surya-Siddhanta. Colebrooke possessed
an imperfect copy of it, and it was also in Bentley's possession. Upon it
was professedly founded, in the main, the Siddhinta-() iromani of Bhaskara.
4. Romaka-Siddhanta. Of the name of this treatise, the only one
we have thus far met with which is not derived from a real or supposed
author, we have spoken in the note to i. 4-6. It 1s said by Colebrooke to
be by Grishena, and to have been founded in part upon the original
Vasishtha-Siddhanta; its early date is proved by its being one of those
treated as authorities by Varaha-mihira. No copy of it seems to have
been discovered ih later times.
Qur list also mentions a Bhoja-Siddhanta, probably referring to some
astronomical work published during the reign, and under the patronage,
of Raja Bhoja Deva, of Dhara, in the tenth @r eleventh century of our era.
LV. Our fourth class is headed by the Siddhanta-Qiromani, written in
the twelfth ceritufy by Bhaskara Acarya, and founded upon the BrahmaSiddhanta of Brahmagupta. Our numerous references to it and citations
from it indicate the prominent and important position which it occupies
in the modern astronomical literature of India, For a description of the
numerous commentaries upon it, see Colebrooke’s Hindu Algebra, note
A (Essays, ii. 450, ete.).
The longer of the lists given above mentions two or three other works
of yet later date. Among them the Siddhanta-Sundara is the most ancient,
having been composed by Jnana-raja at the beginning of the sixteenth
century. The Graha-Laghava is a treatise of the same class, and is highly
considered and much used throughout India, although omitted from the
Pana list. It is of nearly the same date with the work last spoken of,
being the composition of Ganeca, and dated gaka 1442 (A.D. 1520). The
Siddhanta Tattva-Viveka, more usually styled the Tattva-Viveka simply,
is a century later: it was written by Kamalakara, about A.D. 1620. The
Siddhanta-Sarvabh4uma dates from very nearly the same period, and is the
work of Munievara, who is also the author of a commentary on the
Gir i, and the son of Ranganitha, the commentator on the Suryaa. See
- Siddhanta. . vi 1
This class of astronomical writings might be almost indefinitely
extended, but the works which have been mentioned appear to be the most
authoritative and important.
Xp) Of all the treatises whose names we have cited, we know of but three
which have as yet been published—the Sorya-Siddhanta, the Siddhantare =

326 Stirya-Siddhanta
weer and the Graha-Lighava; the two latter under the auspices of the
chool Book Society of Calcutta. Prof. Hall's edition of the SiryaSiddhanta, to which reference is made in our Introductory Note, has been
completed by the addition of a fourth Fasciculus since our own publication
was commenced, so that we have been able to avail ourselves of its valuable
assistance throughout.
2. p. ii. Ranganitha, in the verses with which he closes his
commentary, states it to have been completed on the same day with the
birth of his son Municvara, in the ¢éka year 1525, or A.D. 16038. For his
relationship to other well-known authors or commentators of astronomical
treatises, see Colebrooke’s Essays, ii. 452 etc. Other commentators on
the Stirya-Siddhanta mentioned by Colebrooke are Nrsinha, who wrote but
a few years later than Ranganatha, and Bhidhara and Dada Bhai, whose
age is not stated. The Mackenzie collection (see Wilson’s Catalogue,
p. 118 etc.) contained commentaries on the whole or parts of the same
text by Mallikaérjuna, Yellaya, an Aryabhatta Mammabhatta, and Tammaya.
3. p. iii, As no especially suitable opportunity has hitherto offered
itself for giving in our notes the synonymy of the names of the planets,
we present here all the appellations by which they are known in the text
of the Sirya-Siddhanta.
The sun is called by the following names derived from roots signifying
‘“to shine "’: arka, bhadnu, ravi, vivasvant, siirya; also savitar, literally
‘‘ enlivener, generator ''; bhdskara, ‘* light-maker ''; dinakara and divdkara,
‘** day-maker '"'; and tigmdngu and tikshndngu, ‘‘ having hot or piercing
rays."*
The moon, besides her ordinary names indu, candra, vidhu, is styled
nicdkara, ** night-maker "’; nigdpati, “* lord of night ''; anushnagu, gitagu,
citingu, citadidhiti, himaragmi, himangu, himadidhiti, ** having cool rays,” ’
and ¢agin and gacdénka, ** marked with a hare "’: the Hindu fancy sees the
figure of this animal in the spots on the moon’s disk. The name soma nowhere directly occurs, but it is implied in the title sdumya given to
Mercury.
Mercury is styled jfia and budha, ‘* wise, knowing "'; also gagija and
sdumya, ** son of the moon.'" The reason of neither appellation is obvious.
It will be seen below that the moon, the sun, and the earth have cach of
them one of the lesser planets assigned to it as its son: why Mercury,
Saturn, and Mars were selected, and on what grounds their respective
parentage was given them, is hitherto entirely unknown.
Venus has one name, cukra, “* brilliant,’’ which is derived frem her
actual character: she is also known as bhygu, which is the name of one
of the most noted of the ancient sages, or as bhrguja or bhdrgava, “* son of
OF adh sous See iaeelaleaeieeiaueamactenen ** coal,’’ which is
given him on account of his fiery, burning light: all his other titles, namely

a Appendix 327
ciao high eh bhiimtputra, bhusuta, bhduma, mark him as “* son of the
“Jupiter is known as brhaspati, which is, as already more than once
noticed, the name of a divine personage, priest and teacher among the
gods; the word means orginally “ lord of worship. ” The planet also
receives some of his titles, namely quru, ‘* preceptor,” and amareyya,
een of the immortals." The only other name given to it, jiva,
** divin ,’’ is of doubtful origin.
Saturn has two appellations, each represented by several forms; namely
“* son of the sun, or arkaja, = stiryatanaya; and ** the slowmoving,””
or manda, gani, ¢andigcara.
All these names, it will be itaeed: are of native Hindu, origm, and
have nothing to do with the appellations given by other nations to the
planets. In the Hindu astrological writings, however, even those of a very
early period (see Weber's Ind. Stud., ii. 261), appear, along with these,
> er other titles which are evidently derived from those of the Greeks.
spt 4. p. 2. We have everywhere cited Bentley’s work on Hindu astronomy according to the London edition of it (8vo., 1825), the only one to
which we have had access.
aA In a few instances, where we have not specified the part of Bh4skara’s
| ‘Siddhante-Viromani to which we refer, the Ganitadhyaya, or properly astro_ momical portion of it, is intended.
EA ae 19. For the convenience of any who may desire to make a
. more , detailed examination of the elements of the mean motions of the
planets adopted in this treatise, and to work out the results deducible from
- then we. present them in the following table in a more exact form. We
give ‘the mean time of sidereal revolution, 1m mean solar days, and the
amount of ‘mean motion, in seconds, during a day, and also during a Julian
oem of 365} mean solar days.
Mean Motions of the Planets.
Mean daily
motion.
soeterr90T4sl Tor s3i6l 48,969,346
a3

328 : Sarya-Siddhanta
: wage bs =ne system of the Sirya-Siddhanta, so far as concerns
the mean motions of the planets, the date of the last general conjunction,
and the frequency of its recurrence, is also that of the C alya-Sanhita.
It is likewise presented, according to Bentley (Hind. Astr., p. 116), by
the Soma and Vasishtha Siddhintas. So far as can be gathered from the
elements of the Pauliga and Laghu-Arya Siddhantas, as reported by Colebrooke and Bentley, these treatises, too, followed a similar system; the
revolutions of the planets in an Age, as stated by them, where they differ
from those of the Strya-Siddhanta, always differ by a number which is
a multiple of four. Some of the astronomical text-books, however, have
constructed their systems in a somewhat different manner. Thus the
Siddhanta-CGiromani, following the authority of Brahmagupta and of the
earlier Brahma-Siddhanta, makes the planets commence their motions
together at the star ¢ Piscium at the very commencement of the Zon,
and return to a general conjunction at the same point only after the lapse
of the whole period of 4,320,000,000 years. The same is the case with the
Arya and Par&cara Siddhantas: they too, as reported by Bentley (Hind.
Astr., pp. 148, 150), state the revolutions of the planets for the whole Afon
only, and in numbers which have no common.divisor, so that they assume
no briefer cycle of conjunction. But they all, at the same time, take
special notice of the commencement of the Iron Age, which they make to
begin at the moment of mean sunrise at Lanka, and manage to effect very
nearly a general conjunction at the time of its occurrence, as is shown by
the table at the end of this note, in which are presented the positions of
all the planets, and of the moon's apsis and node, as stated by them for
that moment.
We insert these data here, because they seem to us to furnish ground
for important conclusions respecting the comparative antiquity of the two
systems. The commencement of the Iron Age, which to the one is of
cardinal importance as an astronomical epoch, is to the other simply ao
chronological era, having no astronomical significance. Now if, as has
been shown in our notes to be altogether probable, that epoch is in fact of
astronomical origin, being arrived at by retrospective calculation of the
planetary motions, we can hardly avoid the conclusion that the system
which presents it in its true character is the more ancient and original.
This conclusion is strengthened by the notice taken of the epoch by the
Siddhanta-Giromani and its kindred treatises. We do not see how their
treatment of it is to be explained, excepting upon the supposition that a
general conjunction at that time was already #0 firmly established as a
fundamental dogma of the Hindu astronomy, that they were compelled,
even while rejecting the theory of brief cycles and Pai Sonhas ea ea AT ERE
to pay it homage by so constructing their elements that these sho .
exhibit at least a very near approach to a conjunction at the momen 2
We are clearly of opinion, therefore, that, apart from all consideration o

Appendix 329
the relative age of the separate treatises, the system represented by the
Sarya-Siddhinta is the more ancient.
Mean Places of the Planeta, 6 o’c A.M. at Ujjayini, Feb. 18th, B.C. $102.
Planet, Siddhénta-Qiromani. Arya-Siddbinta. ParScara-Siddhanta.
‘San; o oOo oOo oO
Mercury, 110 «(27 29
Venus, 1k 62 6 642lid
Saturn, Ih 238 46 384
i < ; noite Ve eae z
- Sul sARS p. 20. We present in the annexed table, in the same form 4s
above (note 5), the elements of the mean motions of the planets as corrected
bai tbe. bija.
Mean Motions of the Planets, as corrected by the bija.
Mean daily motion. | Mean yearly motion.
e ai

330 Stirya-Siddhdnta
«8. p. 24. At the time when we wrote our note, we had not observed
that Bentley himself explains, in a foot-note to page 117 of his work,
this apparent error. In the case of Mercury, since the number of revolutions as stated by the text of our treatise did not yield him the result which
he desired, he has quietly taken the liberty of altering it from 17,937,060
to 17,937,024, assuming, as his justification, an error of the copyists which
has not the slightest plausibility, and ignoring the fact that the correctness
of the former number is avouched by its occurrence in other treatises.
It is highly characteristic of Bentley, that he has thus arbitrarily amended
one of the data upon which he reste the most important of his general conclusions, a conclusion which, but for such emendation, would be not a little
weakened or modified. Any one can see for himself, upon referring to our
table given on page 50, with how much plausibility Bentley is able to deduce, from the dates of its fourth column, the year A.D. 1091 as that of the
composition of the Strya-Siddhinta. We have been solicitous to allow
Bentley all the credit we possibly could for his labors upon the Hindu astronomy, but we cannot avoid expressing here our settled conviction that, as
an authority upon the subject, he is hardly more to be trusted than Bailly
himself, that his work must be used with the extremest caution, and that
his determination of the successive epochs in the history of astronomical
science in India, is from beginning to end utterly worthless.
9. p. 25. We have not fulfilled our promise to recur in the eighth
chapter to the subject of the sun's error of position, because we felt ourselves
incompetent to cast at present any valuable light upon it. Nothing but a
careful and thorough sifting and comparison of all the earliest treatises,
together with the tradition preserved by the commentators, and the practical
methods of construction of the calendar, is likely to settle the question as to
the manner in which the elements of the planetary orbits were originally
made up.
40. p. 27. In making out our comparative table of sidereal revolutions, we have calculated the column for Ptolemy as we conceive that he
would himself have calculated it, had he been called upon to do so. M. Biot,
having in view an object different from ours, has, carefully revised Ptolemy's
processes (see his Traité Elémentaire d’Astronomie Physique, 3™* éd., v.
37-71), and has deduced from the latter's original data what he regards as
the true times of sidereal revolution of the primary planets furnished by
them; his periods are accordingly slightly different from those presented in
our table.
Colebrooke (As. Res., xii, 246; Essays, ii. 412) has also given a comparative table of the daily motions of the planets, but has committed in it
the gross error of setting side by side the sidereal rates of motion of the
Hindy text-books and the tropiéal rates of Ptolemy and Lalande. Of course,

Appendiz 331
his data being incommensurable, the conclusions he draws from their comparison are erroncous.
11. p. 30. We add, in the following table, a comparison of the positions of the apsides and nodes of the planets as stated in our treatise—
being those which are adopted, with unimportant variations, by ull the
schools of Hindu astronomy—with those laid down by Ptolemy in his
Syntaxis. ‘The latter we give as stated by Ptolemy for his own period, with
out reducing them to their value in distances from the initial point of the
Hindu sphere. The actual distance of that point, or of the vernal equinox
of A.D. 560, from the vernal equinox of Ptolemy's time, is about 54°. We
should remark also that Ptolemy does not state expressly and distinctly the
positions of the nodes: we derive them from the rules given by him, in the
sixth chapter of his thirteenth Book, for calculating the latitude of the
planets: not being, however, altogether confident of our correct understanding and interpretation of those rules.
Positions of the Apsides and Nodes of the Planets.
StryaPlanet. Siddbanta,
Apsides :
ieee, lS Dvene, MS. Coen

* 332 Stirya-Siddhénta
~ It will be perceived that the differences here are not so great as to exclude the supposition of a connected origin. We do not ourselves believe
that the Hindus were ever sufficiently skilled in observation, or in the
discussion of the results of observation, to be able to derive such data
for themselves, or even intelligently to modify and improve them, when
obtained from other sources. In order, however, fully to understand the
relation of the Hindu to the Greek science in this part, we require to know,
first, what were the positions assigned to the apsides and nodes by Greek
astronomers prior to Ptolermy, and secondly, what were their actual positions at the periods in question. Upon the first point no information appears
to have been handed down to our times; and as regards the other, we have
not found any modern determination of the desired data, and are not ourselves at present in a situation to undertake so intricate and laborious a
calculation.
12. p. 38. ‘The era of the kali yuga, or Iron Age, is not in practical
use among the Hindus of the present day: two others, of a less remote date,
are ordinarily employed by them in the giving of dates. These are styled
the eras of Calivébana and of Vikramaditya respectively, from two sovereigns
so named: their origin and historical significance are matters of much
doubt and controversy. The years of the era of Calivaéhana are, according
to Warren (Kila Sankalita, p. 381 and elsewhere), solar years: their reckoning commences after the lapse of 8179 complete years of the Iron Age, or
early in April, A.D. 78: the 1782nd year, accordingly, coinciding with the
4961st of the Iron Age, commenced, as is shown by the table on p. 34,
April 12th, 1859, and ended April llth, 1860. The years of this era are
generally cited as caka or ¢dka years. In the other era, the luni-solar
reckoning is followed (Warren, as above, p. 591 and elsewhere); and its first
year began with the 3045th of the Iron Age, or early in 58 B.C.: its 1962nd
year, coinciding with the 4961st of the remoter era, commenced (see table
on p. 34) April 4th, 1859, and ended March 22nd, 1860, The years of this
era are called and quoted as samvatsara years, or, by abbreviation simply
samvat,
13. p. 44. M. Vivien de St. Martin (in Julien’s Mémoires de
Hiouen-Thsang, ii. 258) supposes the value of the li in use in China during
the seventh century to have been about 329 metres or 1080 English feet.
This would make the yalues of the three kinds of yojana mentioned by the
Buddhist traveller to be 8}, 64, and 84 English miles respectively.
14. p. 49. In the first table upon this page, we have, by an oversight, given the earth's heliocentric longitude, instead of the sun's geocentric
longitude. To the sun's place as stated, accordingly, should be added 180°.
15. p. 69. M. Biot (Journal des Savants, 1859, p. 409) suggests that
the Hindus, like Albategnius, obtained their sines directly from the chords

Se" - =. - Uc ci ikikata Dh
Pe
a
. of Hipparcbus or Ptolemy. This may not be an altogether impossible
Appendix 338
f
s
he
supposition, but it is at least am unnecessary one, for they certainly had
geometry enough, at the time of the elaboration of their astronomical
system, to construct their table independently. Our notes have presented
Delambre's view of the method of its construction and the reason of ite
limitation to arcs which are multiples of 3° 45’. We cannot but feel,
however, upon maturer consideration, that the correctness of that view is
= very questionable; that the Hindus could probably have made out 4 more
complete table if they had chosen to do so; and that a sufficient reason is
found for their selection of the are of 8° 45’ in the fact that it is a natural
subdivision of a recognized unit, the are of 30°, while the series of twentyfour sines was sufficiently full and accurate for their uses. We have been
at the pains to calculate the complete series of Hindu sines from Ptolemy's
~ table of chords, assuming the value of radius to be 3438’, in order to test
| the question whether there were any correspondence of errors between
Y - them which should prove the one to be derived from the other: our results
al are as follows. In five of the instances (the 14th, 15th, 19th, 22nd, and
y 28rd sines of the table) in which the value of the Hindu sine exceeds the
truth, Ptolemy supports the error; in the other three cases (the 16th, 17th,
=X, and 18th sines), Ptolemy affords the correct value; to the 6th sine, also,
' ic. which by the Hindus is made too small, Ptolemy's table gives its true value,
if but the next following sine he makes too great (namely 1520.69, which
ie would give 1521, instead of 1520); this is his only independent error. The
te : e vidence yielded by the comparison may be regarded as not altogether
EN
oes For the benefit of any who may desire to make practical use of the
—_ Hindu sines, in calculations conducted according to the processes of the
TP . ‘Sarya-Siddhainta, we give, upon the opposite page, & more detailed table
Oe ee hfe SS SNES ¢ . :
~a | Si See ee | ee 41 hi j t f differences
: | of them than has been presented hitherto, with such — o ai
“annexe as will enable the calculator readily to find the sine of any given
| - _ without resorting to the laborious proportions by which
nplates tha should in each case be determined. Such
templates that they
gurselves found highly useful, and even almost indis-
‘ages
r the
Vets s:
ae
rae

tee
; peee eee ears
geese :
1105 a Bee
af .
aoe aonwm~
ne tot amie
a.+ocnorE
ake | ae Ob
rey:
She
Cm Ole
oaewoor | ae Gwe
an wwe
eooco
trim oo ed
ae one
a f e
Fe at
ao
eROooo
Seas
S3an0
seek |¢
ns
oo
Bee
Fa
socoo
aad
eo .
ele | .
sage |

es
Appendix 335
In explaining how the Hindus may have arrived at their empirical
rule, as laid down in verses 15 and 16, for the development of the series
of sines, we have also, as mentioned in our note, followed the guidance
of Delambre. Prof. Newton, however, is of opinion that the rule in question
was probably obtained by direct geometrical demonstration, in some such
method as the following, which is much more in accordance with the
mathematical processes exhibited or implied in other parts of the SaryaSiddh&nta.
In the quadrant AP (Fig. 34), let BF, BD, and BE be three ares, of
Fig. 34. which each exceeds its predecessor by
A the equal increment DF or DE; and
let Fm, DI, and Ek be their sines, inE creasing by the unequal differences Dh
> and Eg. Now as ED and DF are small
ares (they are shown in the figure of
aie - three times the proportional length of
the ares of difference of the Hindu
table), EDg and DFh may be regarded
as plane triangles, and the angles made
| by CD at D as right angles: hence the
Ke
c angles EDg and CDI are equal, the
triangles EDg and CDI are similar, and
ED : Eg :: CD: Cl or Eg=ED. Cl+CD. In like manner, Di=ED.
Cm+CD. Therefore Dh —Eg=ED.Im+CD; and Eg, which is the amount
by which Ek exceeds DI, equals Dh—(ED.Im+CD). But, by similarity
of the triangles CDI and DFh, Fh, or Im, equals ED.DI+~CD; and hence
ED.Im+CD= (ED?+CD*) DI, or (ED +CD) DI. Now when ED equals
225! and CD 3488’, ED+CD= ,}j, nearly (or exactly ;}-,,), and (ED+CD)’
=,}), nearly (more exactly jq4-ax)- Hence Ek=DI+Dh— ghz DI,
which is equivalent to the Hindu rule.
When we wrote the note to the passage of the text relating to the
sines, we assumed that the rule as there stated would give the series of
sines, having found upon trial that it held good for the firat few terms of
the series. But, it having been pointed out to us by Prof. Newtun that
the adoption of », as the value of ED+CD could not but lead to palpably
erroneous results, we earried our calculations farther, and found that only
five of the sines following the first one can be deduced from it by the
processes prescribed; that with the seventh sine begins a discordance between
the table and the result of calculation by the rule, which goes on increasing
to the end, where it amounts to as much as 70’ in the value obtained for
radius. |
This untoward circumstance, which may be regarded as a trait highly
characteristic of a Hindu astronomical treatise, seems to us rather to favor

336 Strya-Siddhdnta
the opinion that the rule is the result of construction and demonatration.
and not empirically deduced from a consideration of the actual second
differences, In the latter case we should more naturally suppose that it
would have been tested throughout by actual trial; while, if it had been
arrived at in the manner above explained, an application of it to the first
few members only of the series might more easily have been accepted as
a sufficient test of its correctness.
16. p. 67. We are not sure that the name bhuja may not originally
and properly belong rather to the arc than to its chord or sine. It comes
from a root bhuj, ** bend,”’ and signifies primarily *‘ a bend, curve,’ being
applied also to designate the arm on account of the latter's suppleness or
flexibility. The word koti also most frequently means “* the end or horn
of a bow.”” We might, then, look upon the relations of the are (dhanus,
capa, kirmuka) and its parts and appurtenances as follows. The whole arc
taken into account is (Fig. 2, p. 67) QRS: of this, BRC is the bhuja,
curve or bow proper, while BQ and CS are its two kotis or horns: BC is
the chord or bow-string (jyé etc.), or, more distinctively, the bhujajyd;
which name, by substitution for jydrdha, is also applied to either of its
halves, BH or HC: BF or CL is in like manner the kotijyd; RH, finally,
the versed sine, is the ‘* arrow *’ (cara, ishu); by this name it is often
known in other treatises, although not once so styled in this Siddhdnta.
If this view be correct, the terms bhuja and koti as applied to the base
and perpendicular of a right-angled triangle, are given them on account of
their relation to one another as sine and cosine, while the synonyms of
bhuja, namely béhu and dos, are employed on account only of their agreement with it in the signification ‘‘ arm,'’ and not in that which gives it
its trGé application. For koti the treatise affords no synonyms.
i7. p. 71. M. Delambre, in his History of Ancient Astronomy (i. 462
ete.), has subjected to a detailed examination the rules of the SaryaSiddhanta for the calculation of the equations of the centre for the sun
and moon, has reduced them to a single formula, and has calculated for
each degree of a quadrant the values of the equations comparing them
with those furnished by the Hindu tables, as reported by Davis (As. Res.,
ii. 255-256). M. Biot has more recently, in the Journal des Savoants for
1859 (p. 384 ete.), taken up the same subject anew, especially pointing
yut, and illustrating by figures and calculations, the error of the Hindus in
assuming the variation of the equation to be the same in all the four
quadrants of mean revolution.
18. p. 87. Neither Delambre nor Biot (both as above cited), nor
any other western savant who has treated of the Hindu astronomy, 1%
found any means of accounting for the variation of dimensions of a
planetary epicycles. In its present form and extent, indeed, it seems ‘
defy explanation: we can only conjecture that it may be an unintelli-

Appendiz« 353
This we take the liberty of omitting to do, as the modification thus introduced into the process would be of very small importance.
a. To find the moon's corrected hour-angle.
And first, for the sun's hour-angle:
Time of first contact, reckoned from sunrise, 32° 51° 4”, or 11,830"
deduct the whole day, 9,192"
remain : 2,638"
deduct from the half-night, 6,235"
Sun's Ristavoe in time from inferior meridian, 3.897"
This, then, is the hour-angle of the centre of the shadow at the time
of contact. The distance of the centre of the moon in longitude from that
of the shadow was found above (under VIII) to be GI 35". This is reduced
to its yalue in right ascension by the proportion
Now, then,
from the hour-angle of the shadow, 8,597"
deduet the difference of the moon's right ascension, alr
Moon's hour-angle at beginning of eclipse, 3,536"
This is virtually an application of the process taught in ili. 50.
‘he moon's hour-angle is now corrected, as before, by the proportion
he sine of 49° 86/ is 2617/.
b. To find the deflection for latitude.
ss The proportion —
gives us the deflection for latitude as 28° 34’, which is north, as before.
«, Yo find the ecliptic-deflection.
‘ ; | Moon's. distance from vernal equinox at opposition, 4° 16" 22’
= , — deduct motion during 4° 39° 2°, 1" 6
a =—s a oa Rh Do. a* time of contact, 4° 15* 15°
Z ° ach nee quadrant, 3 all

c... wee Stirya-Siddhénta
shows us that the ecliptic-deflection is 16° 47’; it is, as in the former
* case, south. .
d. To find the deflection, in digits,
From the deflection for latitude, 28° 34° N.
deduct the ecliptic-deflection, . 16° 47° 8.
remains the net deflection, in are,
its sine is 702’
divide by 70
Defléction, in digits, 10*.03 N,
3. For the end of the eclipse.
Of this process, which is throughout closely analogous to the list, we
shall present only a brief statement of the results.
Hour-angle of the centre of the shadow,
Distance of the centre of the moon in right sacension, 50° =
Moon's hour angle, g81" EB.
Do., corrected, 5° 20°
Sine, $20"
Deflection for latitude, 8° 2)’ N.
Moon's distance from vernal equinox+ 3’, 7° 17° Sa’
Are determining sine, 47° 24°
Sine, 2530°
Ecliptic-deflection, 17° 24° 8.
Net deflection, in arc, 14" 3 8.
Do., in digits, 11‘.93 S.
The mode of application of these quantities in making a projection
of an eclipse is sufficiently explained in the notes to the sixth chapter, and
illustrated by the figure there given, which is adapted to the conditions of
the eclipse here calculated. All the quantities entering into the projection,
however, of which the value has been stated in minutes, require also to be
reduced to digits, according to a scale determined by the following process.
X. To determine the scale of projection of the disks and latitudes
This process we will perform only for the moment of opposition, or
for the middle of the eclipse. At this time, as has been seen above, we
have
Moon's half-day,
Do. hour-angle (nata), 1921"
Do. altitude in time (unnata), 4405"
the sum is 23,743"
divide by » 6,410"
Ube quotient is — #7

Appendix S55
At the elevation, then, which the moon has when in opposition, 3/.7
make a digit, and by this amount the values of the disk of the moon, the
shadow, and the latitudes, are to be divided, in order to reduce them to 4
scalo upon which they may be plotted. It is evident that, in strictness, the
same calculation requires to be made also for the time of contact and the
time of separation, or the time of any other phase of which the projection
is to serve as an illustration: but it is evident also that this is wellnigh
impracticable, since one projection could then be used to illustrate only ©
single phase, unless several different scales should be employed in the same
figure.
It now only remains for us to present a comparison of the elements
of the eclipse, as thus calculated, with their true values as detarmined
by modern astronomical science. This is done in the annexed table. The
true elements we take from the American Nautical Almanac for 1860. In
comparing the time of the middle of the eclipse, we take, as already mentioned, the value of it given by the Hindu process as calculated from mean
midnight.
Sarya-Siddbants. Am. Naut. Almanac. Hinda error
Time of opposition in long., 9* 577 35" eu. 9° 27° 10.8 rm. + 307 24°
‘Moon’s long. at opposition, 136° 20’ 197° 35' 63".7 — 115
, hourly motion in long., 35° 37" 38° Oo"'.6 —- 2 24
. Semi-diameter of sun, 16° 42" 16° 15".2 + a7”
Amount of obscuration, 1.33 0.812 + 0,518
‘Whole duration of eclipse, g* a7” 44° g* 52° 24° + 457 20°
95. p. 177. Our next note is
: CALCULATION, ACCORDING TO HINDU Data axnp Metuops, oF THE HoLAR
Eceurrse or May 2678, 1854,
of WILLIAMS’ COLLEGE, WILLIAMSTOWN,
FOR THE LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE 01
| MASss.
As has been already mentioned in the closing note to the fifth chapter,
the following caleulation of a solar eclipse was mainly made for the
_ translator, while in India, by his native assistant. Some additional calwe culations have been appended here by us, in order to render the whole
7 cess © more complete illustration of the rules as given in the text of our
: and certain parts of the
For the most part,
- treatise; and we havo also had to reject and replace
ae ~ work actually done, on account of their inaccuracy.
5 . pres t the work as it was made, although involving some repetitions
ie Mus:
2 LES
{feats
y
w ht be regarded as superfluous, after the explanations and
trations already given in the notes and in the preceding calculation of «4
cee i — - 2
a 8 Fl te * al oe b “hr >
~T el

> Junar éclipes, The eclipse cahicted is the one calculated and delineated in
: ‘Prof. James H. Coffin’ s useful work, entitled “* Solar and Lunar Eclipses
= fomiliarly illustrated and explained, with the method of caleulating them,
according to the theory of Astronomy as taught in New-England Co!'!eges *'
(New York, 1845).
I, To find the sum of days (ahargana) from the commencement of the
planetary motions to the time of calculation.
The eclipse in question occurs at the close of the month Vaigakha.
the second month of the luni-solar year, in the 1777th year of the era of
Caélivéhana (see add. note 12). To compute, then, the number of whole
years, and to reduce them, with the remaining part of a year, to mean solar
days, we proceed as follows:
Sandhi at the beginning of the kalpa, 1,728,000
Six manrentaras, 1,850,688 ,000
Twenty-seven mahdyuges of the seventh Manu, 116,640,000
deduct the time epent in creation, 17,064,000
From creation to beginning of 2th maldyuga, 1,061 092,000
Krta yuga of 28th or current mahdyuga, 1,728,000
Tretad yuga of - 1,295,000
Dedpera yuga of - 864,000
Kali yuga, to era of Cilivabana, 3,179
Complete years elapsed of the cra, 1,776
From the creation to end of March, 1854, compiete ycara, 1,955 ,884,955
to reduce to solar months, multiply by 12
Solar months, 23,470,619,460
add month of current year elapsed, 1
Whole number of solar months, 25,470,619,461
Now, to find the intercalary months, we make the proportion
Then, to
Solar months elapsed, 23,470,610,461
add intercalary months, 721,334,701
Lunar months elapsed, 24,192,004,162
to reduce to lunar days, multiply by *
Lanar doys, a
add for current month,

Pod
Appendic O57,
Farther, to find the number of tithikshayas, or omitted lunar duys, i
this period, we say
Next, from
Lunar days elapsed, 725 760.124 889
deduct omitted lunar days, 11 356,018,362 -
Mean solar days elapsed, =
> oe
This, then, is the required ahargana, or sum of days from the com “4
mencement of the planetary motions to about the time of new moon,
May, 1854. ‘The processes by which it is found are in all respects the
same with those illustrated by us in the notes to i. 21-23, 24, 48, 48-51,
above. It will be noticed that the Hindu astronomer, at least when
working out an illustrative process, like the one in hand, scorns to make«
use of any of the means for reducing the labor of computation which,
the text directly or impliedly permits, and of which, in our own calcu
lations, we have been glad to avail ourselves. :
II. ‘lo ascertain the mean longitudes of the sun,
apsis, the moon's aps, and the moon's node, for mean midnigh
Hindu meridian, at ths given interval from the creation. _*
‘The amount of motion, since the creation, of the bodies named, in oa :
their order, is found by the following series of proportions : ie
the moon, the sun’
t on the =
1,577,917,828 : 714.404,106,527 : +: 57,753,500 : 26,147 .A&8,11a***1" 9 is’ heey
Rejecting whole revolutions, and, in the case of the moon's nodg,,
as the méa
subtracting the fraction from a whole revolution, we have,
longitudes required :
Sun's apogee, 3 2 le +
PRs gq: 21° 56° FD Ses
eu asoon's: SpOeT 1* 32° 48° 10°" = *
Moon's node, -* <
The Hindu calculator has taken, in the case of the moon's apsis
and node, the numbers of revolutions given by the text, omitting» ie
orrection of the bija. We have not, in order to fest the accuracy GPS
; ope proportions, eXxceE
his arithmetical operations, worked over again the

Strya-Siddhanta
ing in two instances, the first and last: our results differ but slightly
from those above given (we find the seconds of the sun's place to be 40",
| ‘end the minutes and seconds of the node's motion to be 12’ 43°)—not
_ enough to render any modification necessary.
It. Yo ascertain the values of the same quantities at mean sunrise
on the equator, or 6 o'clock,
In order to this, we must add to each planet's longitude one fourth
° the amount of its mean motion in a day. We require, then, the mean
bs daily motions. They are found as follows, taking the sun as an example:
+ We omit the other proportions and their results, as the latter have been
. fully stated in the table of mean motions of the planets (note to ‘.29-34).
; Adding a quarter of the daily motion, we have as follows:
1 ong. at midnight. Correction. Long. at sunrise.
Son, ao iste” lt Te 8? 29" 1” |
IV. To ascertain the values of the same quantities at mean sunrise
R upon the equator, on the meridian of the given place.
Adopting 75° 50’ as the longitude of the Hindu meridian east from
* Greenwich, we have, as the interval in longitude of Williams’ College
. from it, 149° 2’ 80", which is equal to 24" 50° 2e. The latitude is
42° 42) 51". We have, then, first, to determine the distance of the place
* im question, upon its own parallel of latitude, from the Hindu meridian.
‘he equatorial circumference of the earth has been found above (note
*® to i. 59-60) to be 5059.64 yojanas. Its circumference upon the paral-
© lel of latitude of Williams’ College is found (i. 60) by the following proportion :
_ The degdntara, or difference of longitude in yojanas, is then deter-
» “mined thus:
And the decaéntaraphala, or correction for difference of longitude, is
Wealculated from the daily motion of each body, by such a proportion as
© the one subjoined, which gives the sun's correction :
We omit the other proportions, and merely present their results in
ws - . ci
ty — . Y iol ~*

r
if
+r hes?
sa’
ee i.
| oo
cme UP | From the Lea of the moon's apsis,
é
Ae ae hi
ae "7 r ve
Appendiz 359
: Bunrise at Lanka. Correction. Sunrise on giv. merid.
63-65) called attention to the excessively —
We have already (note to i.
process for making the correc:
awkward and cumbrous character of this
tion for difference of meridian.
Vv. ‘To find the sun’s true longitude.
From the longitude of san's apeis, g° 17° 17’ 23”
deduct sun’s mean longitude (ii. 29), 1* 12° 63’ 28”
Sun's mean acomaly, . - 4° 29° 55”
Sine,
‘The diminution of the sun’s epicycle is now found by the following pro-
~ portion i. 88) : ,
‘The « dimensions of the epicycle are,
Next, the proportion (ii. 39)
gives us the sun’s equation of the centre, which, by ii. 45, is additive.
_ Hence to the
ie Sun's mean longitude 1* 19° 63’ 25"
| add = equation, 1° 34" T=
ae n's Jongitade, 1* 214" 7 30"
ther serious error:
“This calculation exhibits a ra
The final result, however,
aa by it: the equation ought to be 1° I
ee ceptibly modi
longitude ys 14° 7! 68".
pisem To find the moon's true longitude.
a* ga" of 34”
ists:
nn” 6S
moon's mean longitade,
the sine of 34° 24’,
is mot per14’ 307, and the true

a _ VIF. To calculate the true daily motions of the sun and moon.
Sak: he equations of motion for the sun and moon have been found by
Le + ne calculator of the eclipse by the following proportion: «as the whole
_ orbit | of either planet is to its epicycle, so is its nrean daily motion to the
. equirec equation, That is to say, for the sun,
a”
Ve. Fe
~ which, by ii. 49, is subtractive. Hence the sun’s true motion is 51 8*—
Phe Again, for the moon,
= And the moon’s true motion is 74Y 35”—69' 36", or 72 5o".
These calculations are exceedingly incomplete and erroneous, 18 may
readily be seen by referring to the corresponding process in the other
eclipse, or to that given as an ill.stration in the note to ii, 47-49. The
actual value of the sun’s equation cf motion, as fully ealculated by the
method of our treatise, is only 1/ 51”; that of the moon is only 53’ 49":
whence the true motions are 57! 17" and 731! 46" respectively. These
are elements of so much importance, and they enter so variously ito the
after operations, that we havo hesitated s to whether it would aut be
better to cancel the whole work of the Hindu calculator from this point
* onward, and to perform it anew in a more exact manner, but we have finally
concluded to present the whole as it is, as a specimen—although, we hope,
not a favourable one—of native work; pointing out, at the same time, its
deficiencies, and cautioning against its results being accepted os the best
that the system is capable of affording.
“y We have thus far found the true longitudes of the sun and moon for
the moment of mean sunrise at the equator, upon the meridian of the
given place. We desire now farther to find the same data for the moment
of sunrise upon the same meridian in latitude 42° 42/ 51” N.
VIIl. To fintthe longitudes of the sun and moon at sunrise in long.
: i. To caleulate the precession of the equinoxes (iii. 9-12).
The proportion
gives us the amount of the motion of the equinox in its own circle of
libratory revolution, since the beginning of things. Rejecting complete
| revolutions, and deducting 6 from the fraction of a revolution, we have
be the distance of the equinox from the origin of the sidereal sphere, in terms
, of its own revolution, as 67° 45! 22": three tenths of this, or 20° 1 36", is
the amount of the precession, .

Appendi« 345
This quantity is often called sdyana sirya; that is to say, ‘* the sun's longitude with the precession (ayana) added.” |
‘he sun is accordingly in the eleventh sign, of which the ascensional
equivalent is 1795. His daily motion has been found to be (iY 48%.
Hence the proportion (ii. 59)
gives us 61P, or 10" 1P, as the excess of the sun’s day over a true sidereal
day of 60 nadis: its length is accordingly 60" 10° lr, or 21,661".
Next we desire to know how much of this day passed between midnight
and sunrise, and for this purpose we have
2 ‘To find the sun’s ascensional difference (cara).
a. To ascertain the sun’s declination, and its sine and versed sine.
The sun's longitude with precession added (sdyana sarya), 10° 16° 21°
Arc determining the sine (bhuja), 43° 30°
Now, then, the proportion (ii. 28)
gives us 964! as the sine of declination (krdntijyd); the corresponding are (il.
$3) is 16° 17/ S; its versed sine (ii. 31-32) is 139".
b. To find the radius of the sun’s diurnal circle (ii. 60).
From radius,
deduct versed sine of declination, is?’
Radius of diurnal circle (dinacy4sadala, dyujy4), 3200°
e. To find the earth-sine (ii. 61).
The measure of the equinoctial shadow at Washington is (see note to
ii. 61-63) 94.68. The proportion, then,
shows the value of the earth-sine (kshitijya, kujyd) to be 773’.
d. To find the sun’s ascensional difference (ii. 61-62).
The proportion
gives the sine of ascensional difference (carajyé), which is 811’. The
corresponding arc, or the sun’s ascensional difference (cara, caradala), is
8. To find the time from midnight to sunrise.
The sun’s declination being south, the ascensional difference is to be
added — i. 62-63) to the quarter of the sun's complete day, to give the
—- Jength of the half-night. That is to say,
“sz
i?

346 Sarya-Siddhdnta
of sun's complete day (21,661L" + 4), 5,415"
Buns ascensional difference, "= gigr
Sun's balf-night, 6,234"
The interval between true midnight and true sunrise
is therefore
That from sunrise till noon (a quantity required in later
processes) is found in like manner by subtracting the ascensional difference
from the quarter-day: it is 45906r,
Now then, finally,
Time of opposition, reckoned from mean midnight,
deduct eqnation of time, 13”
Do. reckoned from tree midnight, 64* 50°
deduct interval till sunrise, 17* 19°
Do. reckoned from sunrise, 37° Si°*
The time at which the opposition of the sun and moon in longitude
takes place, or the middle of the eclipse, is accordingly, by civil reckoning
at Washington, 87° 31’.
VI. To determine the diameters of the sun, moon, and shadow.
1. To find the sun's apparent diameter.
The sun's mean motion in a sidereal day being 58’ 58", his true
motion at the time of the eclipse being 60/ 48", and his mean diameter 6500
yojanas, we find, by the proportion (iv. 2)
that the sun covers of his mean orbit, at the time of the eclipse, 670281
yojanas. ‘This is reduced to its value upon the moon's mean orbit by the
proportion (iv, 2)
And upon dividing the result, 601-37 yojanas, by 15 (iv. 3), we find the
sun's apparent diameter to be 33/ 25”.
2. To find the moon's apparent diameter.
In like manner as before, the proportion (iv. 2)
shows us that the moon’s corrected diameter is 520-3 yojanas. This also,
divided by 15 (iv. 3), gives the value of the moon's apparent diameter in
arc: it is 34’ 41".
8. To find the diameter of the earth’s shadow.
The following proportion (iv. 4),

Appendix
. determines the value of the earth's corrected diameter (sticf) to be 173843
yojanas.
Again, from the
Sun's corrected diameter,
deduct the earth's diameter (iv. 4),
mains
; and this remainder, when reduced by the following proportion (iv. 5),
gives us the excess of the carth’s corrected diameter (sici) over the diameter
iA Hho, shadow on the moon's mean orbit. Hence, from the
| “Barth's corrected. diameter, 1734" .8
deduct Jast result, 376".8
oN 1 eee
. Stee of shadow, 1357".6
eae ee a divide by 15
« r uf 4
ak LU Diameter of shadow ju are, oy 30”
iy Fl Pe
ae _ VII. To determine the moon’s latitude at the middle of the eclipse,
: eg the amount of greatest obscuration.
ae xe ‘The proportion (i. 53) |
: s gi os us the amount of retrograde motion of the moon's node since the
: oe 01 x 1cerment of the Tron Age. Deducting from this 6°, for the position
j ha of the» ode. at | that time (note to i. 56-58), and taking the complement to #
whole cect have
Pome nays
#1. eo al
| ae Ye fe gitude of moon moon's node, mean. midnight, at Ujj., 9° 92" 31’ 35”
SR oct for diference of meridian, 1’ 24”
: a peak of moon's | a node, mean midnight, at Wash'n, 9* 23° So’ 14”
he 7a vet motion ‘aaring | 55" 3",
Lone "4 ude of moon" 3 node at moment of opposition,
abtract ct from moon . longitade i, 57),
sre stance from anode, —
Are det rmining the sine (bhufe)
2: is i te
anf 4 : rop ort rtiox
"Hence ‘the he p : aS

Pie
gives t 8, as the moon’s latitude at the moment of opposition, 16’ 25”S.
a ‘Now, then, by iv. 10-11,
ss Bemi-diameter of eclipsed body (34" 41”+2),
(iu Do. of eclipsing body (90° 30°+2),
their sur,
deduct moon's latitude, 16’ 25”
Amount of greatest obscuration (grdsa), 46° 12”
and since this amount is greater than the diameter of the eclipsed body,
it is evident that the eclipse is a total one. )
his is a most unfortunate result for the Hindu calculation to yield;
for, in point of fact, the eclipse in question is only a partial one, obscuring
about four-fifths of the diameter of the moon’s disk. The source of the
error lies mainly in the misplacement, relatively to the sun and moon, of
the moon’s node, and the consequent false value found for the mioon’s
latitude. The latter quantity actually amounts, at the time of opposition,
to 35’ 42”, or more than twice the value given it by the Hindu processes.
And it will be seen, on referring to the table on p. 148, that the relative
error in the place of the moon's node, having been accumulating for seven
centuries, is now about 34°, and so reduces, by more than half, the true
distance of the moon from her node. We have tried whether the admission of the correction of the bija would better the result, but that is not
the case: the error of position is still (see the table) nearly 2°, and the
moon's latitude is increased only to 24’ 11", so that the eclipse still appears
to be total. It is evidently high time that a new correction of bija be applied
by the Hindu astronomers to their elements, at least to such as enter
into the calculation of eclipses.
a VIII. To find the duration of the eclipse, and of total obscuration,
and the times of contact, immersion, emergence, and separation. ‘
Diameter of the eclipsing body, the shadow, 90° Ye ‘90° 80”
Do. eclipsed body, the moon, war Bat aI"
Som and difference,
Half-sum and balf-difference (CM and CN, Fig. a1, p. * , a 85
Squares of do., we Sr see :
deduct square of latitude,
< <eaan ae? |
: oe pee Se ee
oa ‘Square roots of remainders (CA and CB),
ba oie arly SS Se Po,

Appendia: 349
the difference of the true daily motions of the sun ond moon at the given
moment :
Moon"s true daily motion, 850’ 36”
Moon’s gain in a day, jaz’ 4S"
Hence the proportions (iv. 15)
sor ::§
give us the half-duration of the eclipse as 4" 34*, and the half-time of
total obscuration as 1" 36% 4?, supposing the moon's latitude to remain
eonstant through the whole continuance of the eclipse. We now proceed
to correct these results for the moon’s motion in latitude. And first, as
regards the half-duration. We calculate the amount of motion of the moon
and of her node during the mean half-duration by the following proportions (iv. 14):
Farther,
‘To and from moon's long. at opposition, 9° 25° 56’ 3° 25" 56’
add and subtract motion during balf-duration, 1” Ss 1 ee
Moon’s long at end and beginning of eclipec. So. 9 ek 3° 24° Si’
From and to long. of node at opposition, g* 99° 27 21" 9° 22° 27° 21"
subtract and add motion during half.duration, 14" 14”
—ewES ———— saa OO ee
Leng. of node at end and beginzing of eclipse, 9° 23° 27° @° 32° 29°
Moon's distance from node, 6° 4° 34’ 6° 2° 23°
Are determining sine, 4° 34’ 2° 33°
Bine, a74" ia’
Moon's latitude at end and beginning of eclipse, 21’ 31"S. 11’ 14°58.
From these valuations of the latitude we now proceed to calculate
i anew, in the same manner 4s before, the half-durations, as follows:
Gquare of half-sum of diameters, S919" 9910"
deduct squares of latitude, 452 12
etn B56" S793
Square roots of remainders, 58° 47” §1’ 35”
‘And the proportions
58' ry ha s 4” on" a’
aoe
i give us the corrected values of the intervals between opposition and conaf, a tact and separation respectively, or the former and latter balf-durations,
ae es
i» oT el
. Page’

350 Strya-Siddhanta
The text contemplates the repetition of this corrective process, if still
greater accuracy be required in the results attained: we have not thought
it worth while to carry the calculation any farther, as a second correction
would be of altogether insignificant amount.
By « like process, the f6rmer and latter half-times of total obscuration, and the moon’s latitude at immersion and emergence, are found to
be as follows :—
Moon's latitude at immersion and emergence, 14’ 36”
Hall-times of total obscuration,
By adding the two halves we obtain
Duration of the eclipse (#thitr),
Do. of total obscuration (cimarda),
And by subtracting and adding the half-times of duration and of total
obscuration from and to the time of opposition (iv. 16-17), we obtain the
following scheme for the successive phases of the eclipse:
Phase Time of occurrence :
after mean midnight after sunrise
First contact, 50° 23° 4" g2° 51° 4”
Middle of eclipse, 55" 3” OF 37* 31° O”
The proper calculation of the eclipse 1s now completed. If, hewever,
we desire to project it, we have still to determine the valana, or deflection
of the ecliptic from an east and west line, for its different phases, as ulso the
scale of projection. We will therefore proceed to calculate them, deferring
to the end of the whole process any comparison of the results we have
obtained with those given by modern astronomical science.
IX. To calculate the deflection of the ecliptic from an east and west
line (valana) for the middle, beginning, and end of the eclipse.
1. For the middle of the eclipse.
a. To find the length of the moon’s day and night respectively at the
given time.
Moon's longitude at ition, a* 25° 56°
radssiias mes 20° 25°
Moon's distance from vernal equinox, 4" 16° 21°
Arc determining sine, 43° 99°
Sine, 2972’
The moon’s declination is then found by the following proportion

ie a Appendiz 351
Ps. - a Mfooti's declindtign 16° 17° N.
i wa % deduct her latitude (ii. 68), 16’ 8.
ae - Moon’s true declination, ° 16° IN.
at —- Bine of do., 948"
rive, = a Versed sine of do., 135°
> yen ele dence from radius oe 64), 3435"
* See “Moon's day-radios, _
ae Again, to find the earth-sine, we say (ii. 61),
and to Sina. the ascensional difference (ii. 61-62)
the | excess: of the moon’s complete revolution over 4 sidereal day is found
yt he Poors Gi. 69)
=e 7 Aaain this to a sidereal day, | or 21, 600P, we find that the moon's day is
Increase and diminish this by
moon ‘s “ascensional difference (ii. 62), end the half-day and haif-night
7 ell th Jaborious ‘process of Sa natatatng the length of the moon's
day, | Ys or the time | which, with the given declination, she would occupy
esters the horizon to the meridian, is rendered necessary by the
: iw lich the commentary applies to the rule of the text in which
thes moc Or a jour-angle is involved, as pointed sh in the note to iv. 24-25
ter, above) We now ‘proceed
uo. oO e hour-angle, and the PRR hour-angle.
x . t th Caienenl _ of opposition, the moon’s hour-angle is evidently the
same ith that of the | men: Hence it may be found as follows:
ve on “rctone from sunrice, 97° 31*, oF 13,506"
é eaten} 7 i : ‘ase 4
ieee Meueots | 3 Is
ance in ‘time froin inferior meridian,
6 distance eastward from the upper meridian 1s accordingly
2iv. ‘his is corre or reduced to its proportional value as a part of
200n 5 aces volution paves the horizon to the meridian, by the
_ MM 22. os * as ae ~ a >
we Le low ir e}4 d } RLU ES ¥
‘he moor oF '

| "The moon's corrected hour-angle, then, is 26° 57!: its sine is 1557
Or ih, a GeO determine the amount of deflection for latitude (valandngds, or
aksha valana—iv. 24).
The sine of the latitude of Washington, 38° 54’, is 2158’. Hence the
proportion
gives us 16° 31’ as the value of the quantity sought. The moon being in
the eastern hemisphere, it is to be reckoned as north in direction.
d. To determine the amount of deflection for ecliptic-deviation (dyana
valana—iv. 25).
Moon's distance from vernal equinox,
add a quadrant, : 3°
their sum, 7° 16° 21’
arc determining sine, 46° 21°
ene, a486'
Hence, by ii. 28, tho proportion
gives us 17° 6 as the amount of declination of the point of the ecliptic
which is a quadrant in advance of the moon, and this is the deflection
required. ts direction is south. We are now ready for the final precess.
e. ‘lo ascertain the net amount of deflection (valana), in digits
From the ecliptic-deflection, 17° & 8.
deduct the deflection for latitude, 16° 81’ N.
remains the net deflection, in are, 35° 8.
divide (iv. 25) by : 10
Deflection in digits. 0* 608
It thus appedrs that, at the moment of opposition, the part of the
ecliptic in which the moon is situated very nearly coincides in direction
with an east and west circle. The amount of deflection is so small that
in our projection, given in connection with the sixth chapter, we were
obliged to exaggerate it somewhat, in order to make it perceptible,
2. For the beginning of the eclipse.
As, owing to the moon's motion
d of the eclipse
first part of the
half-day, as it

i a eo Aa, ————
Appendix 353
This we take the liberty of omitting to do, as the modification thus introduced into the process would be of very small importance.
a. To find the moon's corrected hour-angle.
And first, for the sun's hour-angle :
‘ime of first contact, reckoned from sunrise, 32° 51° 4°, oF 11,830"
deduct the whole day, 9,192"
; remain 2 638"
deduct from the half-night, 6,235"
Sun's distance in time from inferior meridian,
is the hour-angle of the centre of the shadow at the time
tre of the mooa in longitude from that.
This is reduced
This, then,
of contact. The distance of the cen
d above (under VIII) to be 6’ 35".
of the shadow was foun
to its value in right ascension by the proportion
Now, then,
from the hour-angle of the shadow, 3,597"
he moon's right ascension, flr
deduct the difference of t
‘Moon's hour-angle at beginning of eclipse, 3,536"
ication of the process taught in ii.
le is now corrected, as before, by t
'This is virtually an appl 50,
. ‘The moon's hour-ang he proportion
“Whe sine of 49° 36/ is 2617’.
tail me ‘To find the deflection for latitude.
_ The proportion
34’, which is north, as befere.
t gives us the deflection for latitude as 28°
‘c¢. Yo find the ecliptic-deflection.
rai ‘Moon’s distance from vernal equinox at opposition, 4° 16" 21°
. deduct motion during 4° 39° 9*, 1° a
; . add a quadrant, ge

‘B54 e Stirya-Siddlianta
shows us that the ecliptic-deflection is 16° 47’; it is, as in the former
case, south,
d. To find the deflection, in digits.
From the deflection for latitude,
deduct the ecliptic-deflection, 316° 47° 8.
remains the net deflection, in are, 11° 47° N,
jis sine is 702’
divide by 70
Deflection, in digits,
3. For the end of the eclipse.
Of this process, which is throughout closely analogous to the lust,
shall present only a brief statement of the results.
Hour-angle of the centre of the shadow,
we
Distance of the centre of the moon im right ascension, 59° E.
Moon's hour angle, a31" E.
Do., corrected, 5° 20°
Sine, 320°
Deflection for latitude, g° 2) N.
Moon's distance from vernal equinox+ 3’, T° 17° 34
Are determining sine, 47* 2’
Ecliptic-defiection, 17° 24° 8.
Net deflection, in arc, 14° 3 8.
Do., in digits, 11.93 8.
The mode of application of these quantities in making a projection
of an eclipse is sufficiently explained in the notes to the sixth chapter, and
illustrated by the figure there given, which is adapted to the conditions of
the eclipse here calculated. All the quantities entering into the projection,
however, of which the value has been stated in minutes, require also to be
reduced to digits, according to a scale determined by the following process.
X. To determine the seale of projection of the disks and latitudes
This process we will perform only for the moment of opposition, or
for the middle of the eclipse. At this time, as has been seen above, we
have
Moon's half-day,
Do. hour-angle (nate), 1021"
Do, altitude in time (uwnnata), 4405"
the sum i 23,743"
divide by 6,416"
the quotient is — 3.7

Appendix 355
At the elevation, then, which the moon has when in opposition, 3'.7
make a digit, and by this amount the values of the disk of the moon, the
shadow, and the latitudes, are to be divided, in order to reduce them to 4
_ scale upon which they may be plotted. It is evident that, in strictness, the
same calculation requires to be made also for the time of contact and the
time of separation, or the time of any other phase of which the projection
is to serve as an illustration: but it is evident also that this is wellnigh
impracticable, since one projection could then be used to illustrate only «
single phase, unless several different scales should be employed in the same
figure.
It now only remains for us to present 4 comparison of the elements
of the eclipse, as thus calculated, with their true values as determined
by modern astronomical science. This is done in the annexed table. The
‘true elements we take from the American Nautical Almanac for 1860. In
_ comparing the time of the middle of the eclipse, we take, as already mentioned, the value of it given by the Hindu process as calculated from mean
midnight.
Sarya-Siddbanta. Am. Naut. Almanac. Hindu error
Time of opposition in long., 0" 577 35° e.M. 9° 277 10'.8e.m. + 307 24°
Moon’s long. at opposition, 136° 21° 197° 35° 63°.7 — 1° 15
, hourly motion in long., 35’ 37” as’ O76 =- 2 24"
Semi-diameter of suo, 16’ 42” is’ 15".2 + a7"
‘Amount of obscuration, 1.33 0.812 . 0.518
Whole duration of eclipse, 3° 37" 44° 9* 52> 24° + 457 20°
25. ‘p. 177. Our next note 15 &
CALCULATION, ACCORDING TO Hixpu Data anp METHODS, OF THE POLAR
ek | Ecurpse or May 267TH, 1854,
FOR THE LATITUDE AND LONGITUDE oF WILLIAMS’ COLLEGE, WILLIAMSTOWN,
fs Mass.
As has been already mentioned in the closing note to the fifth chapter,
the following calculation of a solar eclipse was mainly made for the
ranslator, while in India, by his native assistant. Some additional calulations have been appended here by us, im order to render the whole
cess & more complete illustration of the rules as given in the text of our
| d to reject and replace certain parts. of the
of their inaccuracy. For the most part,
work as it was made, although involving some repetitions
: uperfluous, after the explanations and illusnotes and in the preceding ealeulation of u

es ca Cons <isehil rayon: entitled Solar end Lunar Eclipses
illustrated and explained, with the method of caleulating them,
ditbeding to the theory of Astronomy as. taught in New-England Co'leges ** |
(New York, 1845).
I. To find the sum of days (ahargana) from the ECE BOSEIARES of the
planetary motions to the time of calculation.
. The eclipse in question occurs at the close of the month Vaigakhe,
the second month of the luni-solar year, in the 1777th year of the era of
Célivdhana (see add. note 12). To compute, then, the number of whole
years, and to reduce them, with the remaining part of a year, to mean solar
day s, we proceed as follows:
Sandhj at the beginning of the kalpa, 1,728,000
‘Six mancentaras, 1,850,688,000
‘Twenty-seven mahdyugas on the seventh Manu, i116, 640,000
deduct the time spent in creation, 17,064,000
From creation to beginning of 28th mohdyuga, 1,951,992,000. es
. Krta yuga of 28th or current maldyuga, 1,728,000. -—
Dedpera yuga of e - $64,000 _
Kali yuga, to era of Calivibana, 3,179
Complete years clapsed of the cra, 1776
| ne,
From the creation to end of March, 1854, complete years, 1,055,884,055
to reduce to solar months, multiply by as 12
Solar months, ea. 23,470,619,460
add month of current year elapecd, . 1
Whole pumber of solar months, : 93,470,619,461
Now, to find the intercalary months, we make the proportion
Then, to . Beton |
Solar months elapsed, | — 93,470,619,461
add intercalary months, Se ee
‘. . eh a— any
Lunar months elapsed, : = 26,192,004, |
to reduce to lunar days, siltigts by L.A Site tO ae.

Appendiz 357
Farther, to find the number of tithikshayas, or omitted lunar days, im
this period, we say
Next, from
Lunar days clapeed, 725,760,124 8599
deduct omitted lunar days, 11 356,018 2
Mean solar days elapsed, ; «© 714,404 106,727.
This, then, is the required ‘ahargana, or. sium of ‘days from the com
mencement of the planetary motions to about the time of new moon d
May, 1854. The processes by which it is found are in all. respects the
same with those illustrated by us in the notes to i- 21-23, 24, 48, 48-51,
above. It will be noticed that the Hindu astronomer, at least when
working out an illustrative process, like the one in hand, scorns to make
use of any of the means for reducing the labor of computation which
the text directly or impliedly permits, and of which, in our own calculations, we have been glad to avail ourselves.
Il. ‘Yo ascertain the mean longitudes of the sun, the moon, the sun’s
apsis, the moon's apsis, and the moon's node, for mean midnight on the
Hindu meridian, at the given interval from the creation.
The amount of motion, since the creation, of the bodies named, in
their order, is found by the following series of proport ions :
Rejecting whole revolutions, and, in the case of the moon's node,
subtracting the fraction from a whole revolution, we have, 45 the mean
longitudes required : 7
Sun, i* 12° Lt Loe
Moon, 1 oF i D
Sun's apogee, g¢ 17° 17" 23°
The ‘Hindu ealeulator has taken, in the case of the moon’s apsis
rs and node, the numbers of revolutions. given by the text, omitting the
aawrection of the bija. We have not, in order to test the accuracy of
i ge “his arithmetical operations, worked over again the proportions, except-

Ee nd th Disa Sy nal of +e: oan s motion to be 12! | 480) —not
“enough to render any modification necessary.
, 115. ‘Yo ascertain the values of the same quantities at mean sunrise
on the equator, or 6 o ‘clock.
In order to this, we must add to each planet's longitude one fourth
the amount of its mean motion in a day. We require, then, the mean
daily motions. They are found as follows, taking the sun as an example:
We omit the other proportions and their results, as the latter have been
fully stated in the table of mean motions of the planets (note to} 1.29- 34}.
Adding a quarter of the daily motion, we have as follows:
oe
T ong. at midnight. Correction. Long. at sonziee. '
: Sun, Ptr ta cn ee Se Car | a | atl
IV. To ascertain the values of the same quantities at mean sunrise .
upon the equator, on the meridian of the given place.
Adopting 75° 50’ as the longitude of the Hindu meridian east ane
Greenwich, we have, as the interval in longitude of Williams” College
from it, 149° 2! 30°, which is equal to 24* 50" 2r. The lati! tude is
42° 42) 51°. We have, then, first, to determine the distance of the place
in question, upon its own parallel of latitude, from the Hindu meridian.
‘The equatorial circumference of the earth has been found above (note
to i. 59-60) to be 5059.64 yojanas. Its circumference upon the parallel of latitude of Williams’ College is found (i. 60) by the following proportion ;
The degdntara, or difference of longitude in yojanas, is then determined thus: ei
And the dec4ntaraphata, or correction for difference « of Shes ek
calculated from the daily motion of each body, Py. such” a ‘proportion 98 ;
the one subjoined, which gives the sun 's loci in | fe a = A = a ir
os ee ie. “et
sl ois ei «omit the otbar’p ‘Prope
1529 the following tablets.

Appendia 309
Bunrise at Lanka. Correction. Sunrise on giv. merid,
63-65) called attention to the excessively
ae We have already (note to i.
ss for making the correcLs awkward and ecumbrous character of this proce
wa tion for difference of meridian.
=v; To find the sun’s true longitude.
Popes" From the longitude of sun's apsis,
% deduct sun's mean longitude (ii. 29), 1° 12° 53’ 2S”
9 le §un"'s mean anomaly, 1° 4° 23° 55"
a"
. os ix sg
ya ag ™ ‘Sine,
nn” )
e diminution of the sun’s epicycle is now found by the following prot he dimensions 0 of the epicycle are,
ext, ‘the: proportion | ii. 39)
ne
: ce sun’s equation of the centre, which, by ii. 45, is additive.
Pe ee :
si _— : Sun's long itude 1° 12° 53’ 25"
aS tine ec ongitu 1° 14’ 11°
: ay “2 gun ‘as longitode, =>
Th is calculation exhibits a rather serious error: the sine of 34° 24’,
anomaly, is -1942/, not. 1927’. The final result, however, is not pérspt tibly modified by it: the equation ought to be 1° 14! 30", and the true
To fina d the moon’ ‘s true longitude.
a gitude of the moon "« apsia,
r : aca ta a: an longitude. L* 18° 29° 20"
D Dimi nes cy ss : | i’ 2
Dimensior . a 8 SL” 48° 68”
ons true longi v4 pe, ‘oa 4 wh 4
jek _« ae et . pa! + 7 =
a] = Ee Oo: i —. ty

i atid
gouenl
a e
* seh ge et a vie eC. } le 7
os (2 Vie eats os ue Artis daily Santinns of the sun 1 and moon.
er 7 The equations: of motion for the sun and moon have been found by
| "the calculator of the eclipse by the following proportion: as the whole
orbit of either planet is to its epicycle, | so is its mean daily motion to the
required equation. That is to say, for the sun,
which, by n. 49, is subtractive.
Again, for the moon,
Hence the sun’s true motion is 59! 8¢—
And the moon’s true motion is 7900’ 85"°—69' 36”, or 720’ 59".
These calculations are exceedingly incomplete and erroneous, 95 may
readily be seen by referring to the corresponding process in the other
eclipse, or to that given as an illustration in the note to ii, 47-49. The
actual value of the sun’s equation of motion, as fully calculated by the
method of ourc treatise, is only 1 51"; that of the moon is only 59/ 49":
whence the true motions are 57/ 17" and 731! 46” respectively. These
are elements of so much importance, and they enter so variously into the
after. operations, that we have hesitated as to whether it would not be
better to cancel the whole work of the Hindu calculator from this point
onward, and to perform it anew in a more exact manner; but we have finally
concluded to present the whole as it is, as a specimen—although, we hope,
not a favourable one—of native work; pointing out, at the same time, its
deficiencies, and cautioning against its results being accepted as the best
that the system is capable of affording.
We hove thus far found the true longitudes of the sun ancl ‘moonitfor
‘the moment of mean sunrise at the equator, upon the “meridian of the
given place. We desire now farther to find the same data for the 1oment
of sunrise upon the same meridian in latitude 42° 42’ 517 N.
VIII. ‘To find the longitudes of the sun and moon at sunrise in long.
_ To ealeulate the precession of the equinoxes (iil. 9-12).
The proportion , t
gives us the amount of the motion of the equinox in its own circle of
libratory revolution, since the beginning of things. Rejecting complete
revolutions, and deducting 6 from the fraction of a revolution, we » have
the distance of the equinox from the origin « of the sidereal sphere, in terms
of its. own revolution, as 67° ay) 22" =I three !

Appendix S61
® ‘To calculate the sun's declination.
Sun's longitade, 1° 14° 7’ 39”
Precession, 2° 19° 36”
Sun‘s distonce from vernal equinox, Q* 4° 27°15"
Sine, S101"
Then, by ii. 28,
the sun's declination 1s therefore 21° 31’ 8”.
8 To calculate the sun’s ascensional difference.
The radius of the sun’s diurnal circle (dyujya—ii, 60) is 8199".
The equinoctial shadow in the given latitude is 114.07, being found
by the proportion (iit. 17)
cos lat. : sin lat.::goom. : eq. Shad.
or
Again, to find the earth-sine (kujyd—il. 61),
And, to find the sine of ascensional difference,
The corresponding are is 91° 19, or 1279’; and since a minute of are
is equivalent to a respiration of time, the sun’s ascensional difference in
time is 1279P, or 213°, or 3° 35", rejecting the odd respiration.
4. To ealeulate the length of the sun's day.
The sun being in the third sign, of which the equivalent in right
ascension (iil. 42-45) is 1935°, the excess of his day over 60 nadis is found
by the proportion
whence the length of his day is 21, 663°.
In this calculation of the length of the sun's day, the operator has
taken the mean, instead of the true, motion of the sun, which ts obviously
less accurate, and which is contrary to the meaning of the rule of the
text (ii. 69), as explained by the commentator.
Now, in order to find the difference between the sun’s longitude at
sunrise on the equator and sunrise on the givet: parallel of north latitude.
we make a proportion, as follows: ‘¢ in his whole day the sun moves an
ine 46

Stirya-Siddhdanta
amount equal to his daily motion, how much will he move during an interval
corresponding to his ascensional difference? or
“The sun’s declination being north, sunrise on the given parallel preeedes sunrise on the equator, and hence this result—which is celled the
carakalds, ** minutes (kald) of longitude corresponding to the ascensional
difference (cara)"’—is to be subtracted from the sun’s longitude as formerly
found. ‘That is to say,
Sun's longitude at epuatorial sunrise, 1* 14° 7’ 3”
deduet the correction (carakalds), §’ 3h"
Sun's longitude at sunrise, lat. 42” 42° 51” N.., } 1* 14* 4’ 10"
long. 149° 2° 30° W. from Lanka,
In finding the corresponding value of the moon's longitude we apply
first a correction for the sun's equation of place; it is, in fact, the equation
of time, calculated after the entirely insufficient method which we have
already fully exposed, in connection with part V of the preceding process. +
The proportion is (ii. 46) as follows:
Here, again, bad is made worse by taking as the second term of the
proportion the moon's mean, instead of her true, rate of motion. It is to
be noticed that a like correction should have been applied also to the sun’s ©
longitude, but was omitted by the calculator, We have, then,
Moon's longitude, mean equatorial suoriee, 1° 21° 16’ 20"
add the correction for the equation of time, - 2 43"
Moons longitude, trae equatorial sunrise, 1° 21° 19’ 3”
Now we apply farther the correction for the sun's ascensional difference (carasanskdra); it ia caleulated in the same manner with that of the
sun, and its amount is found to be 47’ 51".
Moon's longitude, true equatorial sunrise, 1° 21° 19 3”
deduct the correction for the sun's aac. diff, 47° 51”
Moon's longitude st sunniec, lat. 42° 42° G1” N., 1° 20° 31’ 12”
long. 149° 2° 30° W. from Lanké,
On comparing the longitudes of the sun and moon, as thus determined,
it ig seen that the time of conjunction is already past, Hence the calculation is carried a day backward, by subtracting from the longitude of each
body its motion during a day. That is to say,

Appendix 863
Longitude, “ae Longitude,
sunrise following eclipse. days motion. onrise preceding eclipse.
his is an entirely uncalled-for, and a highly inaccurate proceeding,
By the rule given in our text (ii. 66), it is just as casy and regular a process
to fihd from any given time the interval to the beginning of the current
lunar day by reckoning backward, as that to the end of the day by reckoning
forward. And to assume that the whole calculation may be transferred
from one sunrise back to the preceding by simply deducting the amount of
motion in a day as determined for the former time is to take a most unwarrantable liberty, and to ignore the change during the interval of many
of the elements of the calculation, as the sun’s and moon's rates of motion,
the sun’s declination and ascensional difference, etc. In makiag the
‘transfer, moreover, the longitude of the moon's node has been taken as
found for mean equatorial sunrise, without any correction for the equation
of time, or for the sun's ascensional difference.
IX. ‘To find the time of true conjunction, and the longitudes of th
sun, moon, and moon’s node at that time. By ii. 66, from the
‘Moon's true longitude, 1 Fw 13"
~ deduct the sun’s do., 1°18? 728
ee
remains tl’ 25° 22’ 55”
divide by the portion of a lunar day, 720°
the quotient is
deduct the remainder from a whole portion, 720°
This process shows us that the moon has still 277! 5” to gain upon
the sun, in order to arrive aut the end of the thirtieth or last day of the
St ee, aret ‘ << . ~
lunar month, or at conjunction with the sun.
: a Moon's true daily motion, 720° 59”
eect deduct the sun’s do., meget
ns daily gain in longitude, FRE A
1e time of conjunction, reckoned from sunrise, as 25" 2°
anes eee ee 7

Stirya-Siddhanta
Now, by iv. 8, we proceed to find the longitudes for that time. The
amounts of motion during 25° 2" are found by the following proportions :
Then, to the
Suns longitude at sunrise, TOES Eli fae te
add the correction, a4’ 43"
Sun's longitude sot conjunction,
| ai Eales} GA ng
Moon's longitude at sunrise, 1* 8 30’ 13"
add the correction, 5° 9 48”
Moon's longitude at conjunction, 1° 18°31" 1”
Node's longitude at sunrise, 1* 12° 19" 14"
deduct the correction, 1” 19”
Node’s longitude at conjunction, 1* 19° 47° 55”
The mode of proceeding adopted by us above, in the lunar eclipse,
for finding the time of the middle of the eclipse, and the longitudes of
the sun and moon at that time, is, as will not fail to be observed, quite
different from that of the native calculator of this eclipse. That followed
by Davis, or his native assistants (As. Res., ii. 273 etc.), varies considerably
from both. Our own method, though varying in some respects from that
contemplated by the text, is a not less legitimate application of its general
methods than either of the others, und it possesses this important advantage
over both, that we were sble to verify it, and to show, by calculating the
mean and true places for the given instant, that the latter was actually the
one at which the system made the opposition of the sun and moon to take
place: while, on the contrary in the process now in hand, so many errors
have been involved, that, were the same test to be applied, we should find
the centres of the sun and moon many minutes apart at the moment fixed
upon as that of conjunction, end the place of conjunction as far removed
from the point of longitude above determined for it.
X. To find the apparent diameters of the sun and moon.
hese quantities are determined by means of the following proportion ;
as the mean daily motion in yojanas is to the mean diameter in yojanas, 80
is the true motion in minutes to the true diameter in minutes. Thut is to
say, for the sun and moon respectively,

Appendiz 365
This method is in appearance quite different from that which is prescribed by our text (iv. 2-3), but it is in fact only a simplification, oF reduction, of the rules there given. Thus, for the moon, the text gives
mmol, in minutes : true mot. in min. ;: m.diam. in yoj.: true diam. in min. x 15
‘Transposing, now the middle terms, transferring the factor 15 from the
fourth term to the first, and noting that the mean motion in minutes, when
multiplied by 15, gives the value of the same in yojanas, we have the former
proportion, namely,
m. mot. in yoj. : m. diam. in yoj. :: true mot. in min. + true diam, in mun.
Again, in the case of the sun, the rules of the text give
m. mot, in iin. + true mot. in min. :: m. diam. im yoj, : true diam. in yo}.
end true diam. in yoj-=true diam. im min. x15x (sun's orbit+moon's orbit)
Now transposing the second and third terms of the proportion, sub.
stituting for the fourth its equivalent as here stated, and transferring to
the first term the last two factors of that equivalent, we have
gun's orbit —
moon's orbit
“But the first term, as thus constructed, is, by the method of determination
of the planetary orbits (see xii. 81-83), equal to the sun’s mean daily motion
upon his orbit reckoned in yojanas: hence the proportion becomes for the
sun, as for the moon,
m. mot. in yoj. : m. diam. in yo}. : : true mot in moin. : true diam. in min.
tm. Mot. ip min. * 1s * - m. d. io y. =: true mot. in min. : trae diam. in min.
o X1. To calculate the parallax in longitude (lambana), and the time
of apparent conjunction (v. 3-9).
- 1. To find the orient ecliptic-point (lagna) at the moment of true conjunction (iii. 46-48). 3
In order to this, we require to have first the equivalents in oblique
ascension (udaydsavas) of the several signs of the zodiac for the latitude
of Williams’ College, 42° 42) 51". N. We present annexed their values
as employed by the calculator of the eclipse, and also 4s calculated by
ourselves according to the method taught in our text (iii. 42-49). It will
be noticed that the differences are not snconsiderable, and evince much
carelessness on the part of the native astronomer; who, moreover, omploys
; yiniadis only in his processes, rejecting the odd respirations, which i aD
| inaccuracy not countenanced by the Sarya-Siddbinta.
Equivalent in oblique ascension :
| ace.
acc, to calculator. to Us.
1008" 12th esge
16wv" Oth =v
S171" Cth

3866 Stirya-Siddhdanta
The equivalents assigned by the Hindu calculator to the 3rd and 4th
signs are moreover, it may be remarked, inconsistent with one another,
since the one ought to fall short of 1935r by as much as the other exceéds
that quantity.
Now, then, to the
Sun's longitude at conjunction, i* 18". 81" 1"
add the precession, 20° 19° 36"
Sun‘s distance from the equinox, 2° 3 60’ 37”
It appears, accordingly, that the sun is in the 3rd sign, and 26° 9 23”
from the beginning of the fourth. Hence the proportion (i. 46)
give us 250° as the ascensional equivalent of the purt of a sign to be
traversed (bhogydsavas). ‘The time of the day, or the sun's distance in
time from the eastern horizon, is 259 2°, or 1502*. Then, from the
Time of conjunction, Litra"
deduct asc, equiv. of part of Grd sign, 251)"
remains 1252°
deduct asc. equiv, of 4th, Sth, and 6th sigos, 1134"
remains 118°
This remainder of time, or of ascension, is reduced to its value in are
of the ecliptic by the proportion (iii. 49)
Add this result to the whole signs preceding, and the longitude of the
orient ecliptic-point (lagna) is found to be Ge 9° 7 25": its sime fs 544’
(mere correctly, 545’).
2. ‘To find the orient-sine (udayajya—vy. 3).
This is found by the proportion
2525! being the cosine of the latitude, and 1397’ the sine of the inclination
of the ecliptic (ii. 28).
3. To find the meridian ecliptic-point (madhyalagna—iit. 49).
In order to this, we must first know the sun's hour-angle (nufa), or
distance in time from the meridian; it is determined as follows:
A quarter of the complete day,
add the son's asccensionsl difference,
The sun's half-day
deduct from time of conjunction, ° 25" 3°
Son's hour-angle, west, 6* 20°

s Appendix 367
x ¥: ; : ee sun's” distance from the beginning of the fourth sign was found
ed a, ‘be 26° 9! 287. Its equivalent in right ascension (lankodaydsavas)
ig found by the following proportion (iii. 49) :
Now, from the
‘ - | Sun's hour-angle. 6° 29", or 389"
mia _ deduct the result of the last proportion, 285°
£ . remains 104".
<e
s and ‘this ; remainder, being less than the equivalent of a sign, is reduced
eh to its value as longitude by the proportion (iii, 48)
The longitude of the meridian ecliptic-point is accordingly 3* 9° 3! 57".
ay ‘its sime i is 3893. a
=.) Ce In criticism of the process as thus conducted, we would only remark
“that th 1e Satay of the sun’s day should have been called 15° Qr iP (see
© ae vat ; . 4), and that to take 328° as the equivalent in right ascension
“of the third: ua fourth agus ‘< inaccurate, the value given it by our treatise
Pe ao
poe Seay or 8224%. -
_ Tot find the meridian-sine (madhyajyé—v. 4-5).
Se rat, the declination of the meridian ecliptic-point is determined by
Sy he prpattion Gl 28)
: value being north, it ig deducted from the latitude of the place for
w lah ¢ the calculation is made, since this, though by us reckoned as north,
o the | Hindu apprehension (iti. 14) always south, being measure south
he zenith to the equator. That is to say,
: x given. latitude, 42" 42° 51”
du i? of merid, ecliptic-poimnt, 23° 39° 37”
Ga Na
Meridian sanith-distance (natdngds), 19” 3 14
e sine 2 of this care, which is 1117, is the meridian-sine.
e is another blunder of the calculator; the sine of 19° 3! 14% is
To find the sine of ecliptic senith-distance (drkkshepa), and the sine
scliptic-al er ti).
ptic-altitude ( rgge
Se Firs t, by v. 5,
ls

— Sétrya-Siddhant
—-s 7, ? ta a" ra iach tee =" = 7 awe
ss‘ This, then, is the sine of ecliptic zenith-distance. The sine of e-liptic-
— altitud : is found by subtracting its square from that of radius, and taking
the square-root of the remainder; it is found to be 8253’.
Ny ey S To find the divisor (cheda), and the sun's parallax in longitude
(lambana).
The sine of one sign, or 30°, is 1719’.
Square of sin 30°,
divide by 5,253
Divisor (cheda), 908
Next, to find the interval on the ecliptic between the sun's place and
the meridian :
Longitude of meridian ecliptic-point, 3* 9° 3° 57”
Interval in longitude, a* 6° 19 20”
Of this the sine is 1950’, and, upon dividing it by 908, the divisor
(cheda) above found, the value of the parallax in longitude (lambana) is
ascertained to be 2* 21°.
Here is some of the worst blundering which we have yet met with.
The sine of 35° 15’ is actually 1982’, not 1950’; and upon dividing it by
908, we find the quotient to be only 2" 11".
The calculator assumes the time of apparent conjunction to be determined ‘by this single correction. As the text, however (v. 9), directs that
the process be repeated, to insure a higher degree of accuracy, we shall
finally quit at this point the guidance of his computations, and yo on to
apply in full the rules of the Sdirya-Siddhanta.
The sun being west of the meridian, or his longitude being less than
that of the meridian ecliptie-point (v. 9), the correction for paratlax is
additive to the time of true conjunction. Hence, to the
Time of troe conjunction, 25° af
add the correction, 2° i
Time of conjunction once equated, a7* 13°
For the time thus found, we now proceed to calculate again the value
of the parallax. The results of the caleulation are briefly
below : /,

~ vet ectiptic.point (madhwalada), a* 91° oo
z! Its declination, Po os! Me
Its zenith-distance, 0° 24’ a.
Meridian-sine (madhyajy4), 107° é
Pott Sine of ecliptic zenith-distance (drkkshepa), =p plc
| Sine of eccliptic-altitude (drggats), 9228" .
Divisor (chedo), ous’
Sine of sun's dist. in long. from meridian, 2556
‘Parallax in longiude (lambana)}, 2* 48°
add to time of true conjunction, 25° 2°
Time of conjanction twice equated,
7 - Once more, we repeat the same calculation; its principal results sre
as follows : .
i=
. Pa . Orlent ectiptie-point 6* at” 41’
ent sine, jor
Meridian ecliptic point, g* 95° 2
Meridian-sine, — 1241"
‘a Hine of ecliptic zenith-distance, 121s
a Bine of ecliptic-altitude, ne
ink | Divisor, a9
Fy Parallax in longitade, a* 56°
* ai add to of true conjunction, 23" 2°
, oh es Raat mand ——
pe j ‘Time of apparent conjunction.
ee A farther repetition of the process would still yield an appreciable
, but as sO many errors have been involved in the preceding
tness of result unattainable,
method of correction by
and the comparative value of the results it yields,
here, and rest content with the last time obtained, as that of the
unction of the sun and moon, or of the middle of the eclipse,
: ses ent conjunctio
=" xu. 1. To ¢ caloulate the parallax in latitude
“This Seaman (v. 10)
2 sine of ecliptic genith-distance, as found in the last
xt he calculation as to render any exac
ou gh has | been done to illustrate the
(nati) for the middle of
eT. ec,
aioe latitude, and her apparent latitude,

370° a oe ss
my pi w eee to Pe the Tongitade of the moon, and that of her
‘pode, for the moment of apparent conjpunction, by adding to their © longia. as already found (above, IX) for the time of true conjunctioa. their
_ motion during 2" 65°. The amount of motion is found by the proportions
ty
aioe
Now, then, to the
Moons longitude at true conjunction, 1° 13° $1’ 1”
add the correction, 35” 3”
Moon's longitude at apparent conjunction, 1° 14° G6’ 4”
Farther, frorn the e
-Nede’s longitude at true conjunction, 1" 12° 47° 55”
deduct the correction, 9”
Node’s longitude at apparent conjunction , 1° 12° 47" 46”
deduct from moon's longitude, i? eo. é
Moon's distance from node, 1° 18° 18”
Sine, is
Hence the proportion (11. 57)
gives us the
Moon's true latitude, 5 8" N.
deduct from parallax in latitude (v. 12), 17” 14” 8.
Moon's apparent latitude, 1’ 6"°8
, XIV. To find the amount of obscuration (grdsa) at the moment of
apparent conjunction
By iv. 10, we add to the
Diameter of the eclipsing body, the moon, a9 «2
Diameter of the eclipsed body, the sun, 31° 10" |
Sum of diameters, — 60° 12” |
Half-sum of diameters, |
deduct moon's apparent latitude, — ar tie
Amount of greatest obscuration, | 19° «(0” .
This remainder being less than the sun's diameter, a. eclipse Gv 1) a:
poesia nly: = | ie Ry Sb bigger. at
oie iz ar A. ots 3 i | a
ilo is, ale. - ee 16H fie att es Ss ™ ‘a ‘4 ail ad ¥ SY pen OG
‘a

a ene
Appendi« 371
XV. To determine the times of the beginning and end of the eclipse
respectively. .
As the eclipse is a partial one only, we have not to calculate the times
of the beginning and end of total obscuration; and indeed, we may well
suppose that the Hindus would never venture to calculate those times
in a solar eclipse: it is even questionable whether the accuracy of their
methods would justify them in ever predicting with confidence that an
eclipse would be total.
In the first place, we assume that the moon's apparent latitude, as caleulnted for the moment of conjunction, remains unchanged during the
whole duration of the eclipse, and calculate, by iv. 12-13, what would
be, upon that assumption, the interval between the middle of the eclipse
and either contact or separation of the disks. That is to say (iv. 12),
from the
Square of sum of semi-diameters (30° 6"), 906" 1”
deduct square of moon's latitude (11’ 6"), 123° 13°
remains, 782° 45”
Square root of remainder, 97° 59°
This result represents the distance, as rudely determined, of the two
centres at the moments of contact and separation. To ascertain the
corresponding interval of time, we say (iv. 13)
Now, then, from and to the
Time of apparent conjunction, 27° 57°
subtract and add the half duration, 2° 33"
Beginning of eclipse, 25~ 25°
End of eclipse, g0° 29°
‘his is as far as the operation was carried by the native calculator,
and with data and results somewhat different from those here given,
owing to his neglect to repeat the process of determination of the parallax in longitude in finding the time of apparent conjunction. Unfortunately, however, the text (iv. 14-15; v. 13-1%) prescribes a long
and tedious series of modifications and corrections of the results so far
obtained, of which we shall proceed to perform at least enough to illustrate the method of the process, and the comparative importance of the
corrections which it furnishes.
We have first to find the longitude of the sun, moon, and node, at
the moments thus determined as those of contact and separation; they
aro aa followa: Sal

a a et ee :
“ a r hy
P
Te add f or bit 8B’ 1”
| » , Fi : eters Curae —_—_—_
te eed ieee at Pier mae end of eclipse, ‘1* 18" 81’ 23” = =§ 1° 13° 36’ 11”
per «nai Oe add the precession, 20° 19 36” 20° 19° 36" es
y¥ Ban’ a distance from the vernal equinox, ‘g@* 3° 60° 60” 3° 3° 65’ 47” 47"
Moon's long. at app. conj., Re 2A: O '4% « 0° UE? GE a”
subtract and add motion in 2” 82°, 30° 26” 80’ 26”
Moon's long. at beg. and end of éclipee, 1° 13° 35’ 38” 1* 14° 36’ 30”
add and subtract, we 38> 8"
Nodes long. at beg. and end of eclipse, 1* 12° 47’ 54” ~=1* -:12” 47’ 38”
To find, then, the moon's true latitude at contact and separation, we
have
Moon's distance from node, 47" 44" 1° )6«648’ 62" ©
Moon's latitade, 3° 46" N. 6’ 34" N.
Next are calculated the moon's parallax m latitude, and her apparent
latitude, at the beginning and end of the eclipse, by a process of which
the main results are the following: ,;
Orient ecliptic-point, 6° 10° 23° 7° 3° 59 =
Sine, :
Orient-sine,
Sun's hour-angle,
Meridian ecliptic-point,
Sine of do.,
Zenith-distance of do.,
Meridian sine,
Sine of ecliptic zenith-distance,
Parallax io latitude,
deduct true latitude,
Moon's apparent lat, at beg. and end of eclipse,
Finally, from the
Square of sum of semi-diameters,
deduct squares of app. latitude,
romain,
Distance of centres in longitude,
Corresponding interval,
Corrected times of beginning and end i. —
would be quite oe oecubie ad, indeed,
cases cases, that already obtained. In making t
é have not followed with exactness the

Appendia 373
under v. 14-17. It is there taught that, after making the first rough
determination of the half-duration, based upon the moon's apparent latitude at apparent conjunction, we must turn back to the true conjunction,
find the positions of the planets and node at intervals of the half-duration from that point, and make these positions the data of our farther
approximative processes. The text itself, as already remarked by us
in the notes, shows an utter and provoking want of explicitness with
regard to the whole matter, and may be regarded as favoring equally
the method of the commentary, our own, or any other that might be
devised. We have taken our own course, then, because we were
unable to see any sufficient reason for reverting from apparent to true
conjunction as directed by the commentator.
With regard to the next steps, the language of the text is less ambiguous: it distinctly orders us to deduct from and add to the time of true
conjunction (tithyanta) the intervals found as the former and latter halfduration, and from the moments thus determined to compute anew, by
a repeated process, the parallax in longitude. This is a very laborious
operation, and not altogether accurate, although perhaps as much 80
as any which the Hindu methods admit. As we are supposed to have
already ascertained how far apart the two centres must be at the mo-
" ments of contuct and separation, the problem is, evidently, to determine
at what moment of time they will, allowing for the parallax in longitude, be at that distunce from one another. Now as formerly, to find the
time of apparent conjunction, we started from that of true conjunction,
and arrived at the desired result by a series of approximative calculations of the parallax in longitude, so now, starting from points removed
from true conjunction by the given intervals, we shall ascertain, by 4
similar series of approximations, the times when the distances represented by those intervals will be apparent, or the moments to which
contact and separation of the disks will be deferred by parallax in longitude. The results of the calculations, as made by us, are as follows:
-— A Time of true conjunction, 95" 2" o5° 9°
pata . subtract and add, g- 29° 9* 32°
5 ‘Times of truetcontract and separation, 22° 33° 27" 34°
| Sun's longitude, with precession, 2° 3° 48° 16” 9° 3°53" 1”
: Orient ecliptic-point, 5° 97° 2° 6° 20° 27°
| Orient-sine, 95° 664"
‘Meridian eoliptic-point, 2° 25° 62’ 3° 23° 56’
“Maridian-sine, y 1107" 1226
- Sine of ecliptic zenith distance, 1106" 1203
' Gine of ecliptic-altitade, 9255 3219
Moon's longitude, Q* 3° 91’ 2° 4° 21
< - Distance from meridian ecliptic-point, ga” 31’ 1* 19° 30’
Parallax in longitude, 1* 27° a* 61°
. aah rlive @

eral in the mode nore has eeaiy been Fathislantly fiiswteatea:
Annexed are the results only :
e ‘Times of contact and separatior, | 22" 33° Qi" 4"
add correction for parallax, 1" 9T° -g* 61°
Times of contact and separation, once equated, 4° O° 80" 25°
Corresponding parallax, 1* 54° 8" 20°
add to times firet obtained, aa" n3° a7" a4"
Times of contact and separation, twice equated, 24° 97° 30" 54" -
Corresponding parallax, 2" 2° 3° 24°
Without taking the trouble to carry the calculations any farther, we
may accept these as the finally determined values of the parallax in
longitude at the times of apparent contact and separation. Then,
Parallax in longitude at contact and separation, g°. ‘9° 3° 24"
do. at apparent conjunction, 2° 55° 2° 65°
Difference of parallaxes, 63° 29°
add to former and latter mean half-duration, Q°" 29° 9° 32°
True former and latter balf-duration, 3° 22" Br ake
subtract and add from and to time of app. conj., 97° 57° 97° 57°
Times of apparent contact and separation, 24°" 35° 30° 5B"
The calculation of the elements of the eclipse is thus completed.
For the purpose, however, of illustrating the rules of the text (iv. 18-21)
for determining, in the case of a solar eclipse, the amount of obsecuration at any given moment during the continuance of the eclipse, we add
also the following process:
XVI. To find the amount of obscuration of the sun, 2" 38° after
first contact.
We make choice of this time, which is equivalent to 27* 13° after sun-—
rise, because the data for finding the parallax in latitude at the moment
have already been calculated (see above, XI). By iv. 18, from the
True former half-duration (sphula eparcasthityardha), 3° 22° Ral
deduct given interval, 2 as°
Interval to apparent conjuction (madhyag rahawe), 4
‘To reduce this interval in time to distance in longitude of the centres,
> any ian 7S
ye ec (iv. 18) : | 2 eat atl. :

vr
pare NN
It
Appendix 375
This, then, would be the interval in longitude between the two centres
at the given moment, if there were no change of the moon's parallax
in longitude during the eclipse, or if the moon actually gained in
Qe 29°, instead of in 3" 22°, the distance intervening between her centre
and the sun’s at the moment of first contact. That, however, being
not the case, we must reduce the result thus found in the ratio of
Ba 22° to 2" 20°, or of the true to the mean half-duration. That is to
say (iv. 19),
and this result, 5’ 59%, is the true distance of the two centres in longltude, 27° 13° after sunrise.
A briefer and more obvious method of obtaining the quantity in
question would have been to make a proportion as follows: if, at the
time of the eclipse, the moon gains upon the sun 27! 20” in 3* 22",
what will she gain during 44°? or
Upon computation, we find the
Moons parallax in latitude, 27" 13° after sunriee, 16° 51°S8.
Moon's true latitude, 5° 25°N.
Moon's apparent latitude, 11° 26”
Its square, igo’ 43"
- Square of distance in longitude (5° 5%”), 35° 59”
Their sur (iv, 20), 166° 34"
Actual distance of centres, 12° 54”
deduct from sum of semi-diameters, 30° 6”
Amount of obscuration at given time, 17° 12”
‘If it were desired to project the eclipse, we should now have ta
ealculate (by iv. 24-25) the deflection (valana) for the moments of contact,
conjunction, and separation, and likewise (by iv. 26) the scale of projection. As we do not. however, intend to present here a projection, and as
the subject of the deflection has been sufficiently illustrated already, in
the notes upon the text and in the calculation of the lunar eclipse, we regard it as unnecessary to go through with the labor required for making
the computations in question. Finally, we annex, as in the case of the
lunar eclipse formerly calculated, a summary comparison of the principal results of the Hindu processes with the elements of the eclipse in
uestion as determined by Prof. Coffin, in his work referred to above
must be borne in mind, however, that, owing to the faulty manner in
ch many of the computations of the native astronomer have been

baka. E ; tary ! :
: S Warge' staat
ig ry the comparison is not entirely trustworthy ; a more careful adherence to the methods of the Siddhanta would have given somewhat
different results: in the case of the daily motions of the sun and moon,
‘the true calculations, az performed by us (see p. 360), give more correct
values: in other instances, the contrary might perhaps have been the
case.
Strys-Siddbinta. Prof. Coffis. Hindao error.
Time of true conjunction in longitude, Q* 30" 3° 56" — 1* 26°
Sun's and moon's longitude, 63° 50’ 37” 65° 12’ 37” — 1° 29’
Moon's distance from node, 43’ 6” 4° 12” 22” — 3° 29 16”
Sun’s daily motion in longitude, 66’ 52" 87’ 46" - 53”
Sun's apparent diameter, 31° 10" 31’ 37” - 37”
Time of apparent conjunction, 3* 407 5* 32" — 1" 62"
Parallax in longitude, in time, 1* 10" 1786. - 26™
Amount of greatest obscuration, 19’ 30’ 59” — = 11’ 59”
Time of first contact, 2* 90" 4* 15° — 1" 55” ;
—Time of separation, 4" 6507 6* 38" — 1* 48"
Duration of eclipse, 2° 30 9* 23" - M bs
26. pp. 211-230. Prof. Weber, of Berlin, has favored us in a_private communication with a number of additional synonyms of the names
of the asterisms, derived from the literature of the BrAhmana period.
Mrgaciras, the fifth of the series is also styled andhakd, ** the blind,’’
apparently from its dimmess; dryikd, ‘‘ honorable, worthy; ‘’ invakd, of
doubtful meaning: this latter epithet is also found in some manuscripts
of the Amarakoca, as various reading for ilvald, which is there expressly declared (I. i. 2. 25) to designate the stars in the head of the
antelope. |
Ardra, the sixth asterism, is called béhu, ** arm.’’ Taking this name
in connection with that of the preceding group, it seems probable that
the Hindus figured to themselves the conspicuous constellation Orion
as a running antelope, of which a, y, @, and « mark the feet: a, then, is
the left fore-foot, or arm. Perhaps the name Mrgavyidha, “e antelopehunter,"’ given to the neighbouring Sirius (viii. 10), is connected with the
same fancy.
The Magh4s are called in a hymn of the last book of the Rig Veda
(x. 85. 18) aghés: the word means titerally * evil, base, sinful,"” ond its”
application to one of the asteriams is 50 strange that, if not found elseWhere, we should be inclined to conjecture a corrupted reading. a eS
Phalguni, or the Phalgunis, forming the eleventh. and twelfth grout 1
no, aon py led also arjuni, ‘* bright, shining.’’ is
y | Qravana, the twenty-third | asterism, recetves |
is ‘properly that t of a tree, the Ficus religions;
at Te,
ry name eee,

' Appendiz 377
Bhadrapad&, the last double asteriam, ‘s called pratishthana, ~ stand,
support,’’ in evident allusion to the disposition of the four bright stars
which compose it, like the four feet of a stand, table, bedstead, or the like.
27. p. 231. We offer herewith the stellar chart to which reference
was made in the note on p. 236, and which is intended to illustrate the
positions and mutual relations of the Hindu nakshatrox, the Arab
mandazil al-kamar, and the Chinese sieu. We add a brief explanation
of the manner in which it has been constructed, and the form in which
it is presented.
The form of the map is that of a plane projection, having the ecliptic
as its central line. It would have better illustrated the Hindu method
of defining the positions of the junction-stars, and the errors of the positions as defined by them, if the equator of A.D. 560, instead of the
ecliptic, had been made the central line of the projection. This, however, would have involved the necessity of eelculating the right sascension and declination of every star laid down, 4% labor which we were not
willing to undertake. Moreover, the ecliptic is, in fact, the proper central line alone which the groups of the Hindu and Arab systems, at
least, are arranged, and the form given to the chart also facilitates the
laying down of the equator of B.C. 2850, which we desired to add. for
the purpose of enabling our readers to “judge in a more enlightened
manner of the plausibility of M. Biot’s views respecting the origin of
the Chinese system: it is drawn with a broken line, while the equator
of A.D. 560 is also represented, by an entire line. As the zone of the
‘heavens represented is, in the ma‘n, that bordering the ecliptic, the istances and the configuration of the stare are altered and distorted by
the plane projection to only a very slight degree, not enough to be of any
account in a merely illustrative chart, such as this is. As a general rule,
we have laid down all the stars of the first four magnitudes which are
situated near the ecliptic, or im that part of the heavens through which
the line of the asterisms passes; stars ef the fourth to fifth magnitude
are also in many cases added; smaller ones arc noted only when they
enter into the groups of the several systems, or when there were other
special reasons for introducing them. The positions are in all cases
aken from Flamsteed’s Catalogue, and the magnitudes are also for the
part from the same authority: in many individual cases, however,
authorities. We have endeavored so to mark
three different series that these may readily be
acl but, to assure and facilitate the comparison, we
ace upon the page opposite it a conspectus of the nomenclature,
| titution, and correspondence of the three systems, referring to
gr s 211-280 for a fuller discussion of these matters, and an exposition
wha is certain, and what more or less hypothetical, or exposed to

ss Hindu asterism.
- ~ 1. Agvinl.
_ —- Band »y Arietis.
2, Bharant.
35, 39, and 41 Arietia,
~S. Kyttika.
7 Tauri,-c'c. (Pleiades).
4. Rohiof.
a, 8, y, 5. « Tauri.
5, Myrgagiras.
A, @*, @* Orionie.
6. Ardea.
a Orionis.
. Punarvasu.
B, a Geminorum.
ushya.
@, 3, y Canecri.
. Agtesh&.
F Magha.
Porva-phalguntf.
8, @ Leonia.
. Uttara-Pbhalgusl.
8, 93 Leonis.
Hasts.
8. y, ¢, a, B Cervi.
. Citrh.
a Virginis.
. Swati.
a Bootis.
. Vigdkba.
s, vy, 8, a Lobre.
Anuridbi.
8, 8, « Scorpionia.
J yeahthsa, ¢, 7 Scorpions.
. Mala.
« Leonia.
A,v, x. 6,9, 9, Cm. © Beorp.
Parvea-Ashaglha,
&, « Sagittarii.
Utiara-AshAdha.
a, ¢ Sagittarii.
Abhijit.
a, «, € Lyre.
23. Gravape ]
a, BL Aquila.
24. Qraviahtha.
A, a, y, 8 Delphini.
25. Qatabhisha:. |
A Aquarii, cote.
26. Pdrva-Bhidrapads.
Sirja Nddhitla
Arab manzil.
ash-Sbaratin.
B and y Arietis.
al-Butain,
35, 39 and Al Arietia.
ath-Thuraiyd,
7 Tauri, etc. (Pleiades).
ad-Dabaran.
e, 0, Ve 8, e Tauri.
al-Hak"gh,
A, @, o* Orionis,
« al. Bin'ab.
4, #, *, y, € Geminorum.
adh.Dhir’,
8, a Geminorum.
. an-Nathrah,
y. 8 Cancri, and Prawsepe.
at-Tarf.
€ Cancri, A Leonis.
. aj Jabbah,
a,», ¥, ¢ Leonis.
az-Zubrah,
5, @ Leonis.
: ag-Sarfah.
B’ Leonis.
al-Auwéi.,
A. n, ¥, 3. © Virginis.
as-Simak.
a Virginis.
al-Ghafr.
i, x, A Virginia.
. a2#-Zubbnin.
«a, B Libre.
. ol-Tkifl.
8, 3, # Scorpicnis.,
. al-Kalb,
a ‘Beorpionia.
aeh-Shaulah.
A, v Beorpionis.
an-Na Gim.
ul-Baldah.
N. of wr Sagittarii.
Ba'd adh-Dhibib.
a, B Capricorni.
Sa"d Bula.’
*, w, » Aquarii,
Bad as.8udd.
B, g Aquarii.
Ba‘d al-Akhbiyah,
o. Ts ¢. W ‘Aquarii.
. ol. Pa
a, B ‘ege
27. — al Makhir,
ff y aA
bh al-Mukdim.
Chinese sieu,
27. Leu.
8 Arictis,
28. Os«i
35 Arietis
1. Mao.
» Tauri.
« Tauri.
3. Tse,
A Orionisa,
4. Tsan,
8 Orionis.
5. Tsing.
a Geminorum.,
6. Kuei.
® Caneri,
7. Lieu.
8 Hydre.
8. Sing:
| ae Hydra.
9. Chang.
v' Hydre.
a Crateris.
11. Chin.
7 Corvi,
12. Bio,
a Virginia.
13. Kang.
« Virginia.
a* Libre.
16. Fang.
# Scorpionis.
16, Sin.
# Scorpionis,
17. Uei.
u* Scorplonis.
, 7* Sagittarii.
19, Teu.
@ Eugittarii.
20. Nieuw,
8 Capricorn
« Aquarii.
sf Aquarii.
23. Goei.
_ @ Aquarii
. Che. |
= Pegasi,
AD 2 eS te
gE rs

SE te -
- Appendix 879
’8. p..289. We have perhaps expressed ourselves in a manner liable
to misconstruction as to the want of reason or authority for giving to
the asterisms the name of ‘* lunar mansions,"* “* houses of the moon,’’ and
the like. We would by no means be understood as denying that in the
Hindu science, especially its older forms, and in the Hindu mythology,
they are brought into particular and conspicuous relations with the
moon. Indeed, whether they were originally selected and established with
reference to the moon's daily progress along the ecliptic, as has been,
until lately, the universal opinion, or whether we are to believe with M
Biot that they had in the first instance nothing to do with the moon,
‘and only came by chance to coincide in number with the days of her
sidereal revolution—it is at any rate altogether probable that to the
Hindu apprehension this coincidence formed the basis of the system.
We may even conclude, from the fact that the asterisms are 60 frequently spoken of in the early literature of the Brahmana period,
while nevertheless there is no distinct mention of the planets until later
(Weber, Ind. Lit., p. 222), that for a long time the Hindus must have
confined their attention and observations to the sun and moon, paying
no heed to the lesser planets: and yet we cannot regard it as in any
degree probable—hardly as possible, even—that any nation or people
could establish a system of zodiacal asterisms without discovering and
taking note of the planets; or that such a system could have been communicated to, and applied by, the Hindus, without a recognition on
their part of those conspicuous and ever-moving stars. It may fairly be
claimed, then, that the asterisms, a6 4 Hindu institution, are an originally lunar division of the zodiac; but we object none the less to their
being styled ‘* lunar mansions,” or called by any equivalent name; because, in the first place, the Hindus themselves have given them no name
denoting a special relation to the moon, and no name signifying “* house,
mansion, station,’’ or anything of the kind; and because, in the second
place, as soon and as far as the Hindu astronomy extended itself beyond
its limitation to observations of the moon, just so far and so soon did
it employ the system of asterisms a6 4 general method of division of
the ecliptic; so that finally, as pointed out by us above, the asterisms
have come to be divested, in the properly astronomical literature of
India, of all special connection with the moon. With almost the same
propriety might we call the Hindu signs ‘‘ luni-solar mansions "_gince
they are, by origin, the parts of the ecliptic occupied by the sun during
each successive synodical revolution of the moon—as denominate the
nakshatras of the Siddhantas ‘’ lunar mansions."
99. p. 240. We should have mentioned farther, that an additional
.ducement—and one, probably, of no amall weight—to the reduction of
ee uenber of asterisms from twenty-eight to twenty-seven, is to be

aes
EN ise ea 1“ cg ary thet the ne a the moon's sidereal revolution in
‘ , though intermediate between the two numbers, is yet decidedly
ty ‘nearer to twenty-seven, exceeding it by less than a third. M. Biot
might even claim with some reason that the choice of the number
twenty-eight tended to prove the whole eystem not a lunar one by
origin: yet it might be replied that, the time of revolution being distinctly more than twenty-seven days, the larger number was fully admissible, and that it was also in some respects preferable, as being one that
could be halved and quartered.
30. p. 820 In bringing this work to a close, we deem it advisable
to present, in & summary manner, but more distinctly and connectedly
than could properly be done in the notes upon the text, our conclusions
as to certain points in the history of the Sirya-Siddhanta, and of the
astronomical sciepce which it represents.
In the first place, Bentley's determination of the age of the treatise
we conceived to be altogether set aside by the considerations which we
have adduced against it (note to i. 20-34); there is no reasonable
ground for questioning that the Sirya-Siddhanta is, as the Hindus have
long believed it to be, one of the most ancient and original of the works
which present their modern astronomical science. How far the text of
which the translation has been given above is identical in substance and
extent with that of the original Sdrya-Siddhainta, is another question,
and one not easy to solve. That it is not precisely the same is evident
enough. Ewen the modern manuscripts differ from one another in single readings, in details of arrangement, in added or omitted verses. <A
cumparison of the texts adopted and established by the different commentators would be highly interesting, as carrying the history of the
treatise a step farther back; but to us only one commentary is accessible, nor do we find anywhere any notices respecting the versions given
by the others: in the absence of such, we may conclude that all
sent substantially the same text, and so are alike posterior to the modelling of the work into its prenent form and with its present contents.
But the indications of addition and interpolation, which we have had in
80 any cases to point out in our notes, are sometimes too telling to be
misinterpreted. Farther than this we may not at present go: any detailed discussion of the subject must remain unsatisfactory, until a t
, acquaintance with other of the ancient treatises, ‘and @ more re
comparison of therm with one another, shall throw upon it new
A point of special interest connected with ‘it is, whether the «
menn motions of the planets do actually date from abo the
‘pointed out by Bentley's calculations. With regard to this we are
from being confident; but we do iy nag oe Soe :
i > emey siete <.h that those elements, os | |
le =

= . Appendiz 381
been the same from the beginning, never having undergone correction
until the application the bija, about A.D. 1500 (p. 22 ete.) And
: the date of that correction is calculated at least to suggest the suspicion
that Muslim science may have had something to do with it. That
observation, and the improvement of their systern by deductions from
observation, were cver matters of such serious earnest with the Hindus
that they should have been led to make such amendments independently, is yet to be proved. The most important alteration of which
anything like direct proof ia furnished is that which concerns the precession of the equinoxes (note to iii. 9-12); and = even here we would
not undertake to say confidently what is the conclusion to be drawn.
All such inquiries must remain conjectural, mere gropings in the twilight, until the position of the Sirya-Siddhanta in the Siddhinta bterature shall be better understood. What has given it eo much greater
prominence and popularity than are enjoyed by the other works of its
class, or from what period its preéminence dates, is unknown. There
are treatises, like the Cakalya-Sanhita (add. note 1), which agree with
it in all essential features; there are yet others, like the Soma and Vasishtha Siddhintas, which are said (udd. note 6) to vary little from it;
whether any one among them all is original—and if any, which—
whether in each case the relation is one of co-ordination or of subordination—we must be content for the time to be ignorant.
One thing, however, is certain: underneath whatever variety may
characterize the separate treatises, there exists a fundamental unity;
their differences are of secondary importance as compared with their
resemblances; they all represent essentially a single system. And this
by no means in the same sense in which all modern astronomical works
may be said to represent « single system. For the Hindu system m not
one of nature; it is not even & peculiar method of viewing and interceeeting nature, from which, after it had once been devised by some com
~ ‘rolling intellect, others had not the force and originality to deviate: i
— is a thoroughly artificial structure, full of arbitrary assumptions, of ab-
«urdities even which have no foundation in nature, and could be. inwented by one as well as another. We need only to refer, as instances,
> the | of monstrous chronological periods (i. 14-25)—to
rt f the commencement of the Iron Age (note to i.
> 49:84), with ite exact or nearly exact (add. note 6) conjunction of all
¢ planets>—to the form of staterent of the mean motions, yielding
curring conjunctions, at longer or ahorter intervals—to the sassumption of a starting-pomt for the planets from at or near {t Piscium (note
to 7jj;—to the resolutions of the apsides and nodes of the plancts
44)— aystem of epicycles (ii. 34-35)—to the deter-

sp
4 Se
oS. za~ ©
——s ws
- Bi | }: mh <x hs
act a pie ft r
-Siddhanta
“> ai SuUrYye
a
| i eR. Ee a a period and of a school, if not of a single mas-
=4 ter, who- had power enough to impose his idiosyneracy upon the science —
of a whole nation. The question, then, of the comparative antiquity
of single treatises is lost in the higher interest of the inquiry—when,
where, and under what influence originated the system which they all
agree in representing?
What our opinions are upon these points will not be a matter of
doubt with any one who may have carefully looked through the preceding pages, although they have nowhere been explicitly stated. We _ regard the Hindu science as an offshoot from the Greek, planted not far
from the commencement of the Christian era, and attaining its fully
veloped form in the course of the fifth and sixth centuries.
of this opinion we will proceed briefly to state.
In considering such a question, it is fair to take first into account the
general probabilities of the case. And there can be no question that,
from what we know in other respects of the character and tendencies
of the Hindu mind, we should not at all look to find the Hindus in possession of an astronomical science containing so much of truth, They
have been from the beginning distinguished by a remarkable inaptitude
and disinclination to observe, to collect facts, to record, to make inductive investigations. The old belief under the influence of which Bailly
could form his strange theories—the belief in the immense antiquity of
the Indian people, and its immemorial possession of a highly developed
civilization—the belief that India was the crudle of language, mythology. arts, aciences. and religions—huas long since Leen proved an error.
It is now well known that Hindu culture cannet pretend to a remoter
origin than 2000 B.C., and that, though marked by striking and eminent traits of intellect and character, the Hindus have ever been weak
in positive science; metaphysics and grammar—with, perhaps, algebra
and arithmetic, to them the mechanical part of mathematical science—
being the only branches of knowledge in which they have independently
won honorable distinction. That _ astronomy would come to constitute _
an exception to the general rule in this respect, there is no antecedent
ground for supposing. The infrequency of references to the stars in
the early Sanskrit literature, the Inte date of the earliest mention of the
planets, prove that there was ro special impulse leading the nation to
devote itself to studying the movements of the heavenly bodies.
evidence gocs to show that the Hindus, even after they had derived
from abroad (p. 285) a systematic division of the ecliptic, limited their .
attention to the two chief luminaries, the e sun and moon, and — contented
themselves with establishing method of maintaining — the o
of the solar year with the order of the lunar months. If, then, at a later
period, we find them in. pgrowsren of a full astr y of the eaten
¥ is to pious eam ener ae they eatghie,
deThe grounds

Appendiz 383
_ closer inspection dows not tend to inspire us with confidence in it as of
Hindu origin. We find it, to be sure, thoroughly Hindu in its external
form, wearing many strange and fantastic features which are to be at
once recognized ag of native Indian growth; but we find it also to contain much true science, which could only be derived from a profound
and long-continued study of nature. ‘The whole system, in short, may
be divided into two portions, whereof the one contains truth so success-
‘fully deduced that only the Greeks, among all other ancient rations, can
show anything worthy to be compared with it; the other, the framework in which that truth is set, composed of arbitrary assumptions and
absurd imaginings, which betray a close connection with the fictitious
cosmogonies and geographies of the philosophical and Puranic literature
of India. The question presses itself, then, strongly upon us, whether
these two portions can possibly huve the sume origin: whether the scientific habit of mind which could lead to the discovery of the one is
compatible with those traits which would permit its admixture with the
other. But most especially, could a system founded—as this, if original, must have been—upon sagacious, accurate, and protracted observation of the heavenly bodies, so entirely ignore the ground-wogk upon
which it rested, and refuse and deny all possibility of future improvement by like means. as does this Hindu systern, in whose text-books
appears no record of an observation, and no confessed deduction from
observations; in which the astronomer is remanded to his text-book as
the sole and sufficient source of knowledge, nor ever taught or counselled to study the heavens except for the purpose of determining his
longitude, his latitude, and the local time? Surely, we have a right to
say that the system, in its form as laid before us, must come from another people or another generation than that which laid its scientific
‘foundation ; that it must be the work of a race whieh either had never
known, or had had time to forget, the observing habits and the inductive methods of those who gave it origin, But the hypothesis that an
7 ~ earlier generation in India itself performed the labors of which the later
. system-makers reaped the fruit, is well-nigh excluded by the absence,
already referred to, of all evidence in the more ancient literature of
deep astronomical investigation: the ether alternative, of derivation
from a foreign source, remains, if not the only possible, at least the only
probable one. We come, then, next to eonsider the direct evidences of
a Greek origin,
| a ‘First in importance among these is the system of epicycles for repre-
- senting the movement, and calculating the positions, of the planets.
, ‘This, the cardinal feature in both systems, is (ii. 34-45) essentially alike
‘ and the same in both. Now, notwithstanding the fact that such second-
: ee circles do in fact represent, to a certain. degree, true quantities in
there is yet too much that is strange and arbitrary in them to
ri a
a Fe P- oa

leave any probability to the supposition that two nations could have devised them independently. But there are sufficient grounds for believing the Greeks to have actually created their own system, bringing it
by successive steps of elaboration to the form in which Ptolemy finally
presents it. In the history of the science among the Greeks, everything
is clear and open; they tell us what they owed to the Egyptians, what
to the Chaldeans: we trace the conceptions which were the germs of
their scheme of epicycles, the observations on which it was based, the
inductive and deductive methods by which it was worked out and established. In the Hindu astronomy. on the other hand, all is groundless
assumption and absurd pretense: we find, as basis for the system, neither
the conceptions—for these are directly or impliedly denied or ignored—
nor the observations—for not a mention of an actual observation is
anywhere to be discovéred—nor the methods: the whole is gravely put
forth as a complete and perfect fabric, of divine origin and immemorial
antiquity. On the agreement of the two sciences in point of numerical
data we will not lay any stress, since it might well enough be supposed
that two nations, if once set upon the same track toward the discovery
of truth, would arrive independently at so near an accordance with nature and with one another. We will look for other evidences, of a less
ambiguous character, to sustain our main argument. The division of
the circle, into signs, degrees, minutes, and seconds, is the same in both
systems, and, being the foundation on which all numerical measurements
and calculations are made, is an essential and integral part of both.
Now the names of the first subdivisions, the signs, are the same in
Greece and in India (see note to i. 58): but with the Greeks they belong
to certain fixed arcs of the ecliptic, being derived from the constellations
occupying those arcs; with the Hindus they are applied to successive
ares of 30°, counted from any point that may be chosen: this is an unambiguous indication that the latter have borrowed them, and forgotten
or neglected their original significance. But farther, the ordinary Hindu
name of that division of the circle. which is in most frequent use, the
minute, is no Sanskrit word, but taken directly from the Greek, being
lipta, which is pares Again, the planets are ordinarily named in the
Siddhantas in the order in which they succeed one another as regents
of the days of the week; and not only has it been shown above that
the week is no original Hindu institution, but it has even appeared that,
on tracing it to its very foundation, we find there another Greek word
isga, represented by hord. Once more, in the cardinal operation of finding by means of the system of epicycles the true place of a planet, we
see that one of the most important data, the mean anomaly, is called
by another name of Greek origin, namely kendra which is _Kevrgov.
oe
These three words, occurring where they do, not upon the outskirts of
1 glia
bal _ ,
- aw, Sn i eee
< pu Tl a4 oe ae ee
te .) 2. i : es ats
= un
TT
0 Pe } um
no.

Appendix 385
_ the Hindu science, but in its very centre and citadel, amount of themselves almost to full proof of its Greek origin: taken in connection with
the other concurrent evidences, they form an argument which can neither be set aside nor refuted. Of those other evidences, we will only
mention farther here that Hindu treatises and commentaries of an early
date often refer to the yaranas, ‘* Greeks ’" or “* westerners,”’ and to yavandearyas, ‘* the Greek (or western) teachers,’’ as authorities on «astronomical subjects—that astronomical treatises are found bearing names
which come more or less distinctly from the West (note to i. 4-6)—and
that floating traditions are met with. to the effect that some of the
Siddhantas were revealed to their human promulgators in Romaka-city,
that is to say, at Rome, Farther witness to the same truth, deducible
from other coincidences of the two systems, we pass unnoticed here,
since it is not our object to discuss the question exhaustively, but only
to bring forward the main grounds of our opinions.
The question next arises, when, and in what manner the knowledge of
astronomy was communicated from Greece to India. In reply to this,
only probabilities offer themselves, yet in some points the indications
are pretty distinct. It is, in our own view, altogether likely that the
svience came in connection with the lively commerce which, during the
first centuries of our era, was carried on by sea between Alexandria, 45
the port and mart of Rome, and the western coast of India. Two considerations especially favor this supposition: first, that the chief site of
the Hindu science 1s found to be the city which lay nearest to the route
of that commerce (note to i. 62): secondly, that Rome is the only western city or country which is distinctly mentioned in the astronomical
= geography (xii. 39), and the one with which, as above noticed, the astronomiecal traditions connect themselves. Had the Hindus derived their
knowledge overland, through the Syrian, Persian, and Bactrian kingdoms which stood under Greek government, or in which Greek influence
was predominant, and Greek culture known and prized, the name of
Rome would have been vastly less likely to stand forth with such prominonce, and the capitals of Hindustan proper would more probably have
been the cradles of the new science. The absence from the Hindu
system of any of the improvements introduced by Ptolemy into that of
the Greeks (note to ii. 43-45) tends strongly to prove that the transmission of the principal groundwork of the former took place before his
time: nor can we think it likely that the numerical elements adopted
by the Hindus would vary so much as in many cases they are found to
do from those of the Syntaxis, if the latter had been already in existence,
a most authoritative exponent of
Whether the information was transmitted through
tie who visited the Mediterranean, or of learned
voyage to India, or by the translation of Greek

the:
‘Stirya-Siddhanta
treatises, or by what other methods, we would not at present even offer
@ conjecture; and the point is one of only subordinate consequence.
Whatever may have been the date of the first communication of tha
elements out of which the Hindu system was elaborated, there is good
reason to suppose that its final reduction to its present form did not
take place until some time during the fifth and sixth centuries. That
period is distinctly pointed out by the choice of the equinox of A. D.,
570 as the initial and principal point of the fixed sphere (note to i. 27),
by the definition of position of the junction-stars of the asterisms (p. 243),
and by the Hindu traditions which refer to that time the names of
greatest prominence and authority in the early history of the science.
It is evident that the elaboration of the system must have been a work
of time, probably of many generations: what were the forms which it
wore in the interval we do not know; here, as in many other departments of the Hindu literature, all record of the steps of development
appears to be lost, only the final and fully formed product being = preserved and transmitted to us: yet more light upon this point may atili
be hoped for, from the careful examination of all documents now
ne
cessible, or of such as may hereafter be discovered. The process of
assimilation and adaptation to Hindu conceptions and Hindu methods
wads thoroughly and completely performed. Among the changes of
method introduced, the most useful and important was the substitution
of sines for chords (p 75); the general substitution of an arithmetical
for a geometrical form also deserves particular notice. That no great
amount of geometrical science is implied in any part of the system, is
very evident: it is distinguished by the constant and dexterous application of a few simple principles: the equality of the square of the hypothenuse to the sum of the squares of the base and perpendicular—the
comparison of similar right-angled triangles—the formation and combination of proportions, the rule of three—are the characteristic features
of the early Hindu mathematical knowledge, as displayed in the SaryaSiddhinta. Of other treatises, of an earlier or later period, as those of
Brahmagupta and Bhaskara, which (see Colebrooke’s Hindu Algebra)
give evidence of knowledge more profound in arithmetic and algebra,
we cannot at present speak; but we hope at some future time to he able
to revert to the subject of the Hindu astronomy, in connection with
these or other of the text-books by which it is represented,
Rev. Mr. Burgess, having placed his translation and notes in the
hands of the Committee of Publication for farther elaboration, has very
liberally allowed them entire freedom in their work, even where
their deductions, and the views they expressed, did not accord with his own
opinions. The most important point at issue between us is that discussed in the next preceding pages, or the originality of the Hindu

Appendix 387
astronomy; upon this, then, he is desirous of expressing independently
his dissenting views, a5 in the following note.
CONCLUDING Note py THE “TRANSLATOR.
It may not be improper for me to state, in a closing note, that I had
prepared a somewhat extended and elaborate essay on the history of
astronomy among the Hindus, to be published in connection with the
preceding translation. But the length of this essay is such—the subject
matter of it not being material to the illustration of the Siddhanta, and
the translation and notes having already occupied so much space—that
it was not thought advisable to insert it here.
Yet as my investigations have led me to adopt opinions on some
points differing from those advanced by Prof. Whitney in his very valuable additions to the notes upon the translation, truth and consistency
seem to require me to present at least a brief summary of the results at
which I arrived in that essay in reference to the points in question. By
so doing, I free myself from any embarrassment under which I should
labor, if hereafter—as I now intend—I shall wish to express the
grounds for my opinions on these points, in this Journal or elsewhere.
The points to which IT allude bear upon the claims of the Hindus to
the honor of original invention and discovery in astronomical seience—
especially, their claims to such an honor in comparison with the Greeks.
Prof. Whitney scems to hold the opinion, that the THindus derived
their astronomy and astrology almost bodily from the Greeks—and
that what they did not borrow from the Greeks, they derived from other
people, as the Arabians, Chaldeans and Chinese (see pp. 38, 2365, 238,
et al.). 1 think he does not give the Hindus the eredit due to them,
and awards to the Greeks more credit than they are justly entitled to.
Iy advancing this opinion, however, I admit that the Greeks, at a later
period, were the more successful cultivators of astronomical science.
There is nothing among the Hindu treatises that can compare with the
grent Syntaxis of Ptolemy. And yet, from the light [ now have, I
must think the Hindus original in regard to most of the elementary
facts and principles of astronomy is found in their systems, and for the
most part also in their cultivation of the science; and that the Greeks
borrowed from them, or from an intermediate secondary source, to
which these facts and principles had come from Indian. I might perhaps
80 far modify this statement as to admit the supposition that neither
Greeks nor Hindus borrowed the one from the other, but both from a
common source. But with my present knowledge, I cannot concur in
the opinion that the Hindus are, to any great extent, indebted to the
Grecks for their astronomy, or that the latter have any well grounded
claims to the honor of originality in regard to those elementary facts

a
: ad
we ee a a? tad as | ae
and principles of astronomical science which are common to their own
‘and other ancient systems, and which are of such a nature as indicates
for them a single origin, and a transmission from one system to another.
For the sake of clearness, it is well that I should state more specifically
a few of the more important facts and principles that come under the
class above referred to. They src as follows:
1. The lunar division of the zodiac into twenty-seven or twenty-eight
usterisms (see transl., ch. viii), This division is common, with slight |
modifications, to the Hindu, Arabian, and Chincse systems.
2. The solar division of the zodiac into twelve signs, with the names
of the latter. These dames are, in their import, precisely the same
in
the Hindu and Greek systems.
The coincidence is such that the theory
of the division and the names of the parts having proceeded from one
original source is unquestionably the correct one
$. The theory of epicycles in accounting for the motions of the planets. and in calculating their true places. This is common to the Hindu
and Greek astronomies. At least, there is such a coincidence in the two
systems in reference to the epicycles as almost to preclude the idea of
independent origin or invention.
4. Coincidences, and even a samencss in some parts, between the
systems of astrology received among the Hindus, Greeks, and Arabians,
strongly indicate for those systems, in their primitive and essential elements, « common origin.
5. ‘The names of the five planets known to the ancients, and the application of these names to the days of the week (see notes, i. 52).
In regard to these specifications I remark in general :
First, in reference to no one of them do the claims of any people to
the honor, of having been the original inventors or discoverers appear tc
be better founded than those of the Hindus. ;
Secondly, in reference to most of them, the evidence of originality I
regard as clearly in favour of the Hindus; and in regard to some, and
those the more important, this evidence appears to me nearly or quite
conclusive.
I have not space for detail, nor is it the design of this note to enter
into the details of argument on any point whatever. A brief remark,
however, for the sake of clearness, seems called for in reference to each
of the above five specifications of facts and principles common to some
er all of the ancient systems of astronomy and astrology.
1. As to the lunar division of the zodiac into twenty-seven or twentyeight asterisms. The undoubted antiquity of this division, even in its
elaborated form, among the Hindus, in connection with the absence or

Appendix 389
to the opinion that the division is of a purely Hindu origin. This is
still my opinion, notwithstanding the views advanced by M. Biot and
others in favor of another origin.
9 As to the solar division of the zodiac into twelve parts, and the
names of those parts. The use of this division, and the present names
of the signs, can be proved to have existed in India at as early u period
as in any other country; and there is evidence less clear and satisfactory, it is true, yet of such a character as to create a high degree of
probability, that this division was known to the Hindus centuries before
ony traces can be found in existence among any other people.
As corroborative of this position in part, or at least as strongly favoring the idea of an eastern origin of the division of the ecliptic in question,
1 may be allowed to adduce the opinions of Ideler and Lepsius, as quoted
by Humboldt (Cosmos, Harper's ed., ii. 120, note): ‘* Ideler is inclined
to believe that the Orientals had names, but not constellations, for the
Dodecatomeria, and Lepsius regards it as a natural assumption ‘ that
the Greeks, at the period when their sphere was for the most part
unfilled, should have added to their own the Chaldean constellations
from which the twelve divisions were named." *' Whether Ideler meant
by ** Orientals '’ the Chaldeans, or some other eastern people, the application of the term in this connection to the Hindus exactly suits the
supposition of the Indian origin of the division in question, since in
Indian astronomy the names of the signs are merely names of the
‘twelfth parts of the ecliptic, and are never applied to constellations.
Humboldt's opinion is, that the solar divisions of the ecliptic, with the
names of the signs, came to the Greeks from Chaldea. I think the evidence preponderates in favour of a more eastern, if not a Hindu, origin.
%. The theory of epicycles. The difference in the development of
this theory in the Greek and Hindu systems of astronomy precludes
f the idea that one of these people derived more than a hint respecting it
from the other. And so far as this point alone is concerned, we have as
much reason to suppose the Greeks to have been the borrowers as_ the
contrary; but other considerations seem to favor the supposition that
5 ; the Hindus were the original inventors of this theory.
Wate 4. As regards astrology, there is not much honor, in any estimation,
co eonnected with its invention and culture. The coincidences that exist
Poe: ‘between the Hindu and Greck systems are too remarkable to admit of
‘supposition of an independent origin for them. But the honor of
inal invention, such as it is, lies, I think, between the Hindus and the
Chale eans. The evidence of priority of invention and culture seems, on
th hole. to be in favor of the former; the existence of three or four
‘a 7 -abic and Greek terms in the Hindu system being accounted for on
’ the supposition that they were introduced at a comparatively recent
i?
period. In reference, however, to the word horé, Greek wga (see nutes
MISS the
aol na ae:

390, — Stérya-Siddhanta
4 reo a ke Hp *
_ to i, 52; xii, 78-79), it may not be inappropriate to introduce the tesmie eg Herodotus (B. 11, ch. 109): ** The sun-dial and the gnomon,
ith the
t
Ww h division of the day into twelve parts, were received by the
Greeks from the Babylonians" There is abundant testimony to the
fact that the division of the day into twenty-four hours existed in the
East, if not actually in India, before it did in Greece. In ‘reference,
farther, to the so-called Greek words found in Hindu astronomical treatises, I would remark that we may with entire propriety refer them to
that mumerous class of words common to the Greek and Sanskrit languages, which either came to both from a common source, or passed
from the Sanskrit to the Greek at a period of high antiquity; for no
one maintains, so far as [ am aware, that the Greek is the parent of the
Sanskrit, to the extent indicated by this mumerous class of words, and
by the similarity of grammatical inflections in the two languages.
5. As to the names of the planets, I remark that the identity of all
of them in the Hindu and Greek systems is not to my mind clearly
made out. However this may be, I think the present names of the
planets in Greek astronomy originated at least as far east as ChaldeaHerodotus says (B. LU, ch. 52).....-.... ‘the names of the gods came into
Greece from Egypt.’ The names of the planets are names of gods.
Herodotus’s opinion indicates the belief of the Greeks in reference to
the origin of these numes. Other considerations show for them, almost
beyond a question, an origin as far cast, to sey the least, as Chaldea.
As to the application of the names of the plancts to the days of the
week, it is impossible to determine definitely where it originated, Kespecting this matter, Prof. H. H. Wilson expresses his opinion—in which
1 concur—in the following language: ‘“' The origin of this arrangement
is not very precisely ascertained, as it was unknown to the Greeks, and
not adopted by the Romans until a late period. It is commonly
ascribed to the Egyptians and Babylonians, but upon no very sufficient -
authority, and the Hindus appear to have at least as good a title to the
invention as any other people ©’ (Jour. Roy. As. Soc., ix. 84).
One word on the claims of the Arabians to the honor of original invention in astronomical science. And first, they themselves claim no
such honor. They confess to having received their astronomy from
India and Greece. They had at an early period some two or three of
the first Hindu treatises of astronomy. ‘In the reign of the second
Abbasside Khalif Almamnsiir...... (A.D. 773), as is related in the preface
to the astronomical tables of Ben-Al-Adami, published......A.D, 920,
an Indian astronomer, well versed in the science which he professed,
visited the court of the Khalif, bringing with him tables of the equations of planets according to the mean motions, with observations relative to both solar and lunar eclipses, and the ascension of the signs;

Appendix 391
taken, as he affirmed, from tables computed by an Indian prince, whose
name, as the Arabian author writes it, was Paonar’’ (Celebrooke’s
Hindu Algebra, p. bxiv). That the Arabians were thoroughly imbued
with a knowledge of the Hindu astronomy before they became acquainted with that of the Greeks, is evident from their translation of
Ptolemy's Syntaxis. It is known that this great work of the Greek
astronomer first became known in Furope through the Arubic version.
In the Latin translation of this version, the ascending node (Greek avaBiBatov ouvder pop) is called nodus capitis, ** node of the head,” and the
descending necde (Greek caraftBatuv ouvéerpop), nodua coudea, node of
the tail '"—which are pure Hindu appellations (see Latin Translation of
Almagest, B. iv, ch. 4; B. vi. ch. 7, et al.). This fact, with other evidence,
clearly shows the influence of Hindu astronomy on that of the Arabians.
In fact, this latter people seem to have done little more in this science
than work over the materials derived from their eastern and western
neighbors.
Another fact showing the belief of the Arabians themselves respecting their indebtedness, in matters of science, to the Hindus, should be
mentioned here. They ascribe the invention of the numerals, the nine
digits (the credit of whose invention is quite generally awarded to the
Arabians), to the Hindus. ‘* All the Arabic and Persian books of arithmetic ascribe the invention to the Indians " (Strachey, on the Early
History of Algebra, As. Res. xii. 184; see likewise Colebrooke'’s Hindu
Algebra, pp. lii-lin, where the same is shown from a different authority.
Strachey’s article was published subsequently to the work of Colebrooke).
The above facts and considerations, showing the indebtedness of the
Arabians to the Hindus in regard to mathematical and astronomical
“seience, clearly have an important bearing on the question of priority
of invention in regard to the lunar division of the zodiac into twentyeight asterisms, at least so far as the Arabians are concerned. Taking
all the facts into account, the supposition that this people were the
inventors is altogether untenable.
I close this note—already longer than I intended—with a quotation
from that distinguished orientalist, H. T. Colebrooke. In a very valuable essay entitled ‘‘ On the Notions of the Hindu Astronomers concerning the Precession of the Equinoxes and Motions of the Planets,’’ having
stated with Some detail some of the more striking peculiarities of the
Hindu systems, and likewise coincidences existing between them and that
of the Greeks, with the evidence of communication from one people to
the other, he says: “Tf these circumstances, joined to a resemblance
hardly to be supposed casual, which the Hindu astronomy, with its apparatus of eccentrics end epicycles, bears in many respects to that of

the Greeks, be thought to authorize a belief, that the Hindus received
from the Greeks that knowledge which enabled them to correct and improve their own imperfect astronomy, I shall not be inclined to dissent
from the opinion *’ (As. Res. xii. 245-6; Essays, ii. 411).
This is all that so learned and cautious a writer could say in favor of
the opinion that the Hindus derived astronomical knowledge from the
Greeks. More than this I certainly could not say. After the solar
division of the zodiac, with the names of its parts, it is evident, I think,
that only hints could have passed from one people to the other, and that
at an early period; for on the supposition that the Hindus borrowed
from the Greeks at a later period, we find it difficult to see precisely
what it was that they borrowed; since in no case do numerical data and
results in the systems of the two peoples exactly correspond. And in
regard to the more important of such data and results—as for instance,
the amount of the annual precession of the equinoxes, the relative size
of the sun and moon as compared with the carth, the greatest equation
of the centre for the sun—the Hindus are more nearly correct than the
Greeks, and in regard to the times of the revolutions of the planets
they are very nearly as correct: it appearing from a comparative view
of the sidereal 1evolutions of the planets (p. 27), that the Hindus are
most nearly correct in four items, and Ptolemy in six. There has evidently been very little astronomical borrowing between the Hindus and
the Greeks. And in relation to points that prove a communication from
one people to the other, with my present knowledge on the subject, IL
am inclined to think that the course of derivation was the opposite to
that supposed by Colebrooke—from east to west rather than from west
to east; and I would express my opinion in relation to astronomy, in
the language which this eminent scholar uses in relation to some ecoincidences in speculative philosophy and religious dogmas, especially the ,
doctrine of metempsychosis, found in the Greek and Hindu = systems,,
which indicate a communication from one people to the other: “ I
should be disposed to conelude that the Indians were in this imstance
teachers rather than learners '' (Transactions of the Roy. As. Soc., 1. 579).
. This opinion is expressed in the last essay on oriental philosophy that
came from the pen of Colebrooke.
Boston, May, 1860. BE. B

CALCULATIONS OF ECLIPSES
BY
THE EDITOR
Lunar Eclipse of January 19, A.D. 1935.
The circumstances of the eclipse and the elements have been calculated according to the method of Surya SiddhAnta.
Ahargana or total number of-days from the Sacsamie of creation up to
the midnight commencing 5th Magha, Saka 1856 . 714,404,135,983
Mean longitudes of the sun, moon and their apses for the mean midnight, Calcutta:
Moon = oie oe an 2 21° CO’ 1S"
Sun's apsia a ake ad ae Le ae Ge:
Moon's apis aed ee = a ae oS ae Ie
Banation mean rae one a. ee
os SA sua see . 88° 25”
: Bun"s true long. oes aod ath .. @ 4 45° 41°
: _ Moon's mean sory on «* eee =. 2 SI" 6S’ 15°
Equation of cen irs “ sae + s° is’ 43°
Moon's truc long. «-- ke = . @ 25° 17 66"
fan's mean motion in 60 nadis eae vas 58° 55"
Equation of motion “ae Se + 9 11”
fiun’s true motion... =- oa aa 61’ 4”
Moon's _gore acon =m 5 60 ws a8 ia 765" 25"
Equation of motion pe - 5a 42a"
Moon's true motion eas “ 7357 8”
Time of opposition in longitude reckoned from mean midnight.

Interval between true midnight and true sunrise= ( “S? + 587 )r of
Time of opposition reckoned from the sunriee=51* 6" 2°—6" 2°
Semi-diamoter of the sun
Semi-diameter of the moon ae meee bis 14” «45°65
Semi-diamo‘er of the shadow Keot eo) — =686" S8Ba5
Latitude of the moon at opposition .. a ea ar:
Semi-diameter of the so a eke: a ite 14 45°°5
Semi-dismeter of the ng body ve ore 36° 32°"5
Their som Ro es c. shes <= bir «4187
Deduct moon's Iatitude .., wes a as 5”
Amount of greatest obscuration vere “> vie a1" 13”
Magnitude of the eclipse = im a o-718
Diameter of the shadow + ons as 7 65°
Diameter of the moon ne ae 5 39° «681
Half — their «urn wee Gee a 61° 18”
Square of es + abs == 26,32’
Deduct square of moon’s Istitude ... tee ae . 905"
Remainder Fan ibe at | r i
are root of remainder eee ass _ @ee 4l 4"
oon". daily gain ees “o ene 66a" 5"
Therefore, half-duration of the eclipse is 3" 44° 4” — supposing | .
that the moon’s latitude has remained constant throughout. |
Now applying corrections for the motion of the moon and her inde
during this time we have :-—
Latitude of the moon at the beginning of eclipses
Latitede of the moon at the end of, silipes “a.

Calculations of Eclipses by the Editor 392c
Lunar Eclipse of January 19, A.D. 1935.
The times have been calculated according to the method of Surya
Siddhanta but the elements have been taken from the Nautical Almanac.
Calcutta civil time of opposition in long ... ; - @21* 37°35"
Moon's horizontal parallax —s we e - 54° 13°27
‘se . ** ee = yy RR” U4
Sermi-diam. of moon «« oe en = 14° 45°74
Bemi-diam. of suo eee oor “? *e* = iy 15°°30
Movement of * tithi" per hour “as 1 - 27° 15”
Semi-diam. of shadow Mas sii “ - 38 sO” U7
Latitude of moon at opposition jee one = 13’ 14
Greatest obscuration =r = - 28 5o"OT + 14" 45°74
Magnitude of ecli ( diam. =1 0) =. "3.58
Ae t . ec moon's di z=i°0) .. = = i ; or
Semi-diam. of shadow <a a8" («66-07 BR” 56° 97
Semi-diam. of moon ia wie 4°) «64574 14” #46°74
Their sum and difference aan ane 63° <42°°71 ow "23
of eas ous ees 2RR3 9 585-01
Deduct square of latitude she ese 18542 185 °42
Remain ese een re 940827 fo 26
Square roots of remainders oot ove 61°9 an’
The moon 97°25 per hour. . abe gains 51°°9 and 7 jo 1" GA" and 44° respectively, -. duration of the eclipse ~1* 547 sod the half time of total obscurat:on
Hourly movement of latitude a a. = 0 66945" = 275.
Moon‘s Istitude 1" 54° before and after opposition ~<a aan 1s «3560'S sms
asa°°OS 70°39
r2s

Immersion of colipse at Calcutta ... ao. = O1° 40°85"—44" = 20" 50°35"
Emergence of eclipse at Calcutta ... «. == 21° 40°35"+ 44" = 2° 24°35" “sag
Magnitode of the eclipee (Moon's diam.=1°0) ... = 1°358 or in digits 14°30 itd
Surya Siddhanta
Suorya Sidhanta. | with corrected Nautical almanaac.
| elements.
First contact ...| 19* 8* civil time 19* 47" 19* 47ast contect —ia = 35° 34> 93° 4"
Beginning of total eclipse =... prc 20° 6&7 90* 57"
Eod of total eclipse te | eee 22" 25" 22* 2Magnitude oc. | “72 1°36 1°36
Solar Eclipse, August 21, A.D. 1985.
Calculated according to the method of Surya Siddhanta with the
bija corrections.
Aghargana or sum of days from the commencement of the planetary motion
up to about the time of New moon August, 1933 ... %714,404,135,467
Mean longitudes of the sun, moon, sun's apogee, moon's apogee, and
moon's node at mean sunrise on the equator for the meridian of Calcutta -—
Sun “oe + we
Moon eee *? eee e
Sun's apogee ese oe ows
Moon's spogee ne -8 eee .
Moon's node use ss see eee
Sun's mean longitode ein = an
Equation of centre oon ar see
Sun's true 1 ; ase oss ose
Sun's nrean moton - —* eo
Equation of oo s+ os see
Sun's true motion +++ ore ose ese
Moon's mean longitude 7+ <= ane
Equation of centre ows one “a6
‘s true longitude oes “ +
‘« mean daily motion one see oo"
Moon's ef motion ... sae — os

: Calculations of Eclipses by the Editor 392e
| Moon's true daily motion = Be, see 758" 4”
Preeession of the equinoxes ... wiry ied 21° 30° 55”
Sun's declination eee ote ais iv
Sun's ascensional difference... agin a O* 65" 1°
Sun's day a baa a zt: 21,657"
: Sun's longitude at a RTS sunriso =... Ai i eee ee
Deduct the difference das me a 6§:"
Remainder ane o-e 4’ 4” 8’ a5"
Deduct correction for sun's equation of place... 16"
Sun's long. at sunrise for the latitude of Calcutta .. 4° AP. Sree
& Moon's longitude, mean equatorial eunrise elses 4°: 3° £6 39"
Deduct correction for sun *s equation of place rane 3’ 97"
, ta 3 L Remainder eee ose ; ose 4° » ey ar 62”
: Deduct correction for sun's ascensional difference ll”) «=660”"
| a ‘i ‘Moon’ s long. at sunrise at Calcutta <i owe 4e T° Se oe
se! ‘Time of true conjunction on ae side 138° 26° i"
= eae oe! Sun's longitude at that time... = ite 4° <4° 0° 38”
oe Moon's *” “os ome o- 4" 21° 25"
mates Node’s = a Sai pele aia Io TT oa ee
st gee x Determination of parallax in longitude
eee ras of the orient ecliptic point... oss ( bom | = a
“ee aee8 ef “se a
ron Sun's hour angle ca eoligti puint ... a “1° 80 3
Morflian yee ore — 297"
ae of eclip siptic zenith distance — as al 9s4°°7
P of, eclipiic altitude eee -* ans -J
| Divs itude of the meridian ecliptic point ... = 4° 1" «60° «(32”
re - Longitude of sun (with precession) = ane 4° 25° 52° 20”
seve ve in longit of “-* ave 14" 1 48”
al r x in longitude one + soe O° 68°
n a] tre con unction “se * asa 13° 35" 4?
15 Af, — wee ace oe —("* 63"
apparent conjunction sae 13° #4" a’
he value of parallax is found out, and repeating the
1 a nations, we have at the fourth approximation
oes = ~~ wv 2
oe ae 155°3
se *** Mu 7T
oes ae R60 S5
s lell _* I°-s4" or
middle of thecclipse ... saa 2” s8"8

ah” ae Half-sum of the Marnateore Sy a ao roa
uct moon's apparent latitude ae ay oe 15°13” :
Amount test omen Fe oft 2 A tte
Magnitude S of the ps : 15° 545
Square of the «um po gaol diameters... 2 ie Nara
Deduct the “bres of moon's latitude... e =m O31" 3%"
Remainder one ase 737° 13”
Square root of the remainder sci = ar or" oF
This result represents the distance as roughly determined of the two
centres at the moment of contact and separation. |
crite age, interval in time eas for g* 39° §$?
Beginning of the eclipse oe “s ace O° 45° 1°
End of the eclipse acu . 14" ga" 4°
Moon's true latitude at the beginning and end of ,
eclipse ener hot «ue rF 10’ 38"N 15° 0”"N
Moon's parallaxes in latitude are calculated thus :-~
Begining End
of eclipse of eclipse
Orient ecliptic point a es 6° 19° 11’ 32” 7° 14° 17" 69"
Sun's hour angle = on 2240"
Meridian ecliptic point was «+ 8 19° 10° 18” 4° 16° 28” 10”
Zenith distance of M. E, P. ... see of 1° 36” 6" 18° 6"
Meridian sine one 1°60 877
Sine of ecliptic zenith distance Sen "AS 858"°78
Parallax in latitude Son ons 0 1"8 6° 6"8
Moon's apparent latitude <n 19’ 37"N 9’ 55’°N
Square of the sam of semi-diameters eee 988’ 46" 908" 46"
Deduct square of moon's latitudes on B84" 49” 98” 20”
Distance of centres in long. ... ae 24’ 10° weit. *
Corresponding interval 9° 4° 1” Q* 31" ar .
Corrected times for beginning ‘and end of
eclipse sss see see 10* o* 8" 14" 36° Qr
Repeating the process again with the corrected time we have—
Beginning of End of
eclipse se
Parallax in latitude oe pte ~. Of UW 8B r a5" 8
Moon's apparent latitude ci aks 19 19N & 26"N
Distance of — - longitude ae ee et de 20" 40”
chasedled: eS orks “beginnin “and end of = eee sacha
ti
ar 6 6F at Ba" BF
ag mt . cz ee
bis. sir
le
ad

Calculations of Eclipses by the Editor 3929
Repeating the process for successive approximations we have for -the
third approximation :—
Parallax in npg itone at contact and .
separation ose 2* 30° O" 6* 2°
Soak sree in longitude at apparent conjunction s+ sa aan = fA* = a4°
Difference in parallaxes 56° 1* 28" 4°
Add to former and latter mean half-duration 2° 6° 6° 2° 39° ar
True former and latter half-duration'... S* 1° 5” 47" 1?
Subtract and add from and to time of
apparent conjunction ose oes 12% 4° 4” ig° 4° 4”
Times of apparent contact and separation ... 9° 2° &* ig" G&° 5B?
(Calcutta Civil time) va ~ 9 bra. 177" 12 brs. 6*"
Solar Eclipse, August 21, A.D. 1988.
Galculated according to the method of Surya Siddhanta with the
- corrected elements from the Nautical Almanac.
Caleutta civil time of conj. in long. 11" 417 (A.M.) = 16° 3”
Calcutta : latitude 29° 33’ N; longitude, 5* 53" 20°
Feats s distance from equinox at con}. = 347° 42° 27”
oon's s+ eee = ar te
Moon's hor. psrallax = sus = 55’ 59°38”
Their difference... ast -= 655° 67.1" = 3951!"
Moon's movement per bour in long- _-. = 31° 45"
Moon's gain eee se ~et = 29° 20"
Sun's half day one se = 165°57°30* [69 vipala —1 pala
. | 60 pala = 1 nadi)
- Deduct time of con}. — eve =i15* 3”
Sun's hour angle, east ae nas = O° 64" 30°
»» Tight ascension nao eke = 24° 68" 57°
Difference =" - 24° 4? ov
-. “Visuva kala’ at 15° 3” (new moon) = 24° 4” 27°.
1. ‘Therefore for latitude 22° 23'N the long. of
the central ecliptic point (tribhona lagna) = 139° 19’
also f ecliptic zenith serene (tribbonalagns
patanca) see ave 7° 8T
Long. of cen. ecl, point... ae 199° 19°
Tnterval in long. = 'S* 93° 27"
ne See aston ToS HA" . she gains 464°°3 in 16°°55~ 41".

2. Sun's long. at corrected time of co- j. = 147° 42° 27”
Visuva kala 4L* before new moon - fa" <4 a7*
Long. of central ecliptic point 135° revs sf
athe. no : o = ® 1"
Interval in long. = "oe <<?”
Ecliptic zenith distance = 6° 45°
Parallax in long. = «sinil" 6S 47" cos. 6* 45° x 3951"
Repeating the process for successive approximations we have for the seventh
approximation, ecliptic zenith distance =5°54" and parallax io longitute=843'"4
Time of conj. correcte | for the last time 11" con
i.¢., time of apparent conj. =1L* 12°°25
Therefore the middle of the eclipse occurred at Calcutta at 11“ 12°.3 a.m,
Calcutta civil time.
Now parallax in latitude at the moment of apparent conj.=sin of ¢coliptic zenith
distance x diflerence of horizontal parallaxes of the sun and the moon=
Now latitude of moon at 1L* 41°=—4’'51L"
Movement of moon in latitude at sagt 175" —2’55”"
.. apparent latitade of moon =O'1l4°""d—S'44°°5 = 50S
Now ead of sun a 15’ 14"°8
their sum = $1’ 3"°5
Deduct apparenot latitude 30""s
Greatest obscurvation | = 30° 33"°2 c
Diengnitude of the gbeatest ecli sata te ik
-“. Magnitude gtea pse 30’ 339". re
at Calcutta al’ 37".4 “0
(sun's diam.=1°'0), Sai &
= 11°00 digits. (sun's diam, = 12°0)
Their sum
Square of do. _ oo
Dedact square of app. latitade = (90°°3)"*=018
Remains r . SATI71A '
Square root of remainder =
in ee mo. = 68°"
The moon gains 704" per 24” she gaios 1963"

Po ui ie
a
Calculations of Eclipses by the Editor
Therefore rough time of eclipse =11" 12°-25 —63°'5 — 10° 8°"75—11" 18°.
Also rough time of end of eclipse = 11" 12"°25 + 63°°5 12° 15°-75—816* 30",
i a
o07 14" 27° (=Visuva kele at) "25" Sl” 27° (= Visova
11" 18° kale at
Ecliptic zenith distance 2° WO <ccese de nnhi se ens nee 10° 43° ee
PD ees ot ee eee =—f28°''2=10 23”
Moon's lat. at 10® Qt ae 19”.......0ccercee Moon's lat. at 12" 16*=3' 10”
Square of semidiam. Fo | 3A7T2652
Dedoct squares of app. lat. 186624 187489
Square roots of do. 18123°°7 1812"°5
The moon gains 704” in 247 +. she gains 1912” in 61°7—1* 1°7=—2° SY.
Now sgain,
Time of true con) 15* 8° 15* 3°
Subtract and add 2° B4” 2° Sa"
Time of contact and separation 12° 29”, 17* 37”
(visuvakala at 12" 297) (vieuvakals at 17° 37")
Long. of central ecliptic point 125° 38’ 152° 47°
ic zenith ‘distance 3° 19° 13° 1’
Long. of cen. ecl. point 125° 88" 152° 47°
.Interval in long- 22° 1° 58” eas 6° 2° 4"
Long. cen. ecl. ee 116° 0 a1: ar at
Long. cen. cl, pt. —2116° 0 wo 56"
Interval in long. $1° 38" 14” sie 7” 10’ 40”

Intervals in long. 36° 69° 'I7~ 8” 36° 26" b Daca
Par. in long =sin 36° 59° 17" cos 42 =~ 9351" sin 8° 38° 25” cos 14” 27° =x 3351"
Loag of cen. ecl. point— ose 156° 54’
Ee “re > See
— ro ee oe

Calculations of Eclipses by the Editor 392k
- or or fi
v4 - and latter mesn balf daration a7 7
Add to former
eon]
‘Times s of app. contact and separation
J em moot 11" 417 a.m.
a. eee et cama Py Ay hy ame by
. Suryasiddhints Nautice! Almanac
er ,
True former and latter half duration
of .
Bubtract and add from and to time of app a sone “si
me 12° og", T Pw.
“it SaryasiddbAnts y
with bija correc- with the
Jee

SANSKRIT INDEX.
Tan following Index contains all the Senskrit words, excepting proper names, which
have been cited in the text and notes, in co
detailed explanation. It includes many terms of trivial importance, but we prefer to
err upon the side of fullness, if upon either, All
are not given, but it is referred to o characteristic
explained. ‘Che references by Roman and Arabic figures
an added n denotes the note next following the verse given :
alone refer to pages.
anca, i. 28 1.
ancucimarda, wii. 19.
akeha, i, 6On. c"
akshadrkkarman, vii. 12 n, is, Sn,
akehabhdaé, it, 18 nm.
akehonnati, i, 6On.
agrajyd, iii, Tm.
agramduroikd, iii, 27.
agra, iii, 7m.
aghd«, add. n, 26.
angdraka, add. n. 3.
angula, ii. Su, x. 9.
aja, i. 58 nh.
aja ekapdd, 230,
anu, wii. 1.
aljpegita, ti, Ll o.
atigighra, i. 13.
adits, xii. 28 n.
adhrkdra, i. 7T0n, xi. Qn.
adhimdsa, adhimdsaka, i, 40 n.
adhydtma, xii. 11,
adhydya, xi, 23m, xii, 10.
anurddhd, *
anupvakra, ii. 12.
Trnushnagu, add, n. 3,
antara, xi. 18 n.
antaralagndsavas, ii. 50 n.
antyd, iti, 7m.
andhakd, add. n, 26,
apakrama, i, 70 n.
apakramamandala, xiii, 13 n,
apabharant,
apamandala, xiii, 13 0.
apaxacya, vii. 19.
onection with their translation or more
All the cases of occurrence of cach word
passage, or to the note where it is
are to chapter and verse, and
Arabic figures when used
arka, add. n. 3.
arkaja, add, nm 3.
arkdagrd, iii, 23.
arjuni, add. on. 26.
aloka, xin. 16 n.
acanati, v. Ln.
ageattha, add, n. 26.
acgrayujdu, 211.
agoini, agvini, agvinda, 211.
ashddhda, 224.
asavas, tit, 45 fn.
usita, x. Loo.
aeu, i. 12 mn: and see aeavas.
acura, i, 2, xin. 35.
asta, ix. ln.
astamgachant, xiii, 13.
astamana, astamaya, 1x. 1 o.
astalagna, xii. 15 wb.
astdnegds, ix. 5 n.
asphuta, v. 7.
aghankdra, xii, 20.
dhargana, i. Sl n,
ohé budhnya, 199, ix, 15,
aherdtra, ui, Slo.
jkdca, xii, On.
dkeha drkkarman, vii, 12 n.
dkaha valana, iv. 25 no.
dgnueya, viii, 18.
dds, xii. 15,
dditya, vin. 19, xu. 2S no.
dpa, dpas, 224 vil. 21 4.
dpya, wii. 4.
dyana graha, vii. 12 n.
dyana drkkarman, vii, 12 0.
dyana calana, iv. 25 n.
drki, add. n. 3
drdrd, 215.
dryikd, add. n. 26.
dertya, iii, 12H.
dereshd, 217.
dgleaha, 217.
deannatd, xii. 72 n.
tedu, add. mn. &.
invakdé, add. nm. 26.
tleald, add. n. 26.

oi a
te ra 33, Hn, ii, Sn.
relatos Sbdhesintake,: ii, 22.
uttera, vi. 12n, 218, 2
uttara khanda, xi. 23 n.
_ uttardyana, ili, 12 n.
ya, ¥, In, ix, In.
udayajyd, v. 3n.
wudayaprénds, ii. 59 n.
udaydsavas, ii. 59m, iil, 43 n
udaydstddhikdra, ix. Ln.
unnata, iii, 39n, iv, 26.
unmandala, iii. Gn.
unmandalacanku, iii, 34 n.
unmilana, iv. 17 ».
ullekha, vii. 18.
@rdheam, xiii. 10 n.
ardhea yamyottaraprtta, xiii. 15 n,
reas, xii. 17.
ryu, ii. 13.
rea, i. Sn.
riu, xiv. 10 n.
rshi, vill. 21 n. xiv. 26.
ekadega, xi. 18 n.
eké4yanagata, xi. 5n, 18 n.
dindra, xi. 21.
oja, ii, 35.
kakeshdé, iv. 3n, xii. 65 nm, xiii. 4.
kadamba, v. ln.
kanyd, i. 58 n.
kapdla, ¥. 17 n, xiii, 22 n.
kagila, vi, 23.
kerana, ii. 67, 69 n.
karant, iii. 80, 34 n.
. karka,. karkata. iL 58 n.
karna, 41, ili. 23 n, iv. 21 n.
harusea,. ‘ii. 42, vii. 12 n.
kalana, i. 10 n.
kali, i. 17 a
kali yuga, i. 17 n.
kata, 4. t 19.
képilike, viii. 13 n.
karmuka, add. n. 16.
kdlagati, ix. lin.
kdlabhagds, ix. Sn.
kdlasddhana, iii, 50.
kdléncde, ix. 5 n.
kdahthd, i. 12 n.
oo ii. 7 ny ome oT ee add. n. 1
hone yd, ii, 30m, add. no, 16.
kotijyéphala, ii. 39 n.
Rosiphala. ii. 39 n.
kona, iii. 34 on.
konaganku, Hi. Bn.
krdnti, i. T0n.
kréntyyd, i. 28 0.
Krantipdta, W.
krantipdtagati, vi, 12 n.
krdntrmandala, xu. 13 n.
krdntiertta, xiti. 13 n. :
kroga, 1. 60 n.
kahana, Le 12 n.
kehaya, 2. 40 n, xii. 72 0.
kechate, i. Con. ~
kshitija, ii 49 n, ¥. Ln.
kahitiyyd, 65 1.
Kehap, 1. 70 n.
kehetra, ix. 16m. xii. D1,
Ihetradngds, ix. 16 n.
kehetriya, 223.
kehepa, iv. 21 n, v. 6n.
khacara, add. n. 22.
khecdrin, add, n. 22,
Maan ves: v. ln, xiii. 14.
gana, i. 28 n.
ganda, xi. 22 n.
ganddanta, xi, 21, 22.
gati, v. Gn.
garbha, v. In.
guru, xiii. 2, add. mn. 3.
gureakshara, i, 12h.
guhyoke, xii, 3m.
gola, v. lu. .
srexexe, JV. 683 vil. In.
gréea, iv. lln, 15 n, 20.
grahaka, iv. 9 n.
gradhya, iv. On.
ghati, xm, 23 n.
ghatikd, i. 12m, xii, 23 nm.
cakra, iii. Tn, Kili, 21 n.
caturasra, iii, Sn.
catushpada, ii. OF 4
candra, add. n.
candragrahandihikiro, iv, 26
candrad 5
idas n.
cara, i, 63 n, xiv. bn.

Sanskrit Index
caradala, ii, 63 0.
cala, ii. 40.
cala karna, uu. 420,
capa, add. n. 16.
citrd, 220.
chandas, xii, 15.
chddaka, iv. On.
chaédya, iv. 9 nchdéydé, iil, 5 n.
cheda, tii, 35, v. 7.
chedyaka, vi. 1n.
jayin, vi. 21.
yna, add. n. 3
pdvinds ii, 27 n.
jydpindaka, ii. Sl.
jydrdha, ii. 27 n.
tatpara, 1. 12 n.
tamas, vi. ll.
tallagndsavas, ix. 11.
tajika, vii. 23
tdrakd, téra, vii. 1n, viii. 16, 19, xii. 43.
tdrdgraha, vir. Ln.
tiqmingu, add, n. 3.
tithes, i. 13, un. 66 n.
tithikshaya, i. 400.
tithyanta, v. 13 0.
tims, tu. 5 n.
ty ra, x. 150
tiryagsya, xin. 13D
tishya, 216.
tulad, i. n-.
torana, 221.
tringatkrtyas, iii, 12 n.
tringatkrtvas, iit. 12 n.
trikona, iii. 34 n.
tricatuhkarna, wii. 14 n.
trijied, ii. 6On.
truti, i, 120.
#4 yuga, i, 17 n.
dig, ii. 69 n, v. 2.
drkkarman, vu. 120.
drkkshepa, ¥. 6n.
dritulyatd, wu. 18 n.
drktulya etc., xi. 5 0.
dragati, v. On.
drggatijied, v. 7.
drgjy4, v. 60.
drglambana, ¥. 1n.
drgeortta, v¥. Ln.
dreydngds, ix. 5 ndecdntara, 1. 61 n.
degdntaraphala, ii. 39n, MO.
déivata, ui. 10.
dorjyad, ii. 48. .
dos, ii. BO n, add. n. 16.
dyugana, 1. Sin.
dyujyyd, 1. GO n.
dedpara yuga, i. 17 a.
deisvabhdea, xiv. 4.
deipa, xi. 440.
dhana, ii. 5 n.
dhanim, :
dhanishthaé, 227.
dhanus, i. 58n, GOn, sau. 21 no,
dhishnya, vii. Io, X!. 91.
dkruca, 1. 67, wu Lo.
dhirucaka, viii. 1 n.
dbruvatairé, xii, 43.
nakshatra, 230.
add. a. 13.
nakshatragraha tyadhikdra, vill. lo
nata, ii, 15, 1¥ n.-
natayyd, iv. 25 n.
natabhdagds, ii. 17.
natdncds, in. 21.
nafs, +. 1 o.
nara, xiii. 220.
narayantra, xi. 24.
ndkshatra, x. 5n.
naga, ii. 67, GIn, xn. 3d.
nadi, i. 19m, xiii. 23 nb.
naddikd, i, 12 n, xiii. 23 0.
nimilana, iv. 17 n.
nimesha, i. 12 n.
niraksha, xii. 44 0.
nirgli, 223.
nicdkara, add. n. J,
nicdpati, add. n. 3.
nishft{ya, 220
paksha, i. 66 n.
para, i. Ql n.
perama, i. 70 n.
paramakrants, jya, nu. 26 n,
paramdna, i, 12 0.
paramdpakrama, i. 28 n.
param dyus, 1. 21 n.
pardrdha, i, 21 n.
paridhs, ii, 38 n.
pariiekha, vi. 1 1.
pardiekhdadhikdra, vi. 1a.

paryonke, 218. =
percon, iv. Bn, xiv. 16 n.
porvanddyas, iv. 8 n.
parvavinddyas, v. 3.
percdnta, xiv. 16 n.
pdtddhikdra, xi. 5 n.
patala, xii. 33.
pidma, i. 23n.
pdraddrd, xiii, 22 n.
pinda, ti. 27 n.
pilaras, 217.
pitrya, viii, 18.
punarcasu, 215. °
purusha, xii, 12.
pushya, 216.
pirnamd, giirnimd, ii. 66 n.
pirnimdnta, xiv. 16 n.
pirea, 210.
pirea khenda, xi. 23 n.
piishan, 230.
prahtha, ve. 1 n.
pdurnamdsi, u. 66 n.
péushnya, xi, 21.
prakriy, xii. 13.
pragraha, iv. 15 n.
pragrahana, v. 16.
pratishthdna, add. n. 26.
prabhd, iii. 6 n.
praména, v. 15.
pravaha, un. 8B.
pracna, 322.
praci, iv. 26 n, add. n. 235.
prdfc, vi. 12 n.
prina, i. 12 n.
proshtha, 228.
proshthapaddé, 238.
Phaloa, ii. 34 n.
phalquni, 218.
phalqunt, 218.
bala, vii, 20.
bali, 222.
bhalin, wii, 21.
bdrhaxpatya, viii. 18,
birhaspatya mdna, i. 55 n.
bihu, ti. BOn, add. n. 16, 26.
bdhujyd, ii. 30.
bihuphala, ii. 39 n.
bija, i. On, 34 n.
° Regi canes
brahman, xii, 12.
brahmahrdaya, viii. 12 n.
bha, i. 97m, iii, 12m.
Lig sah i. 27 n, ii. 1, xii. 6.
bhdga, i, 28 n.
bhddrapadd, 228.
bhdnu, add. mn. 3.
bhdrgaca, add. n. 3.
bhdskara, add. vn. 3.
bhuktdsavas, iii, 49 n.
bhakti, i. 27 n.
buy, i. 27 n.
bhuya, ii. 30 n, ii. 5m, add. n. 16,
bhujajy4, ii. BOn, add. n. 16.
bhujajydphala, ii, 39 n.
bhujaphala, ii, 39 n.
bhujasitra, iii. 5.
bhdgola, xii. 32>
bhiagolddhydya, xi, 23 n.
bhdputra, add. n. 3.
bhdbhagola, xiii. 3n.
bhdmigola, xiii. 3 n.
bhamiputra, add. n. 38.
bhisuta, add. n. 3.
bhrgu, add. n, 3.
birguya, add. n. 3.
bheda, wii. 18.
bhoga, ii. 64.
bhogydsavas, iii. 49 n.
bhduma, add. n. &.
bhramana, xii. 76.
makara, i. 58 n.
maghd, 217.
manca, 218.
mandala, x. 15 n, xi. 18 n, xii, 76.
matsya, it. Sn,
madhya, i. 70 n, xiii. 15 n.
. madhyakarna, iii. 23 n,
madhyagrahana, v. 13 n.
madhyasyd, v. 6 n.
madhyapita, xi. & n.
madhyabha, ¥. 1.
madhvama, xiii. 14.
madhyamddhikdra, i. 70 nmadhyarekhda, i. n.
madhyalagna, iii. 49 n, xiii. 16 nm. -
madhyasthityardha, v. 13 n.
madhydkna, x. 8 n.
madhye, xiv. 14 n.
manu, 1 1Dn. |
manda, ii. 5m, 12, add. n, 8,
mandakarman, vii. 15 n.
mandakendra, ii. 30 n.
mandatara, ii. 12. —
mandaparidhi, ii. 34.
mandaphala, ii. 44,
mandocea, i, 34 n.
nmienecantara, i. 19 n.
wmiaharshs, i, 8, xii. 35.
mahdbhdta, xii. 28.
ya, xiv. 2n.

Sanskrit.
mdsha, xiii. 23 n.
mitra, 222.
mithuna, i. 58 nm.
mukhya, 1. 1idn.
muhdrta, 1. 12 n.
madrita, i. lO on.
mdla, 223,
mrga, i, 58 on,
mrgaoyidha, van. 12 n.
mrgaciras, 214.
mrgacirsha, 214.
meloka, wil. 1 n.
mesha, i. 58 n.
mditra, viii, LB.
moksha, iv. 15 4.
mdurvikd, ii. 27 n.
yojdmshs, xii. 17.
yantra, xiii. 19.
yash{i, xiii. 21 nydmyottaracrita, iv. 2on, xin, 15 n.
yuga, i. 17 nm, 5S n.
yoga, u. 65 n, vil. ln, add. n. 10.
atérakdé, wii. 19.
yoyjana, 1. GOn.
ranhas, ii. Sn.
ravi, add. n. 3.
rdkehasa, 1. 62.
ragt, 1. 26 n.
réhu, vb. Bo.
rekid, i. Gln,
renugarbha, xui. 22 n.
revats, 230.
rohint, 214.
rdudrarksha, ax. 14.
lagna, ii, 48, 49 n.
lagndntoraprands, ix. 5,
erage ta = 2.
a cas, i. 47.
lankodayds, xiii, 14,
lankodaydsavas, iit. 49 mn.
lamb, i. 27 n, ni. 12 n.
lamba, i. 60 n.
lambayyda, i. E60.
liptika, i. 2
Index:
pasu, B15.
castra, xili. 16.
vdyacea, vin. LO no.
cdra, i. 52 nm.
cdrdha, 1. 23 n.
tdésaca, ix. 18,
vikald, i. 28, wi. 10.
vikehip, 1. 70m, vin. 12.
vikshepa, i. T0n.
nigraha, vii. 22.
etertdu, 223.
erita, win. 21.
vifast?, i, 5 nn,
cidig, ii. F2.
cidyddhara, xi. 31 nm.
ridhu, add. no. 3.
cidhrta, vidhrti, xi. 5 n.
vidheasta, vii. 21.
omdadi, 1. 123 n.
tiparita, xi. 5n, xin, F2 0.
pimarda, iv. 15 on.
cicascant, add. n. 3.
cigdkhd, 221, 224.
ciccoe decides, 224.
tishama, it. 30.
cishuca, cishucat, i. 6H.
cishucatprabhda, iai- 13.
cishucadbhd, ii. 7.
tivhucadertta, iii. 6m.
vishucanmandala, i. 6 n.
cija, 1. 34 n.
ertta, vu. 3S n.
orddht, xu. T2 0.
ercctka, i. 58 n.
orchan, 1. 58 0.
cega, m. Il n.
ceda, xii. 27.
eeddnga, i. Bn,
edidhrta, edidhrts, xi. 5 n.
edigea, viii, 4.
cdsshucati, xin. 0.
cdishnaca, ix. 1s.
cyaksha, xu. 44 n,
oyatlipdta, xi. 5 n.
eyoman, xii. 30,
gaka, add. n. 132.
gakuen, it. 69 nm.
canku, thi. Gn, 3tn.
gankujied, iii. 22,
catabhishay, shad, 227.
cant, add. n. 3.
candiccara, add. n. 3.
¢cayyd, 218.
cara, add. n. 16,
ic bea a oes 3.
¢cacija, i. nm. 3.
im, add. n. 3.
cdka, add, n. 19.
ctkhin, 249 note.
cighra, i. 34n, ii. 12.
cighrakarman, ii. 37.
cighrakendra, 1. 30 n.
¢fghratara, ii. 12.
¢cighraparidhs, wu. 55.
¢ighraphala, ii. 44.

J afi
aa reese ry
we »
aly rind Mes
eae rae ae, wy
ua =e ae: oe: aad: 3 ne 3.
Stngonnatyuibika, x. lo.
il 4.
ighrya, ii. 42, 43.
raighryes ‘26, iv. 21 n.
¢ravana, iv. Zin, 226.
gravishthd, 227,
¢rond, 226.
shadagitimukha, xiv. 60.
samyoga, vii. 1 n-.
-gamvat, sameatsera, add. n. 12.
sanskdra, (362.
sanhita, wii. 23 n, add. n. 1.
sonkramana, xiv. 10 n.
sankrantt, XIV. 3 n.
sadhamra, vi. 23.
gandhi, xi. 22 n.
sannihitam saras, 4. H2 nm.
saplarshayas, xi. 9.
sama, ii. 12, iv. 25 n.
ramamandala, iil. 6 n.
samamandalacganku, ii. SA on.
samasitra, xiv. 7».
samdgama, vii. Lo, 20, 22.
samdsa, vi. 3.
saras, 1. 62 n.
sarpds, 217.
sacvano, xiv. 19 n.
savitor, xii, 28 n, add. n. 3.
savyam, xii. 72 n.
sparca, iv.
—~ aI sk 5 a
sdmpraddyika, vii. Ba
sdyana, 345. —
sdrpa, vill, 19. =
win 12, xiv. call
aoe. my *
sura, xii. 41.
sdel, iv. Sn.
stra, xii, 22 n.
adrya, add. n. 3.
saryagrahanddhikdra, iv, 26 n.
stryatanaya, add. n. 3.
siryadigas, x. 15 n.
soma, add. n, 3.
sdumya, viii. 16, add. n. 3.
gdura, i. 13, xiv. 3n.
sthits, iv. 15 nm
sthira, xIY. 6n.
sthala, viii. 19. :
n.
spas ta, a ee ”
spashtddhikdra, i. 70 n.
ephuta, i. 60.
sphudasthityerdhe, v. 17 n.
sphufikarana, iit, 14
srotas, xii.
svat, srvdti, “920.
harija, v. Ln. -
hasta, i. 60n, 219.
hdni, xii, 72 n. : ae a
kimediahsti, himaragmi, himdngu, add
tinea Se 1.
hutabhiu
hora, xt

GENERAL INDEX.
THE REFERENCES ARE AS IN THE PRECEDING INDEX.
Abhijit, 22nd asterisam—identification, etc.,Apimvatesa, name of etar (@ Virginie),
225, omission from the series, 240-42. viii, 21.
Abu-r-Raibin, see al-Biréini. Apas, name of star (4 Virginia), vill. 21.
Acleshi, %h asteristn—identification, ete.;Aphelion, 17—see Apis.
217; ite last quarter unlucky, xi. 21. Apogee, 17—see Apsia.
Agvina, 6th or 9th month—i. 51 mn, xiv. 30,Apparent longitude, vii. Wn: term how
used by Colebrooke, wii. 1 nh.
Agrini, lat asterism—identification, ¢tc., Apsis—term how employed in this work,
211. 17: apsides of the planets, mode
Acvins, divinities of lat asterism. 211. action. il. 1-5; revolutions, i. 41-42; bow
Aditi, divinity of 7th asterism, 215. devised, i. 44 n; positions, ete., to difAditya, 215 ctc., xii. 28 0. ferent authorities, i. 440; compared with
#Zon, i. 19; day of Brahma, i. 20; names Ptolemy's, add. on. 11.
of past and current, i. 23n.- For moon's apsis, s¢¢ Moon.
Agastya, mame of star (Canopus), viii. 10. Arab astrology, connection with Hindn, vil.
Age—Great Age, or Quadruple Age, bow 23n.
oon , i. 15-17; Golden, Silver, Brazen,Arab use of sines, Ister than Hindu, 63.
and Iron Ages, i. 17 mn; quarter-Age,Arab lunar mansions, 200: identified and
proper iod of hia treatise, 18. compared with Hindu and Chinese, 211-231 ;
Agni—divinity of 3d, asterism, 218: with character and origin of system, 234, etc.;
Indra, divinity of 16th asteriam, 221: name = stellar chart illustrating, add. nm. 27.
of star (8 Tauri), viii. 11. Arc—names of, and of its functions, add.
Albategnius, Arab inventor of sines, 63. n. 16: part of are determining sine, i.
‘al-Birini—visit to India, and notices of 30; to find are of a given sine, nu. 33.
Hindu astronomy, i. 3n, 60; identificationArdré, 6th asterism—identification, ele.,
and description of the asteriams, 210, ete., 215, add. n. 24, : ?
O41. Armillary sphere—construction, equipment,
(For other Arabic names commencing with and revolution of, xiii. 1-20; its use, ond
the article, see the initial letter of the comparison with those of other nations, xiii.
word following the article.] 3n; its adaptation to observing polar
Altitude, sine of—name, 130, udd. n. 21; longitude and latitude, wii. 12 n.
how calculated, iii. 28-34, 34-36. 37-38 :Aryabhatta—his period and writings, add.
© instrument for taking altitude, xiii. 21m. & 1: references to his doctrines, i.
‘ Altitude in time, in. 3Y, iv. 26. i. GOn, add. n. 18—see Arya-Siddhinta,
Amplitdde, sun's at horizon—sine of, iii. Laghu Arya-Siddhinta, Arvishtagata,
* 972 measure of, on the dial, iii, 7; ite | Dagagiteka.
: constant ratio to hypoth. of shadow, iii. Aryabhatta, commentator on the SiryaTn; how calculated, iii, 22-23, 27-25. ‘iddhanta, add. n. 2.
| n yous, | _p. 19. Aryaman, divinity of Lith or 12th asterism,
.* Anala, 24th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n. 19.
Ananda—22nd year of Jupiter's cycle, |. 55 n; Aryashtacate, treatise by Aryabhatta, add.
= name of a yoga, add. mn, 19. a
Angiras, 40th year of Jupiter's ayele, i. 55 un. Arya-Siddhanta, add, mn. 1: citations of its
quantity not employed in Hindu feachings, 26, i, 440, add. n. 6.
. astronomy, Lol. Ascension—see Right ascension and Oblique
Anomalistic revolutions of nets, p. 71. ascension. —
aly, mean—nare, ii. ; how reckoned, Ascensional difference, how calculated, ii.
Anquetil du Perron, notice of the Parsi Ascensional equivalents—see Right io
| asteriatms, etc., 208. ite ia.
_ Antipodes, Hind
sald nda view of, xii, 51-55. Ashidhbs, 90th and 2let asterisms—identifia. dha, 17th asterism —identification, ete., Ue tai ete., 224.
pik ; . —- * 4th year of lustrumm, xiv. 17 nH. ana nH. = 7 : ay é' ; ? 3)

Aspects, unfavourable, of
when of like declination, xi.
Asterisms—Hindn name for, 239; how to be Base of o right-angled triangle, ii. 90 n, add
translated, 239. add. n. 28: their portions,
Siirya-Siddhanta
eon and moon, 4l-Baldah, 21st manzil, 225.
. Bani}
, Tth, ete., karana, ii. 69 n,
or divisions of the ecliptic belonging toPase-sine=sine, ii. 30m, add. n. 16,
them, ii. 64, 207, 289: their junction-stara, Base of the
gnomon-shi
207; time and motive of selection, 289;Batn al-Hiit, 28th manszil, 250.
names, add. nm. 19; situation § in
group, will,
position, will. Im; defined positions, viii.
2-9: illustrative figure, 206: discordance of
authorities, 210; errors of position examined. and time of definition deduced,
243; mode of observation of positions, viii.
12n; detailed identification of the groups
and their junction-stars. with statement of
names, symbole. divinities. defined positions, efec., comparison with Arab mandi!
a! kamar and Chinese sien, 211-231: additional synonyms of names, add, nn.
each Pava, 2nd, etc., karana, ii, 69 n.
16-19: mode of definition of Bentley, introd. note; his views of Hindu
astronomical literature, i. 3n, 27: method
of determining the age of a SiddhAnta,
23; applied to Sdrya-Siddhinta, and conclusion drawn, 24; criticiam of his method
and results, 24, ete.; general estimate of
his labours, 27, add. no. 8; his view of
Hindu precession, 120; of asterisms, 224;
other citations from and referencasa to his
Qf: Phadricva, name of a clime, xii. 38
inability of later Hindus to point thern ont, BhAdrapadaé, 26th and 27th asteriamsa —identi210: a«l-Birfini’s information fresnecting fieation, ete,, 228, add. n. 26.
them, 210, ete, 240, 241: eonspectua of Bhidrapada, Sth or 6th month, i. Sl nm, xiv.
correspondences of the three systems, 291: 4n, l6n. ,
stellar man illustrating their relations. add. Phaga, divinity of lith or 12th asterism.
n. 27: Biot’« views of their origin and
connection, 282, ete.: age of the avatem in
India. 234: diacnssion of its eharacter. 12. . aes :
comnections, and origin. 234, etc.; transfer en ae name of a clime, containing India,
of first rank fron ti inf, S37; _ Mu. a. f
Solutio: to the Tiree pes ae ras ani Bhaakate, add. n. 1—see Siddh4nta-Qiromani,
variation in number, and omission of Bhiva, 42nd year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.
Abhijit. 240. Bhoja-Siddbfinta, add. n. 1. Tee
conjunction of planets with asterieme, viii. Bhrgya (? Vrshya?) 49th year of Jupiter's
14, 15; avstems of yogas fonnded upon, 244,_ cycle, 1. 55 n.
Bharant, 2nd asteriam identification, ete..
add. mn. 19: helinesl settings, ix 19-15, Bhhdhera, commentator on Sirya-Siddhinta
17-18; orbit and revolution, xii 73, 80, _ add. n. 2.
0 n. Bija, correction of mean motions of planets,
Astrologyv—cenerally treated in distinct 22, ete., i. On; table of mean motions aa
Astronomy—aee Greek
Astronomical literature of Hindus.
Atiganda, 6th yous, ii. A5 n.
al-Auwf*, 13th manzil, 229).
Pw
Avin-Akbari—orbits of the planets, an
works, vii. 23n; titles of astrological works 80 corrected, 22, add. n. 7.
vii. 23; connection of Hindu with Greek Biot—his views of origin and history of
and Arab, vil, 23: astrological import of Chinese efen, 211, 292, ete.; of Hindu asconjunctions of planeta. vii, 18-28: of terisms, 240 ete.: of omission of Abhijit,
splitting of Rohini’s wain. viii. 18m: of 240: of Hindu sines, add. n.
eanality of declination of sun and moon, xi: references to and citationa from his works,
of sun's entrance into a sign, xiv. 11, Sie n, i. 67 n, add. n. 10, 17, 18, 87, 28,
astronomy, Hindu ,
EBrahma—day of, i. 20; length of hia life,
i, 21; time of, xiv. 21: divinity of 22nd
usteriam, 225: name of star ( Aurigm),
vill. Zin: 25th yoga, ii. 65 n
Brahmagupta, i. In, add. n. 1—see Brahmasphota-Siddbanta and Khanda Kataka, _
viven Brahroshrdaysa, name of star (Capella), wil.
astronomy.
siimnmory
view of, add. n. 1 ;
Avanti, name of Ujjavint. i. 62.
by, 296, note; description of instrument for 11-12,
Measnring time, xiii, 23 n. Brahima-Siddhinta, add. n. 1, 6.
Ayushmant, 3rd yoga, ii, 65 n. Brahms-sphota-Siddhanta, add wm. Ls: ite
aveterm. how different from Sirva-SidPaludhanya, 46th wear of Jupiter's eyele, .
views of Hindu ast
ronomy add. mn. 18.
382; mean positions of the Brhaspati, divinity of Ath asteriam, 216.
beg. of Iron Age, 20: other Brhaspati-Siddbanta, add. n. 1. |
to his works, 84, 3239. Bodhavira, Wednesday, i, 52 n,
ete., ii, 69 n. al-Bula’, 28rd maneil, 226,
dhAnta, add. nm. GO: references to ite docé
15; ather .

General Index
al-Butain, 2nd mansil, 213.
Qabdakalpadruma—ita list of Siddb&ntas,
add. n. 1
Citra, 12th or Ist month, i. 51 nm, xiv. So,
kalya-Sanhité, add. nm. 1: references to,
etc.
Qakuni, 58th karapa, i, 69 n :
Calendar, sketch of
Qilivihana, era of, add. n. 12.
Qanivira, Saturday, i. 52 n.
Cara, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
‘Qarad, autumn, xiv. 10n, lin.
Cardinal directions, names of, vi. 12 n.
Qarvari. Sth year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.
Qatabhistaj, 95th asteriam—identification,
Catushpada, 60th karana, ii. 69M.
Central ecliptic-point, v- In; sines of
altitude and zenith-diatance. v. 5-6.
Chang, th siew, 219.
Chattra. name of & yoga,
Che, @4th eieu, 290.
Chin, 11th «sien, 220
a Hindu, for the year
add, mn. 19.
Chinese astronomy and division of the heavens @yjmukha, 41st year of Jupiter's -yele.
—see Siew.
Chord of an arc, G4, xiii, LO n, add. n.
opiate ea ceveles, i. 15-21; eras.
n.
add.
Conjunction and opposition of sun and mocn,
common name of, iv. 8n: true and apparent conjunction, names of, v. 13 n
Conjunction of planeta with one another, vii:
with asteriams, viii. 14-15; name, general,
vii, Im: particular, astrological, vii. 18-20,
22: conjunction viewed as taking place
on secondary to prime vertical, wi. Gn:
time and place how calculated, vii. 2-11;
per observations of conjunctions, viiContact of disks. or disk and shadow in
cclipses, iv. 15 n; time of first and last
contact how determined, iv. 16.
Cosine—not distinctly recognized, 64, ii.
30 n: term corresponding to, ii. 30 n, add.
pn. 16; part of arc determining covine, li. 30.
Seip ag development of creation, xii
ig stag one asterisrin—identification, ete...
; Seis see
Oraivapa 4th or Sth month, i. Sin, xiv.
Gravish{ha, ith
Creation, time s
as given by ot
of this
asterism — identification,
nt by the Deity in, 1. 24;
r treatises, i. 44 5 reason
allowance, @1
mh
QOridhara, ratio of diam. to cirowmfl. according to, i. 60n.
rh.
Getehegs, author of Romuka-Siddhanta, add
ul.
Qrivatea, name of a yoga, add. n. 1.
igira, coal season. xiv. 10n, l6n aS Ser : |
ratio of diam. to circumf., 4. n, 64. ‘ca We TR teed
Citra, 14th asteristn —identification, toe 10th year of Jupiter's cycle, |!
‘ rat's . Cubie, i. 60n, ti. 5 n.
Citrabhinu, 60th year of Jupiter's nycle, 4. Qokla—37th year of Jupiter’s cycle, i. 550;
~=—édBS e
_Qiva, 20th yoga, ii, 65 n. BHth yous, ii. 65 n
Neue OnE Friday, i. 52 n.
Civil time, day—see Time, Day. :
. : fla, Mth yoga, i, 65 no.
loka, eommon Hindu verse, introd. Cusps of the moon—name, x. ln, loa; their
Xe Qobhana—lith year of Jupiter's cycle, i, elevation calculated, x. 6-8; delimeated, *x.
55 n; Sth yoga, ii. 65 nu. 10- |
Co-latitude, terrestrial—name, i. 60 nD: how Cycle—of five years, i. 58n; names of ite
found, iit, 19-14, 14-17. years, xiv. 17 mn: of sixty years of Jupiter,
: : | _ 55: of twelve years of Jupiter, xiv. 17:
Colebrooke, introd. n.: his statement of ie deri | t SEs. Oe
the ss tems of yoras, i’. G5, add. the Pry ag ee m: Vaesler chronalogiidentification, etc., of the asteriams, . . = <° :
etc.; information as to astronomical Literature, add. nm. Ll: other references toad-Dabarin, 4th mance, 214.
‘and citations from hin works, i, 27 DB Duwcagitika, treatise by Aryabhatta, add
19 4, a1 ‘n, xiii. 3 n, 5 n, xiv. 16 0, add oor Bhai, commentator on Sdrya-Siddhbanta,
Color of moon when eclipsed, vi, 24. Daily motions of plancts, etc., i. 25-27; of
Cotmmutation, mean—name, ii, 220; how equal absolute amount on each orbit, xi
29 S)n: tables of mean daily motions, 19,
n.
a planet—term how enpar 29, add. n. &,
7; mean motions in aidereal
cee
in thie work, 18; mode of action om t aay 104; true daily motions, how calplanet, ii. 1-6; revolutions, i. 29-92; orbits, culated, si. 47-51; comparative table f, for
it
bh

references to and
in Asiatic Re , introd. p.,
Da vil re how reckoned, i. 36, xiv. 18;
- wamber of in an Age, i. 37; varying length
in different seasons, xii. 45-71: lunar day,
i. 13; number of in an Age, i. 37; its
ion, ii, 64; current one how determined.
i. 66: omitted lonar days, i. 36; number
of in an Age, i. 38; bow calculated for o
given period, i, 50; sidereal day, xiv. LS:
ite divisions, i. 11-12; number of in an Age,
i. 34: solar day, xiv. 3n: day of the gods,
“the Fathers. xii. 77 n, xiv. 14; day af
Prajapati, xiv. 21; day of Brahma, 1. 20,
xiv. 21.
Day of a planet, i.
34, it. 59; ite divisions.
Day-meagure, it, 35 pn.
Day-radius, ii. 60
Day sine, ii. 60 n.
Declination—name, 52: reckoned as in the
ecliptic, 653, vili. In: how caleniated,
i. ; how combined with latitude, ii. 58;
comparative table of, for Jan. 1, 1860, 99,
how found by observatian, iii. 17-18.
Declination, equal, of the sun and
Incon—
time how calculated, and astrological
influence, Xi.
Deflection of ecliptic from an east and
west direction-——-how calculated, for use in
projection of eclipses, iv. 24-25; how projected, vi, 2-9.
Degree of a circle, i. 25.
Delambre, references to and citations from
his works, introd. n., 63, 64, 120, vii.
Dhitar, 44th year of Jupiter's cycle, 1. 55»
adh-Dhir&, 7th manzil, 216.
Dhrti), Sth yoga, ii, 65 n.
Dhrova, 12th yoga, ij. 65 n.
Chiimra, name of a yoga, add. n. 19,
Dhvaja, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
Dhvinkeha, name of a youa, add. n. 1%.
Dial, construction of, in, 1-7.
Diameter, relation of to circumference, i
Digit, iii. 5m; measure of the gnomon in,
mi, Sn; ivalent in minutes, im projecting an eclipse, iv. 26; measure of the
moon's disk in, iv. llm, x. On.
Directions on the aphere, how reckoned,
vii. 6 : cardinal directions, vi. 12 n.
Diurnal circle, radius of, |
ii, GO. 7
Dundubhbi, 30th year of Jupiter's cycle,
i. nh.
citations from hie Earth—form, position,
and suppart, xii. 32;
apparent form, Xi. 54; its revolution
ay by Aryabhatta, i. 27 n; dioiensians,
i. ; centre and surface, terme for, 163;
poles, xii. 34-35; geographical divisions,
xii, 36-40; zones, xii. 51-69; cavities within
it, xii, 33; measurement by circlea and
arca not applied to, i. 65 n.
Earth's shadow, diameter how calculated, iv.
EFarth-sine, ui. 61.
East and West direction on the sphere, 157.
Fast and west hour-circle, i. 6, xin. 15 1,
East point, 168, add, n, 23.
Eccentric circle, equivalent to Hindu epicycle
of apsis, 72. ,
Eecentriticities of planetary orbits, comparative table of, 57. |
Eclipses—name, iv. Gn; rules, applying to
solar and lunar, iv; rules for parallax,
applying to solar, vj; projections of oclipses,
vi: primitive theory of cause of eclipse, iv.
6n. ll n: true theory, iv. 9: cccurrence of
annular eclipse not contemplated, v. 13 nm:
calculation of a lunar eclipse, add. th. 4;
of a solar eclipse, add. n. 25; projection of
a lunar eclipse, 179. — vO
Ecliptic—name, xiii. 13 n; pole, 163 ; divisions, i, 28; their equatomal equivalents,
iii, 42-45: inclination, ii, 28: orient and
meridian points, iii. 46-49; central point,
v. ln: deflection from east and west direction at a given point, iv. 24-25.
Flements, five, xii. 25.
Fintrance of the sun into a sign, astrological
character, xiv. 3, 11.
Epicycle—name, ii. 380: dimensions, for
all the planets, ii. 34-37; change of dimensions, i, 3An, 86, add. n. 18; epicycle
of apsis equivalent to eccentric orbit, 72:
relative dimensions of orbits deduced from
epicycles of conjunction, 87 comparison
of Greek and Hindu systems, 84: Greek ,
origin of the method, 353. a ed
Equation of the centre—how calculated, .*
30; Ptolemy's method, for sun aod moon,
77: for other planets, 83; how applied,
with annual equation, in finding true places
of lesser planets, ii. 43-45; comparative
table of value when greatest, 55.
uution of the orb, or annual equation—
found, ii. 40-42: Ptolemy's method,
83 how applied, with equation of centre,
Fquation of time, correction for, li. 46; ite
wney, li. 4060. MS,
Equation of motion of a planct, ti. 47-51.
Faquator, celestial, ili, 6.
uator, terrestrial
, mame of, iv. 15 he! agar, shadow, iii, 7, 12-18; how found
rom
hov rmined, iv. 12-15, ¥. 13-17, . latitude, iii. 17. Be
Durmati, 20h year oe Jupiter’a « + Equinox, iii, 6m: pr mn of—seo Prepoe, Gh yenr at Jupiter's x due lan boxes ‘amy age use among Hindus, add
Be

General Index 403
Ether, fifth element, xii, 23; orbit of, xii. Hour-angle, distance in time from teridian,
SO. Al, oo. iii. 34-36; corrected hour-angle, 159; sun's
Kvection, not noticed by Hindus, 77. hour-angle how determined from observation, bi. 37-39.
Fang, 5th sieu, 222. . Sse Spar da ete iv. Zin: hypoth. of
al-Fargh al:Mukdim, 26th mana, 224. shadow of wnomon, iii. 8; constant relaal-Fargh al-Mukhir, 27th maneil, 220. tion to measure of amplitade, ui. 7 a.
Fathers, or Manecs—divinities of 10th asterjam, 217, their station and day, xii. 74,
xiv. 14. Iovara, 45th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.
Fixed stare—names and defined positions of (dAvateara, 3rd year of lustram, xiv. 17 n.
certain, viii. 10-12, 20-21; their identifica- Ideler—identifications of Arab mandzil, ~
tion, wil. 12 n, 21 no. 211, ete.
Full moon, day of, ii, 66 n. Idvatesra, 4th or Sth year of lustrum, xiv.
nm.
Gada, name of a yous, add. n. 19. al-Ikiti, 17th manztl, 222.
G | a fa y Inclination—of planetary orbits to ecliptic
Ginaed saute: Hy Grate Tastions, add. i: 68-70; comparative table of, i. 700: of
nl. ; eae as == B...
Gara, 6th, etc. karapa, ii. 69 n. ndra—20th yoga, 1. n: divinity of 18th
Gurga, Gargs Bidihsnio, add. n. 1. os 7a ao are ; of others, 228; with Agni,
corey Ss aad eee A urdgas, Xi "Inequalities of planetary motions—how pro-
‘Gaemen.. ii, 1. & np: ? duced, ii. 1-8; why of different degrees, ii.
Goei, Q3rd sieu, 228. v-11.
‘ , 3 F Instruments—armillary sphere, xiii, 1-20,
ea Re egal pair ye i oe ete esa vill. 12.0; other instruments for measuring
7 pap viii, (Qn. 21 eo . “ ee _ retool ethane, altitude, xiii.
’ . ain f. | n; for taking zenith-distance at meridian
Greek astronomy, relation of, to Hindu, 383, transit. viii. a!
: - ; . Tron Age, i. 17 n; its commencement, 19;
Spel "ise r ha eta Raper 7 il bow determined, 20.
Gidhartbaprakdgaka, oame of Kang
pitha’s commentary on the Shrva-fid- se ee 10th mane, 218.
dhanta, introd, mn. — ea ecerar rT ect ge in FPuranic
Suerenee ro es ai aac 2nd org of Jupiter's cycle, 1. 55 pa.
al-Hak’ah, Sth manzil, 214. oT aia. a og. Measures, and Coins of
aah. .. ae ah of eee Gene Ebaakare, reference to, 1. 6.
introd. n, add. n. 1, fdns-rija, aut of Bic -‘Sundara,
al-Han’ub. Psi canal orn. — baat author Siddhinta-Sundara
eWarshapa, ldth yoga, 1. 650. — Jones, Sir W., references to and citations
Hares Oe asteriam—identification, ¢f¢., from his works, 200, 200, xiv. lin, add.
—~« BLN. OM ou. 1.
2 Hemalamba, Sth year of Jupiter's ea at revolutions, otc., elc., see
i. 550 lanete—Jupiter’s cycle of sixty years, 1.
Hemanta, winter, xiv. 10 n, 16 5. 565; of twelve years, xiv. 17; their relation,
Hemisphe name, v. 170; castern and xiv. 17n. *
western, of heavens, ¥. lf n; northern and Jyéishtha, 2nd or 3rd moath, i. Sin, xiv.
6 of earth, xii. 46, 46
Heliacal settings and risings—of plaacte, ix.Jyeshjhé, 18th asterisn:—identification, ete.,
1-11; distance from sun of occurrence, ix. 222; its last quarter unlucky, xi. 21.
6-0; calculation of time, ix. 10-11, 16: of Jyotisha, astronomical treatise, 1. 3 nn.
- asteriams, ix. 12-17; asterisms which never
‘set heliacally, ix. 18: of moon, x. 1. —_ Kaladanda, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
inde: earn ys. discussion of ita origin, KAlayukta, 26th year of Jupiter's cycle, 14,
= , an m to the Greek, add. n. 30, 6 n.
Hii, 22nd sieu, 227. ‘ al-Kalb, 18th manael, 223.
ington, H. R.—hbis Oriental Astronomer Kamalikara, author of Tattva-Viveka, add.
ited introd. 2, ii, 19 n, B34. oe rt
He om, ii. np. pa, name of a yoga, , me 1.
-Hour—name, i. 52n; succession of regentaKang, 13th seu, 220
of, xii. 70. Karage, half o lunar day, ii, 67-69

ss Stirya-Siddhdnta
Earttika, 7th or month, i, Sin, xiv. Longitude, terrestrisj—name, i. 61 5; whence
Bn, 16 base naaae | messared, 1. 62; how determined, i. 63-65 ;
‘Kanlava, 4th, etc. karana, ii. 69 hn. measured in yojanas, 3. 65n.
Ketu, moon's descending node, ii, 8 n. Lunar time, day, month—see Time, Day,
Ketumila, a clime, xii, 39. Month.
Khanda-Kataka, treatise, or chapter of one, Lustrum, cycle of five years, i. 56 n; names
Gey thaltarepin otal by al-Birini res. of its years, xiv. 17 n.
asteriatms, 210, ete,, 241. >
Khara, 59h year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55.0, Mackenzie collection—see Wilson.
Ki, 18th eiew, 225. Mazha, 0th
os erage ification, ete.,
K . 16th year of Jupiter's cycle, 1, 556m. 158, add. n, 26. — |
, “aete hna, ist ation 69 n. aghié, 10th asteriem—identification, etc.,
Kio, bh siew, 220. Sn, 16 n.
Koei, 26th sieu, 230. Mitra, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
Mallikarjuna, commentator on Siirya-Sid.
reas 33rd year of Jupiter's cycle, * Sammath atta, "commentator one “Gteva:
os cia an ates ad eral fio 3 ME Manasa. naine of s yoga. add. m. 19.
Kritika, 3rd = asterism—identification, etc., anizil al-kamar—gee Arab juner man7 sions.
ry formerly firet of the sories, 1. 27 "+ Mangalavara, Tuesday, i. 52 n.
Kshaya, Sith year of Jupiter's cycle, 1 = aprons Srd year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
ov Be : Manu, citations and references, i. 12 n, 17 o
Kuet, 6th stew, 217. 19 n, 28n, xii. Qn, xiv. 14 n.
- Sapte Pesan Rr knee Nt on Mao, Ist stew, 213.
Kurukshetra, region in India, 1. = Miargacirsha, 8th or 9th month, i. 51 n, xiv.
Ladha, astronomical authority, 1. 3 n. . pag nl gan revolutions, etc | ae Doe
aagedhe or Lagata, author of Jyotisha, **Miatanga, name of a yoga, add. n. 19.
8m. aieted cipi a SfiryaLaghu-Arya-Siddhanta, add. mn. 1; citations ~ Sabhariee tro. - Rd barat ve 7 tack
and references, p. 2, macier te G. 9 24-27; conjectured identity of hia name
ard an hes’ a A tr -m. 12, with that of Plolemy,i. 6n. _
Lita, called by al-Birani author of Sirya- “a motions of plancts—see Daily motions,
Siddhainta, 1. 3b. ;
h I _ ude.
Latitude, celestial—name, i. 70n, 'v. 21 n: sean hace Of Planets—see Longitude
how measured, 1, 70n, vil, lo; mean Mercury, names, revolutions, ete., ele,—see
greatest Intitude of planets, i. 65-70: dati- planets.
tude of planets bow calculated, 4i. 56-57 + Moridian—no distinct name for in text, xiii.
how combined with declination, 1. 58. 15 n; name in commentary, 150, xiii, 15 n.
Latitude, terrestrial—name, i Gn; how eridian ecliptic point, tii, 49, v. 4-5, On, +
ascertained by observation of shadow, 1i' \foridian, prime—situation of, i. 62; why
13-14, 14-16: circumf., of earth on #® chosen, i. 62 n.
parallel of latitude, how found, i. 60. Meridian-sine, v, 5.
Leu, 27 th, siew, 212. : Meru—poles of the earth, xii. 34-35; in
la, Chinese measure of distance, i. OF n, Puranic geography, xii. 44 n.
add. ca 18. a pila — are, i. 28. |
Laeu, s wren, . <a litre, divinity of 17th asteriam,
ee boundary of the earth, xi. 44 n, Montli—eivil, i. 12: lonar, 45.- 18; number
xii, 16m. in an Age, i. 35; names of com -
Longitude, apparent—term how employed, posing t io year, 1. Sln, xiv. lin; how
vu. 125; how found, vii. 7-11. derived, xiv. 16n; divisions of lanar
Longitude, celestial, of = planct—no name month, i. 51: intercalary months, i. 38;
for, 3. 53m; mean longitude how found, number in a given. period how calculated,
1. 40: lunar month o day o athers,
found, ti. 39-45 : sun's trae and mean i- xii. 74, xiv. 14: aiddeon) crite Haak :
tude how determined from observation, solar month, i. 13; number in an Age, i.
17-20, 40-41. 30; names, i. Glin, xiv. 16m; precise
Longitude, —term how employed in this length of the several solar months, xiv. 3n;
work, will, Im; —— of aster- division into seasons, xiv. 16 n.
jiama, viii. 2-6; certain stars, wil. Moco — sabes, revointions, @te., ele., see
10-11, 20-21. Planets— ‘s spsides and nodes, revo-

General Index 405
-Jutions in an Age, i. 33; mean daily mo- as calculated for Washington, 140; for
tions of, 19, 22, add. n. 5, 7; im sidereal Williams’ College, 345: degrees of obliqne
day, 340 positions at beginning of Iron asconsion, ix. 5 a.
Age, 19, add. n. 6; orbits, xii. 87-88 :Observations—how far contemplated in
moon's dimensions, iv. 1; mean apparent Hindu system, vii. 18 n, will, 12 n, 381;
diameter, distance, and horizontal parallax, sccuracy of Hindu observations, 244, 254.
iv. ln; orbit, iv. ln, xii. 85; apparentOu, 2th sen, 21d,
diameter how calculated, iv. 2-3; conciserOrbit—name, iv. 3, xu. 76; orbits of the
of, 365: moon's heliacal setting and planets, i. 26, xii. 73-77; their absolute
rising, x. 1; time of rising and setting, dimensions, xii. SU-00; how determined,
how ated, x. 2-5; elevation of cusps, 3. 27m, iv. Lo, xi. Sn; their relative
x. 6-8; to determine illuminated part of dimensions deduced from opicyclos,
disk, x. 9; to delineate illuminated part, compared, 87. —
and elevation of cusps, x. 10-15 : moon the Orient ecliptic-point, 11. 46-40.
divinity of Sth asteriam, 214; relation toOrient-sine, or sine of amphltude of orient
system of asterisms, 239, add. mn. 28; ©cliptic-pomt, v. J.
equality of declination with sun unpropitious, xi. 1 etc.; station of the Fathers,
xii, 74. Pada, quarter of a gloka, introd. nMotions of planets—see Daily motions, In- bt adma, name of a yoge, add. nm. 10.
equalities. Padma, name of last Eon, 1. 23 n.
Mrgacirsha, Sth asterism —identification, etc,, L afeu-Siddhantiké, 1. 3n, add. nm. 1.
214, add. n. 26. Paribhava, Mth year of Jupiter's vycle, 1.
Mrgavyadha, name of star (Sirius), vill. 59 D10-11, add. n. 26. Puricgara, add. n. 1.
Mytyu, name of a yoga, da ws: 10; Parigera or iMracara Siddhanta, add. no. 1;
Mudgara, name of a yoga, add. n. 1. its system, add. n. 6; length of year, 26;
Muh -Cintamani, cited respecting aster-, Positions of apsides and nodes, 1. 41 n.
isms, 209, ete, l‘arallax—general expesition of Hindu view
Muhfrta-M4lA, cited respecting Abbijit, of, v. Ln; horzontal parallax of moon avd
241. sun, iv. Lo; the same sec. to Ptolemy, tv.
. Mala, 19th asterism—identification, ete., 225. ln; vertical parallax and ite resolution,
Munigvara, author ae diddhainta-Sérve- °° ln; parallax in longitude, name of, 165;
bhauma, add. n. 1, 2. mode of calculating, m time, v¥. D8;
Musala, name of a yoga, adi. ,.19: parailax an latitude, name of, 14: mode
an-Na‘Aim, 20th manzil, 225. of calculating, v. 10-12: method of applying parallax in determining phases of
Nadi, sixtieth part of sidereal day, 1. UU. eclipse, v. 9, 13-17, $72; general critictem
: , 50th karana, ii. 67, 69 n. ol methexts of calculation, 176 5 parallax of
an-Najam, 3rd maned, 213. other planets ueglected, wil, 23 pb.
os Nandana, GOth year of Jupiter's cycle. 1. eo ies 20th year of Jupiter's cycle, 4.
n. ) OO i.
Narada, Nérada-Siddhinta, add. n. 4. Larigha, 19th yoga, uu. 65 a. 1
® Niradi-Sanhita, add. n. 1. rerivatesra, Zod year of lustrum, As. 1é o.
, an-Nathrah ¥ 8th mana, 216. Parsi asterisms, or 28-fold division of ecliptic,
New moon, day of, nh. 66 n. 208, 236.
ae Nieu, 20th steu, 226. VParthiva, 63rd year of Jupiter's cycle, 1. 55 n.
an-Niyat, stara in Scorpii, 223. Math of extremity of shadow, how drawn on
Node of a planctary orbit—name, i. Stn, the dial, us. t1-42. |
xi. Sn; only ascending node en of, Vath of eclipsing body, how drawn i9 proji. B4n; names of ascendi descend- jection of eclipses, vi. 14-16.
ing nodes, ii. So, 249; of action onFatriarchate, great chronological period—
the | how composed, i, 18: reckoned as day of
Prajipati, xiv. 21.
fulastya or Pulastya Siddhbanta, add. mo. I.
; add, nm. 11; corrections applied Faulica or Puliga Siddhinta, i. On, add.
. m, 1, O: tte length of year, we.
oon. Péusha, Oth or 10th month, 1, Sln, Xv.
on Sorya-Siddhéata, , 2 16 5.
Pe; add. me 2. erfected, the, a race of supernatural beangs,
Me we, how expressed in the text, Perigee, perihelion, a8 name for, 72.
"ahs intred. n. Perpendicular of a right-angled triangle, ii.
ea : =e. tae? 30m, add. n. 16.
“ jon, equivalenta in, of Verpendicular-sine=cosine, uu. Won, dr.
ane oor ar ow a isetvennan 2 ager Ine = cosine lu ra a

| Vhases of an
Strya-Siddhanta
Phsigans, lith or 12th month, i. Sin, xiv. 130: the patriarchate, a day of, xiv. 21 -
Phalguni, 11th and 12th asterisms—identfication, ete., 218 add. n,. 26.
eclipse, contact,
nee, separation, greatest
tion, etc.—names, iv. 159, 17 n.
Pi, 2nd steu, 214 {2th sew, BI.
Pingala, 25th year of Jupiter's cycle,
Fianet, name, iv. Gn, add. nm. 22.
Mianets—names, add, n. 3; creation, xu.
22-24; general explanation of motions, 1.
25.27, xii. 73-77; point of commencement
ef motion, 1. 27, 20 tame of commencement, i. 24, 19, 20 1. 440; sidereal
revolutions in an Age, 1. 20-32; tables af
periods of sidereal revolution, 19, 22,
168, add. n. 56, 7; mean daily motions, 3.
obscura:
name of a star (4 Aurige@), wili, 20: name
of w youa, add. n. 19.
Pramidin, 2lat year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 65 n.
iumersion, Pramaéthin, A7tis
year of Jupiter's cyclo, i.
Vramoda, S8th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 65 n.
Pravardhe, name of a yoga, add, n. 1v.
i. Precession of the equinoxes, i. 0-12; name,
120; statement of, iii. 9; form of theary,
# libration, in, 12 n; possible reason, 117;
tentley’s view refuted, 120; theory of
Siddhanta-Ciromani, not a libration, 110;
Whether precession taken account of in
construction of Hindu system, 117, add.
i. 20> position and history in thia treatise,
116, ete., add. n. 20; rule for calculating,
ui. W-10; for determining by observation,
iti. 11-12: Greek view of precession, 120.
26, xii. 83; tables of do., i, Bin, add, n, Prime meridian, i. G2. _
5, 7; mean positions, end of last Golden Prime vertical, 11, 6; its pole, 159; to find
Age, i. 57; do. beginning of Iron Age, 1.
5h n, add. n. 6; actual mean positions, beg.
hypoth, of shadow, when sun is on the,
of Iron Age, 20: to find mean longitude Priti, 2nd yoga, il. 65 n.
for any given time, i. 53-67; mean longi-/’rogresses of the
tude as found for Jan. 1, 1860, and errors,
1. 67 n: causes of irregular motion,
1-11; kinds of motion, 11. 12-13; how to
calculate true longitudes, ub. 20-45; dimensions of epicycles, u. S438; equation
centre, . 30; annual equation, ti. 40-42;
ealculation of true rates of motion iH.
47-51; of declination, ii. 28; data for finding latitude, 1. 65-70; mode of calculation,
ij. 56-57; combination of latitude and decli
nation, 11. 58: comparative table of true
longitudes, daily motions, and declinations,
for Jan. 1, 1860, GJ; apperent diameter,
iv. lo, war. 13-14: orbits, how determined,
iv, lo, xii. (0 nm; absolute dimensions, x11.
50-90; relative dimensions, deduced from
epicycles, 57 distances from earth, xi.
64; order in respect to distance, aii. 31;
order in which referred to in this work, 1.
S62n: synodical revolutions, il. 420: conjunctions of planeta with each other, vii;
with asterisms, viii. 14-15: heliacal settings
and risings, ix. 1-L1 : regency over days.
tnonthe, etc., i. 51-52, xii. 76-70: day of
a planet, ii. 59,
Plava, Mh year of Jupiter's cycle, i.
Ge papi 16th year of Jupiter's
nu.
Polar longitude and Iatitude, terms
employed in this work, viii, 1 np.
cycle, i.
Pole—of earth, xii. 34-35; of celiptic, 168;
of prime vertical, 159.
Polestars, mii. 43.
Portion of an asteriem, ii. 64, 207, 239
ee ni ee of Know
Frabhavs, 35th year of Jupiter's cycle, i
nh.
-rajdpati_3mh year of Jupiter’s
F ge gage Rage i ge tl
sun, from solatice to
solstice, xiv. 0.
jj, Projection of an eclipse, vi; mame, vi. 1, 8;
ecale of, iv. 26; hgure illustratin jection of lunar eclipse, 150, bro
of Piolemy—possible traces of his’ oame in
Hindu astronomy, i. Gn; his times of
sidereal revolution of the planets, 27, add.
n. 10; inclination of planetary orbits, 1.
70 n; of ecliptic, nu. 28m; use of chords,
64; relation of bis chords to Hindu sines,
add. n. 15; mode of calculating equation
of centre of sun and moon, 75; of other
planets, together with annual equation,
S4; bie improvements of Greek astronomy,
not found in Hindu system, 85, 384;
relative dimensions and eccentricities of
planetary orbits, 87; retrogradation of
planets, U4; precession, 120; distances,
parallax, and dimensiones of sun and moon,
145; direction of ecliptic in eckpers, 160;
astrology, vii, 230; heliacal setting of
planets, i. Yn; positions of apsides and
nodes of planets, add. n. Li,
Puliga, author of Phuliga-Siddbinta, add.
wm. 1; identieal with Paulus Alexandrinus?
i. On, add. n. 1.
Punarvasu, 7th asteriam—identification, ete.,
how Ge Relea Wth asterisu:—identification,
Pirva-Bhidrapads, 26th asterism—identifica-
. tion, etc. , -
~Pérva-Phalguol, 11th asterism—identification,
242. pashan, divinity of @eth esteriem, 280
vetoes t i ian vin as ‘ re
ledge, supernatural be Poa ear aie ho ‘ n
sm—identification, etc.,
“Quadrants, odd and even, ii. 29-30.
pA.
i, Radiue—names, ii. 60n; value in minutes.

General Index AOT
Rabu, ii, 6; cause of eclipses, ii. An, iv. Serpents, divinities of Sth osteriam, 217.
n. Wis Seven Sages, stara in Urea Major, xiii. 4;
Thikehasa—23rd year of 7° itera cycle, i their independent revolution, vii. 21 n.
65 n; name of a yoga, add. n. 19 Shadacitimukha, solar period, xiv, 3-6,
Rakt&keha, 32nd year of Jupiter's cycle, i Shadow of earth—diameter on moon's orbit, »
55 n. iv. 4-5: no account taken of penumbra, tv.
Ranganfitha, commentator on Siirya-Sid- 5 n.
dhinta, introd. n., add. n. 2. Shadow of gnomon—names, i. 50; base,
Ratnamals, authority respecting asteriams, or north and south projection of, iii, 23-25;
B25. pany 3 path of its extremity, iii. 41-42 ; equinoctial
Raudra, 28th year of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55m. shadow, iii. 7, 12-15: noon shadow, how
Ravivira, Sunday, i. 520. - ealeulated. iii, 20-22; other shadows, 11.
Regents of years, months, daya, and hours, 25.34, 34-36; shadow cast by any planet or
i, 51-52, xii. 78-79. ‘ star, how determined and laid down, UM,
Respiration, measure of time, ERS 197.
etre ation of the planete—name, it. ash-Sharatan, Ist mana, 212.
12-13; explanation, and definition of limits, ash-Shaulah, 19th manzl, 224.
ii, 51-55. Siddha, 2let yous, i. 65 n.
Rewati, 28th asteriam—identification, etc., Ziddhinta-Ciromanpi—date, authorship, and
230; ite last quarter unlucky. xi. 21. derivation, add. mo. 1; account of Vedingas,
Revolution of a planet, i. 25-27: numbers of i, 3n; planetary system, add. nm. 6; dive
revolutions in an Age, 1, 29-34. sion of the day, i. 12m; length of year,
Right ascension, equivalents of the different ond mean sidercal revolutions of planets,
#igns of the ecliptic im, fii, 42-44. 27; positions of apsides and nodes, 1. 41;
ar-Rishfi, 28th manzil, 230. diameter and circunference of earth, 4.
Rohini, 4th asterism—identification, ete., 60 n; prime meridian, i- 620; precession.
914; astrological consequences of collision 119; statement respecting precession as
of the planeta with, vin. 13. taught by Sirya-Siddhanta, 115; sines of
tohitaka, place situated in prime meridian, venith-distance and altitade of ecliptic, v4s 62. Tn: definition of position of uasteriamea,
Romaka, name of Rome, i. Gn, xii. 39 211-242: of fixed stars, vii. 120; gee
Romaka-Siddhanta, add. n. 1, 1. 6n, graphy of southern hemisphere, xii. 44;
Rudhirodgarin, 3ist year of Jupiter's cycle, orbit of asterisms, xii. 90m; armuillary
a. 55 n. sphere, xiii. Sn; descriptions of instruRudra, divinity of 6th asteriam, 215. ments, xiii, 21 n. 22 n; solar day, xiv. 30;
{For words often spelt with Sh, 9 ‘'S, or epicycles, add. n. 18. Sf
S, see Q under the letter C.] Siddbinta-SaérvabhAuma, add. nm. i: method
of observing positions of asterisms, vill.
12 n: epicycles, add. n. 18.
Siddhanta-Sandara, add. mn. 1; cited by
Sa‘d adh-DhAbih, 22nd mane, 226. Siddh’nta-Sarvabbiuma, viii. 12
Sa'd al-Akhbiyah 25th manail, 225. : ira ent oa Se aes is 2 ag .
Sa'd Bula’, 23rd manzil, 227. Siddhi—l6th yoga, ti. 69 n; name of a yor,
ya, 22nd i. 65.n. Sidereal time, day, year—sce Time, Day,
; | -* Badharanges 38th year of Jupiter's cycle, i, qdd. n. 19
| ae BB ae - wn. 19,
a3: ‘Sadhya, ¢ ) Year.
‘Bamvatsara—Ist AI ei xiv. 1? Pi Sien, 28-fold division of heavens by Chinese,
- year of era of fiiditya, add, wu. V2. LT
Poe ee ee ai : | ; 200; comparison with Hindu astertsms and
‘Sanskri peed) mocis:, Wenenere and pronunci@- Ars} lunar mansions, 211-230; map illus
| a lies Toe, Tae eee > trating position and relations, add. m. SF;
oe ag-Sarfab, iT prom! soe piter’e cycle, i origin of system, ace. to” Biot, 233.
* sha. . : heady alg twelfth part of ecliptic, +. 28; reckoned
7 tarwmiit. f | * rom any given starting-point, i. 28a,
: -¥ Sent, Coth year of Soe * cycle, 3, 65 n. 58 n: table of names and symbols, i. 58 n.
= Seite at BOE s aoe i<-Simak, 14th manzif, 220.
AubhAgye, 4th yox i. 65 n.. . Sin, 16th #iew, 223.
va—17th vea Jupiter's cycle, j,. Sine—name, O4, add. n. 16; series of sines,
a 5 in minutes, ii. 17-22; comparative table
of, 60: table of sines for every degree,
with differences, 833; rule for developing
the series, ii, 15-16; how derived, 60-61,
add. mn. 15; ita falsity, add. n. 15; Hindu
use of sines earlier than Arab, 64; Arab
sines from Greek chords, 64; whether

Hindu sines likewise
series how obtained, 60, add. n. 15.
of an arc determining the sine, ii.
50-90 to find the sine of o given are, or
arc of a given sine, ii. 31-33.
‘Sing, Sth stew, 215.
Solar time, dey, month,
Time, Day, Month, Year.
Soletice, name of, 120, xii. 72 n.
Soma-Siddhinta, add. n. 1, 6.
Semavira, Monday, i. 52 n.
Sphere, 163.
Square, ili. Sn.
Sthira, name of a yoga, add, n. 1%.
year,
Subhfinu, Slat year of Jupiter's cyele, 1.
Sukarman, 7th yoga, u. 65 n.
Sum of days—names, i. 51n; how foond
Sun—names, revolutions, ete., elc., se
Planets—dimensions, iv. I; mean
parent diameter, horizontal parallax,
distance, iv. ln; to find trac
diameter, iv. 23: briefer method, 364
solar eclipses, iv. ¥; caleulation of oa solar
9 add. n. 15; Hindu
Sairya-Siddhdanta
i. 13m, xiv. 12-14; sidereal time xiv. 15;
solar time, xiv. 3, 10; time of gods,
Prajépati, and Brahma, xiv, 20-21 : mode
of reckoning time practically employed, i.
13 n : instruments for measuring time, xiii,
16, 19-24: to determine the time by observation of shadow of gnomon, ni. 37-30-—
see Day, Month, Year, ete.
Times of rising, see Ascensional equivalents
Twan, 4th stew, 215,
Tae, Ord sien, 214.
La Sth sieu, 216.
Tvashtar, divinity of 14th asteriam, 220.
Tycho Brahe’s determination of apparent
diameter of planeta, vii. 14 n.
_Udravatsara, Sth year of lustram, xiv. 17 nu.
Ler, L7th stew, B24.
Ujjayini, city determining position of prime
meridian, i, 62 n.
and Upanishad, xui, 3n.
apparent
Itpita, name of a youu, add. n. 1%.
Uttura-AshAdh’, 2st asferism—identification, etc,, 224.
eclipse, add. n. 25; error of sun's motion Uttara-Bhidrapadd, 27th asterism—identifisition tem, 24: adap- cation, etc., :
ane getter el i gar tined vedpartclns Re Uttara-Phalgunt, 12th «asterism —identifica22.05 : avin revelation of present tum, ete., 218.
treative, i, 2-0, xiv. 24-25 : his part in the
ceacane 919. BR GRY ee eS Vaigikha, Ist or 2nd month, i, 51m, xiv.
Surd, 128. Qn, L6n.
Sirya-Siddhinta—professedly revealed by the
Sun to Maya, i, 2-9; ascribed by al-Birini
to Léta, i. 8n; referred by Bentley to 11th
century, 24; refutation of this conclusion,
i. Sn, 24, 380: position in astronomical, *
literature of India, intred. n., add. n. 350;
its aysterm compared with those of other
treatises, add. n. 6; present extent, xrv.
27 n; division into two portions, xi.
commentaries on, add. mn. @:
edition, Introd. n., add. n. 1.
Sviti. 15th asterism—identification, etc.,
Synodical revolutions of the planets, 78.
published
Vaidhrta, or Vaidhrti, name of a hostile aspest of sun and moon, xi. 2, 4Viidhrti, 27th yoga, u. 65 n.
ujra—l5th yoga, ii. 65 n; name of a yoga.
Vairiha, name of current Aon,
Variha-mihira, astronomical and astrological
authority, i. Sn, vil. 2n, 240, will, 130,
xiv. 6m, add. n. 1,
Variha-Siddhinta, add. n. 1.
Varivas, 18th yoga, ii. 66 n. ns
Varsha, rainy season, xiv. 10 n,“sr
‘Varuna, divinity of 25th asterism, 228.
Vasanta, spring, xiv. 10 n, 16 n.
Vasishtha or Vasishtha Siddhanta, add.
fitiy Wied. 7
Tables for finding true places of planets VCacudevs. xii, 12.
where given, ;
Thitila. Sth ete. karana, ib. OF n.
Tiittiriya-Sanhit& and
names and divinities of the asterism
cording to, 211, ete.
Tammaya, commentator on Sirya-Siddhinta,
add. nm, 2.
Sheps 52nd year of Jupiter's cycle,
n.
at-Tarf, Oth manzil, 217.
attwa-Viveka, add. n. 1.
ath-Thuraiya, Ord manned, 213.
Ti, 14th efeu, hs
Dime—real and oanreal, i. 10; different m
of measuring reckonix
odes “d | Se? a
and . xwiv.; civil Vierthu, name of stars in sting of Seorpia
time and its uses, xiv. 18-19; lunar time, ‘oh arr ™
Vasus, divinities of 24th asteriam, 227.
Vatsara, Sth year of lustrum, xiv, 17 n.
an.
Venue— oatnes,
Tdittiriva-Brahinana, Vedas, xii.
ae Vedingas, i,
revolutions, ete., etc., see
Planets—in conjunction with other planets,
vii, 23.
i. Versed sine—name, 64; how found, ii. 22;
series of, for the quadrant, ii, 23-27.
Vertical circle, 163.
Vithavs Paul poke BF Secibaee coole iat
‘ibhava, 36th year of Jupiter's , i. 65 n.
Vicikha, 16th sateriein-identifieation, otc..

een * ee = -_ ‘i
‘ ie General Index | 409
| year of Jupiter’ s cycle, i. Wileon—his catalogue of aoe Collection referred to, add. n. 1, 2; bis Vishnu-
‘ year of de iter’s os dared i, 55 no. Purina, see Vishnu-Purana.
: in, 7th, year of upiter’s cycle, 1. 55 n.
cr of Jupiter's cycle, i. 55 n.
Jupiter's cycle, i. 35 n. VY, 10th sieu, 219.
of Jupiter’s cycle, 1. 55 n. Yama, divinity of 2nd asterism, 212.
meascre of time, 1. 11. Yamakoti, city, xii. 38.
h { Jupiter's vycle, i. Yavanas, Greeks or westerners, referred to
iliac ge of Saeeat in Hindu astronomical traditions, i. 6n,
J Sef 885.
- sTth year of Jupiter's cycle Year—civil, lunar, sidereal, and solar, ia b t , ii. 65 13 nm; year of the , 3. 14; years in
eee p= yogs 23rd eateutann, 226 ; practical use in ia, i. 13 n; sketch of
_ original ‘aavecters xiv. 10 n. solar and Joni-solar calendar, for year
author of Vasishjha-Sid- 1859-60, i. Slo: length of sidereal solat
years of eras of CAlivahana and WVikrayears of eras of Calivihana and Vikrapie reracs, citations from aa: 2 miditya, character and names of, add.
to, i. On, 12n, 17n, 190, 2la, Q3n, mn. 12; years of Jupiter's cycle, names af,
ii. Sn, ‘xii. 28 n, 440. ‘3 55 n; yeara of luostrum, names of, xiv.
ahti, n.
} ete., karana, ii. 69 n.- af. the Sellers: oe commentator on Sirya-Siddhinta,
hinta. add. n. 1.
u-dharmottara-Purinpa, add.
sea, or propellin currents,
laneta, ii. 3, xu. 73.
Yoga, ried of time—name whence derived,
ll , ii. 65 nv.
“yoga, ii. 4 add. n. 19; Tag systems, oames and
ates add. “id character of, 65 n, add. n. 19.
Yojana, eas. ‘of length, its subdivision
| | and value, i. 60n, d. n.
tile aspect 0 sun and oon, xi. Yuvan, 43rd year of Jupiter's cycle, 1. 5S n.
yay ya, path: year of Jupiter's cycle, i, 55 n.
Zenith, name of, v. Ion.
o's Kale Sankalita, references: to ape Zenith-distance—on the meridian, iii. 14ache 0 oy Tes). 3s 15; elsewhere, iii. 33; sun's zenith-distance
ie eli B4, xiv. Sn, ‘i's, on circles of intermediate direction, bow
found, iii. 28-34; to find the same elsewhere, iii. 34-36; how found from shadow,
ij. 14-15, 37; instrument for obtaining
an zenith-distance by observation, Xiu.
nD.
