READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: the_agni_purana_part_2.json
Dataset number: 388 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 740,270 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: The Agni Purana, Part 2
Creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
Date: 1954
Description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-pt-2-aitm-vol-28-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-pt-2-aitm-vol-28-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: The Agni Purana, Part 2
  • creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
  • date: 1954
  • description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-pt-2-aitm-vol-28-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-pt-2-aitm-vol-28-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>
  • subject: West Bengal Public Library
  • identifier: dli.bengal.10689.12912
  • source_folder: dli.bengal.10689.12912
  • total_pages: 362
  • total_words: 126689
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.947
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE
AGNI PURANA
PART 1 1
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI

First Edition: Delhi, 1954
Reprint: Delhi, 1998
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
Sanaa Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002
16 St. Mark’s Road, Bangalore 560 001
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017
Asbok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRESS,
A-45 NARAINA INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I. NEW DELHI 110 028
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD. DELHI 110 007

CONTENTS
PART II
CHAPTERS
101. Mode of consecration of a temple
102. Mode of consecrating the flag staff
103. Mode of repair of old or broken lingas
104. General characteristics of a divine edifice
105. Mode of worship of the presiding deity of a place
106. Vastu relating to Cities
107. The creation of Svayambhuva Manu
108. Gosmographical account
109. The greatness of sacred spots
110. The greatness of Ganga
111. The Greatness of Prayaga
112. The greatness of Varanasi
113. The greatness of Nannada
1 1 4. The greatness of Gaya
115. Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gaya
116. Mode of making a pilgrimage to GayA
117. Mode of performing the ancestral rites
1 1 8. The Country of Bharata
119. Description of different continents
120. The extent of the universe
121. The Science of Jyotisa (Astronomy and Astrology )
122. Paficanga: The Almanac
123y Svarodaya cakra, l§anicakra, Kurmacakra, Rahucakra
1 24. Essence of astrology as described in the Victory
in battles
125. Different circles which get success in battle
126. Combinations of good and bad asterisms
127. The auspicious and inauspicious periods of the day
based on certain combinations

Contents
128. The Ko(acakra — a drawing to forecast results 385
129. Guide-lines for storing and selling grains 386
130. Different spheres marked by astorisms indicating
victory in battle 387
131. Ghataka cakra, Naracakra, Jayac?kra indicating
failure or success in battle 388
132. Sevacakra and the indication of accrual of benefits 390
133 Different traits in infants and combinations indi¬
cating success in battle 392
134. Sacred formula for the conquest of three worlds 396
135. Formula for success in battle 397
136. The diagram of asterisms indicating the period for
undertaking a journey 400
137. The formula known as Mahamaii 401
138. The six accessory acts relating to all mantras 403
1 39. The names of sixty years of Hindu cycle and the good
or bad results accruing from them 404
140. Description of herbs used in charms 405
141. Description of herbs used in charms, medicines 407
142. Description of medicinal incantations 409
143. Mode of worship of Goddess Kubjika 411
144. Mode of worship of Goddess Kubjika 413
1 45. Different Kinds of mantras and the rites of locating
them. 416
146. Names of different Goddesses 420
147. Mode of worshipping the goddess Tvarita and others 423
148. Mode of worship for success in the battle 425
149. Mode of performing Lak$a and Kofiboma 425
1 50. Names of different Manus, different sages and others
during their period 427
151. Duties laid down for different castes 429
152. Duties of a householder 431
153. Duties of a student 432
154. Rules of marriage 434
155. The Code of Conduct 436
156. Purification of things 439
157. Pollution and Purification 440
158. Kinds of pollution 444
159. The merits of libation and the performance of
good deeds

ConUnts
160. Duties of a brahmin leading life in the forest 452
161. Duties of an ascetic 432
162. Code of laws 4S3
163. Mode of performing a i$r&ddha 457
164. Propitiatory rite for the planets 461
165. Code of Conduct 463
166. Duties of different castes 465
167. Propitiatory rite for the planets 467
168. Kinds of major sins 471
169. Atonements for various offences 474
1 70. Expiations for association with major sinners 478
171. Description of certain subtle expiations 482
1 72. The hymn which destroys sins 483
173. Different expiations for different sins 483
1 74. Expiations for discontinuing the worship of gods 490
175. Rules and regulations relating to the Vows 492
1 76. Vows observed on the first lunar day 497
177. Vows observed on the second lunar day 498
1 78. Vows observed on the third lunar day 500
1 79. Vows observed on the fourth lunar day 503
180. Vows observed on the fifth lunar day 504
181 . Vows observed on the sixth lunar day 504
182. Vows observed on the seventh lunar day 504
183. Vows observed on the eighth lunar day 505
184. Vows observed on the eighth lunar day 507
185. Vows observed on the ninth lunar day 509
186. Vows observed on the tenth lunar day 510
187. Vows observed on the eleventh lunar day 511
188. Vows observed on the twelfth lunar day 512
189. Rules of observing ^rava^adv&daiSi vrata 513
190. Mode of practising Akhandadv&dafi vrata 514
191 . Mode of practising vows on the thirteenth lunar day 515
192. Vows to observed on the fourteenth lunar day 516
193. Description of Sivar&trivrata 517
194. Details relating to the vows of Aloka Purnimk 518
195. Vows relating to the weak-days 519
196. Vows relating to different asterisms 520
197. Vows performed on certain days 522
198. Vows performed in different months 523
199. Vows relating to different seasons 524

Contints
2CX). Vow of giving a gift of a lamp 525
201 . Mode of Worshipping Vi§nu in a figure of nine , 527
Compartments
202. Different flowers used in worship 528
203. The nature of hell 530
204. Mode of practising the vow of fasting for stipulated
months 533
205. Mode of performing the Bhi^mapaficakavrata 534
206. Mode of offering water of libation to the Venerable
sage : Agastya 535
207. Mode of performing Kaumuda vrata 537
208. Rules and regulations relating to vows and gifts in
general 538
209. Rules relating to gifts 539
210. Sixteen great gifts 544
211. Different kinds of gifts 546
212. Gifts granting the desired fruits 552
213. Mode of making a gift of the earth and its benefits 555
214. The system of veins in the body and their benefits 556
215. Mode of reciting Gayatri and its greatntrss 559
216. Instructions relating to Gayatri 563
217. Vasistlia’s hymn to lord Siva 564
218. Mode of performing the Coronation of a king 566
219. Sacred syllables for the coronation 569
220. Accomplishment of assistance to the king 573
221. Code of Conduct for the servants 575
222. Construction of forts 376
223. Duties of a king 579
224. Duties of a king in the harem 581
225. Duties of a King 584
226. Means of Conciliation 587
227. Code of Criminal laws 588
228. Instructions relating to military expedition 594
229. Significance of dreams 595
230. Inauspicious auguries 597
231 . Good and bad augures known from the sounds of
animals and birds 598
232. Omens known from birds 600
233. Propitious periods for undertaking an expedition 604
234. Six expedients used by the King * 606

Contents
235. Daily duties of a king 608
236. Rites preceding the march of a king 609
237. A hymn to Laksmi for success 615
238. Ethics narrated by Rama 617
239. Duties of a King 618
240. Six expedients used by a king 622
241. Four ways of policy : Conciliation etc. 624
242. Statesmanship for a king 629
243. Physiognomy of men and their indications 635
244. Characteristic features of women 637
245. Characteristics of the royal fan, bow and sword 638
246. Testing of gems 640
247. Characteristics of a Site for building 642
248. Benefit of worshipping lord Vi?nu with flowers and
leaves 644
249. Science of archery 645
250. Science of archery 647
251. Method of using a noose 649

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ONE
Modi of consecration of a temple
The Lord said ;
1-5. I shall describe the mcKle of consecrating a temple.
By that itself it would become permeated by the divine force.
After the angular projection is completed, the preceptor should,
locate a pitcher made of gold or other metals at the middle
of the eastern altar. It should be filled with the pancagaoya (five
things got from a cow), honey and milk. Five kinds of gems^
should be placed under (the pitcher). (The pitcher) should be
adorned with garland and cloth. It should be besmeared
with fragrance. It should be decorated with fragrant flowers.
The temple should be decorated with tender leaves of trees like
mango etc. After having finished the accomplishing rite in hb
body, the preceptor should gather (his soul energy) with the
breath drawn in. The preceptor should then convey to (lord)
Sambhu (Siva) by his command with the exhalation of breath
after the soul had been conceived as different from all the (other)
souls with (the recitation of) its own mantra.
6. Ailer having gathered the same from the twelve-petalled,
that one shining like a spark-of fire, the beatific states should be
located in the pitcher as laid down in the tantras.
7. The image, its qualities, the beatific states, the letters
upto kfa and their lords and the collection of fimdamental'
principles should be located.
8. The ten nddlts (tubular organs of the body), ten vital
winds and the thirteen sense-organs as well as their presiding
deities (should be located) after having united the syllable om
with their names.
9. (The two fimdamental principles of)illusi(m and univer¬
sal space which stand in relationship of cause mid effect
towa^ eadi other, the gods of leamii^ vebo direct the pervad*

308 Agni Purity
ing (lord) Sambhu (Siva) (should also be located therein)
■with the (recitation of) mantras.
10-12. After having located the accessories, the preceptor
should prevent (the deity) from going away by showing the
rodhamudrd (posture made with the fingers denoting restraint).
Otherwise an image of the god (should be made) of gold or
■other metals and it should be purified as before with the five
things got from a cow etc. After having placed the pitcher on
the bed and contemplating (lord) Rudra, the consort of Uma,
(the lord) should be located in that (image) as the pervasive
(lord). Oblation, sprinkling, touching and repetition (of
mantras) (should be done) for accomplishing (lord’s) stay therein
permanently.
13. After having completed thus the announcement of
invocation in its three divisions, the preceptor should place the
image in the pitcher.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWO
Mode of consecrating the flagstaff
The Lord said :
1. O Skanda ! I shall describe (the mode of) consecra¬
tion of the pinnacle, the banner and the flag-staff relating to a
temple as laid down.
2. Either it should be half the depth of the tank or of the
whole edifice. The banner-staff should be made of wood in the
case of (a temple) built of brick and of stone in the case of that
built of stone.
3. In the case of a temple of Vi|nu, the pitcher should have
the mark of a disc and be proportionate to the image of the deity.
If it is with a trident it is known as agracula (the tip of the top
portion).
4. If the (mark of a) liAga is found on the top it is called
ISaSUla (the banner-staff of Siva). This kind {of flagstaff) is

also found to be described in saivite texts as having the bijap&raka
(of the shape of common citron)
5. The coloured banner should be made to reach down to
the half of the plinth (of the temple), or to commensurate with
its entire length, or of the same length with its rod, according to
the option (of the consecrator).
6-7. That banner is known as the mahSdhvaja (great banner)
■which flaps around the platform of the edifice. The rod measur¬
ing fourteen, nine or six cubits in length should be known as the
excellent etc. by learned men. A flagstaff made of a bamboo
or of wood etc. yields all desires.
8. A flagstaff breaking down in the middle at the time of
planting the same augurs evil to the sovereign of the country
or to the consecrator.
9. It should be remedied by (the repetition of) the bakurupamantra. Then the guardian deities of the door should be
worshipped and appeasement with the mantras (should be done).
10-12. After having placed the fl^taff, it should be,
bathed with (the repetition of) the mantra of the weapon. After
having sprinkled the fl^taff (with water) with (the repetition
of) the same mantra^ the preceptor should then bathe (it) with
herbal waters and make the divine edifice. After having smeared
(the rod) with juice and laid on the bed as before, the location
(of the mantras) (is done) in the flagstaff as in the case of the
lihga. But one should not locate the energies of knowledge and
action. There is no need to use the fourth case (of inflection)
indicating speciality. There is also no need for constructing an
altar.
13-14. Then the principle of artha (sense), the second prin¬
ciple of knowledge and the faces (of i§iva) such as Sadyojata
etc. and the principle of Siva (should be located) in the flagstaft. Lord Siva, the indivisible^ whose attendants have been
located should be worshipped4^.Then oblations should be made
with the vedic mantras fcnr the S2^e of the presence of the flag¬
staff and ending with (the for every part of the flag¬
staff. The flagstaff is also consecrated in a different way.
15-17. All about this has been described in the mode of

Affii Purd^
the astray&ga. After the temple has been made, the bedstead and
the quadrangle having been decorated at the (decided) place,
and the three fundamental principles have been located»therein,
the oblations etc. should be offered and then (lord) Siva should
be worshipped as before.
18-22. Alter having meditated on (lord) Siva as the repo¬
sitory of all the principles, the all-pervasive god should be located
(therein). The (gods) Ananta (serpent chief) and Kalarudra
(a form of lord Siva) should be considered as lying at the lotus
feet, the (lords) Ku^manda and Hafaka at the platform at the
top of the plinth and the guardian deities along with the nether
worlds, hells, other worlds and the hundred Rudras representing
the cosmic egg having been contemplated should be considered
at the plinth. Then (the preceptor) should contemplate the
picture of a man on the cloth with a lion on the left along with the
forty such as principles of water, lustre, and wind, that which is^
known as enclosing all things, the eight resultant of the intellect,
the eight kinds oiyogUy and the three qualities ending with des¬
truction. The four (principles of) learning etc. (should be consi¬
dered) as located in the comice of the temple.
23. The (principle of) illusion along with (lord) Rudra
(are located) in the neck,.- the learning in the threshold, the
mystic circle, the master along with the lord of learning in the
(ornamental) pot above.
24. It should be conceived as the matted hair and the cres¬
cent (on the top) as the trident (of the lord). The three energies
(should be located) in the flagstaff and should be looked upon
(as permeated) with the sound.
25-26. (The preceptor) should also conceive that the energy
(known as) ku^4^li is present in the banner. Thus (the different
gods) should be conceived as present in that abode. After having
lifted the liiiga along with its pedestal or with the earth (lying
at its bottom) with (the recitation of) the mantras, it should be
placed in its seat namely the lotus of energy after having placed
the gems etc.
27. After the banner staff* has thus been fixed, the person
for whom the rite is performed gets the desired firuits after cir-

cumambulating the edifice along with his relatives and friends.
28. After having contemplated (the mantra) pUnptUa, along
with the presiding deities of the mantras^ the preceptor should
invoke the presiding deities possessing the weapons for the sake
of protection.
29. After having made oblation for the removal of
defects of deficiency etc. and making offerings to the quarters,
fees should be paid to the preceptor. yajamSna (the person
for whom the rite is done) would go to the heavens.
30. Such a person would enjoy comforts for so many thou¬
sand as the number of atoms in the structures of the image,
liAga and the altar.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THREE
Mode of repair of old or broken liAgas
'The Lord said ;
1-2. I shall describe the repairing of the liAgas which have
become old etc. as laid down. That one which is devoid of the
characteristics, or broken or whose outlines have become blunt
or that which is struck by lightning or cracked or broken or
mutilated or damaged in any other way should be installed on
its pedestal as also its bull.
3-5. The liAgas which have been shaken (from their position)
or which have become unsteady or which have been
slantingly fixed or which lean towards a particular direction or
those which have been fixed exactly at the centre (of the temple)
should be re-installed (in their places) if they are devoid of any
cracks or if they have been washed by floods of river water etc.
A liAga of l$iva duly reinstalled at a different place as laid down
should not be removed whether it has been perfectly fixed or
improperly fixed.

Agni Purina
6. A liAga should be established by (offering) a hundred
(oblations) and be removed by (offering) a thousand (oblations).
If the linga is worshipped, it would set right even the old ones.
7. After having erected a sacrificial shed either in the south¬
ern part or in the north-eastern part of the ground and an arch
on the door on the western side and completed the worship of
the guardian deities, worship with the mantras (is done) on the
(sacrificial) ground.
8-10. After having appeased with the mantras and worshipp¬
ed the presiding deities of the ground as before and made
offerings for the quarters outside, the preceptor should sip waters
(thrice). After having fed the brahmins, (lord) Sambhu (Siva)
should then be informed, “O (lord) Sambhu ! This linga is
defective and is to be removed. O (lord) Siva graciously take
thy seat in niyself for a while if it pleases you”. After having
submitted to the lord thus one should offer oblation of appease¬
ment.
11-12. (The preceptor) (should offer) one hundred and
eight oblations with honey, clarified butter, milk, and durvd
(a kind of grass). After having established the linga^ it should
be worshipped on the ground then. (The Siva mantras for the
worship are (as follows) : “Om, to the all-pervading etc.”
obeisance to the lord of the heart, the pervading.” The anga
mantras (those for assigning on the different parts of the body)
are “Om obeisance to the pervading lord, to the head.” etc.
Then the principle abiding therein should be addressed with the
mantras of the weapon.
13-17. (Then the preceptor should say as follows) : ‘‘Which¬
ever good spirit that is lodged in this lifiga may go to its place of
liking after leaving this linga by the command of (lord) Siva.
(Lord) Bhava (Siva) being attended to by the learning and the
presiding deities of learning would remain here.” Then having
made thousand oblations for each one of the (three) parts with
the pdiupata mantra^ sprinkled waters of appeasement and
touched with the Aufa, (the preceptor) should repeat (the man¬
tras). After having offered the arghya (waters for washing) in
the reverse order to the (fundamental) principles and to the
presiding deities of the principles, the preceptor should bid fare¬
well to the presiding deities of the eight manifestations (of lord
Siva) located in the littga and the pedestal by binding them with

a golden noose placed on the shoulders of the bull and leading
them with the repetition of the mantras of (lord) Siva and should
put it in the waters. Then the preceptor should offer hundred
oblations in order to confer prosperity.
18-22. One hundred oblations each (should be offered) to
satisfy the presiding deities of the quarters and for the purifica¬
tion of the sacrificial ground. After having laid protection for
ihat building with the (repetition of the mantra of) pdiupata wea¬
pon, the preceptor should establish another linga therein as laid
down. {Lingas) established by demons, sages, brahmins belong¬
ing to the clan of renowned sages and those well-versed in the
Tantras (class of literature dealing with magic and mystic formu¬
lations for the worship of different deities) should not be removed
even as laid down, even though they may be old or broken.
This is the procedure to be followed for replacing an old edifice.
After having located the collection of mantras on the sword ano¬
ther edifice should be made. If (the edifice is) made less spacious
it is said to confer death (on the consecrator) and if made too
spacious it would cause loss of wealth. Whether the same mate¬
rials (are used) or better materials it should be done well to be
of the same measure as before.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOUR
General characteristic of a divine edifice :
The Lord said :
1 . One who has peacock on the banner ! 1 shall describe
you the general characteristics of a divine edifice. In a ground
divided into four parts, the breadth of the walls should comprise
a part.
2. The adytum should be one-seventh of this. The pedes¬
tal (should be) a quarter of its extent. The pedestal should
occupy the central part of the ground divided into five parts.
3. The aperture and the wall should be one part each. Two
adytums in two parts is medium. One adytum in two parts is
excellent.

Agni Purdifa
4-6. According to some the vault of the adytum should
■occupy three such parts and the walls the rest. In the case of a
plot divided into six parts the walls (should comprise) dhe such
part. The breadth of the adytum (should be) one part amd that
of the pedestal two parts. The height of the temple (should be)
double or greater than twice (the breadth) by a quarter or in
certain cases triple (that of the breadth). Sometimes it would
be half the breadth or one-third of (the entire area of) the ground.
7. The (inner) circumference (of the vault would be) a
quarter less than the area of the temple. The outer circumference
(would be) a third of it. Small chariots should be got ready at
the centre.
8-9. Lords Camupda, Bhairava and Nafye^a (different
forms of Lord Siva) should be placed in them. Images of eight
or four deities should be made outside to surround (the main
temple) and they should occupy half the space of the temple.
They may or may not be within the temples. The (images of)
Adityas (the 12 suns, progeny of Aditi and Kaiyapa) should
be plaqed at the east. The (images of) Skanda and Agni (should
be placed) in the north-west.
10. In this way, images of Yama (lord of death) and other
deities should be placed in the respective directions over which
they preside. After having divided the pinnacle into four parts,
the region of the vault (should be made to comprise) two such
parts.
11-13. The top platform of (god of) fire should be in the
third part. The flat cushion (should be placed above that)
with a cornice. The five (classes of temples) are vairdja, puf~
pakoy kaildsay mat^ika and triviffapa (characterised by structures
of different shapes) built over the top platform. The first (among
the above) is a square, the second one a rectangle, (the third one )
circular, the next one oval and the fifth one is octagonal. Each
one of these is divided into nine (thereby) giving rise to fortyfive divisions.
14-15. The temples belonging to the vairija class are — the
first one Tneru, mandara the second one, vimdnay bhadray sarvatobhadra, carukoy nandika, nandivardhana and Srivatsa.
16-17. The nine temples belonging to the pufpaka (class)
are vdabkiy gjhar&ja, SSl&ffhay mandiroy vUdlOy brahmamandiray
bhat>anay prabhava and iibikdveSma. The circular shaped temples —

valaya, dundubhiy padma^ makdpadma, varddhaniy ufi^ifa, Safikkay
kalaia and khavjrkfa belong to the kaildsa class.
18-21. The nine — gajay vrfabha, hadtsOy garutmdny rkfmdyakay
bhUfai^ay bhUdharay Srijaya and pjrthividhara are oval-shaped and
belong to (the class called) mai^a. Vajra, cakrOy svastikOy vajrasvastika, citrcy avastika-khadgay gaddy Srikca^tha and vijaya are the
names of those which belong to triviffapa (class).
22. These are the names given to the towns of Latas etc.
The top portion should be half the height of the neck and propor¬
tionately broad.
23. After having made the top platform into ten parts,
the breadth of the shoulder portion (should be made to comprise)
five parts. The neck portion should be made (to comprise)
three parts, and the pracandaka{?) should be four such parts.
24. The doors should be made so as to face the cardinal
points and never on the intermediate points. The pedestal
should extend to two corners (of the temple) and to the middle
part of the adytum.
25. Sometimes (the pedestals) extend upto the fifth part of
the adytum from the posterior edge thereof, their height being
double of their length. A different type (of construction) is
■described now.
26-30. Four doors should be made so as to measure ten fin¬
gers less than one hundred and sixty fingers known as the uttama
(excellent ones). Three (doors) would be of the madhyama
(middle) order and three (doors) of the kaniyasa (inferior ones).
The breadth (would be) equal to half the height or height grea¬
ter than (the breadth) by a third part. The height may be four
or eight or ten fingers more. The breadth may be a fourth (part)
of the height. There should be ornamental indents on the thres¬
hold. It has been stated that the breadth of all of them (should
be) half the breadth (of the doors). The door with two, five,
seven or nine ornamental indents confers the desired (fi*uit).
Two warders should be carved in the doorframe to occupy a
quarter part of the latter below the lower (ornamental) branch.
The ends of the (ornamental) branches vhould be decorated with
(the images) of the fairy twins.
31. (In a temple) if the post has been encroached (the
•consecrator) would be a slave and if the tree has been impeded

Agni Purd^a
in its growth it would confer poverty, if it has encroached on a
well at the gate it portends fear and if it protrudes over the
ground (it augurs) loss of wealth.
32. If it has encroached a thoroughfare it would get capti¬
vity (for the consecrator). One would get poverty if the temple
had been built to make the hall (in front) as narrow. If it obs¬
tructs the vama (?) it will make one deformed.
33-34. If a mortar causes an obstruction it would give po¬
verty. If a stone-block causes obstruction it would cause enmity.
If it is shadowed (by some other building) it gives poverty.
There will not be defects of obstruction (in the following cases)
— by felling a tree, uprooting (of stone) or by leaving interven¬
ing space equal to twice that of the original compound.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIVE
Mode of worship of the presiding deity of a place
The Lord said :
1 . The presiding deity of the ground should be worshipped’
in (a mystic diagram) of eightyone squares for the prosperity
of a city, village, fort, house or temple and their definite accom¬
plishment.
2-4. I shall narrate the names of the ten occult nerves
which face the east. (They are) idnta^ yaSovati^ kdntdy viSdldy
prdnavdhiniy satiy oasumatiy nanddy subhadrd and manoramd, (The
following occult nerves) are remembered in the north in twelve
of the eighty-one squares — hariifiy suprabhd, lakpniy vibhUtiy vimaldy
P^y^t jvdld and viSokd.
5. (Gods) lia and others should be worshipped in the eight
directions. (Gk>ds) Ila, Dhanaftjaya, Sakra (Indra), Arka
(Sun), Satya (truth), Bhr^a (strong) and Vyoma (sky)
(should be worshipped) in the east.
6. (Gods) Havyavaha (fire), Puijian, Vitatha, (untruth),
Bhauma (Mars), Krtanta (god of death), Gandharva (a semi¬
divine being), Bhifiga and Mrga (should be worshipped) in.
the south.

7. The Pitrs, the door-keepers, Sugriva, Pu^padanta,.
Varuna, Daitya (demon), Sesa (the serpent-god), and yak^man
(consumption) (should be worshipped) always in the west.
8. The diseases, the serpent-chief, Bhall^ta, fortune, Aditi,
and Dili should occupy six half squares. (God) Brahma should
be worshipped in the nine squares (at the centre).
9-10. (God) known as AYA (should be worshipped) in the
two north-eastern squares of Brahma. (God) known as
Apavatsa (should be located) in the six squares below that
between the central points. (God) Savita should occupy
two squares in between those of Marici and Fire-god. (God)
Savitri should occupy two places below that and (God) Vivasvan six places below that.
11. (One should worship) (the gods), Visnu, Indra, Jaya
and the moon in the squares belonging to Pitps and (lord)
Brahma. (The god)Mitra should be worshipped in the six squa¬
res in between those of (gods) Brahma and Varuna.
12. The attendant of (god) Rudra (should be worshipped)
always in the ten (squares) in between those of the diseases and
(god) Brahma. (The disease) yak^an (consumption) (should
be worshipped) in the two squares below that and dharadhara
in the six squares on the north.
13. (The demonesses and demons) Garaki, Skandavikata
Vidari, Putana, Jambha, Papa and Pili-piccha should be wor¬
shipped outside in the directions of north-east etc.
14. There should be eightyone divisions of squares (in the
case of a site relating to) a house. The same should be one hund¬
red divisions (if it relates to) a (temple) pavilion. As before,
the gods should be worshipped. (Lord) Brahma (should be
worshipped) in the sixteen squares (at the centre).
15-16. (The gods) Marici, Vivasvat, Mitra and Pfthvidhara should be (worshipped) in ten squares in the (four) direc¬
tions. Diti, lianl, Mrga, Mukhya, Pitrs, Papa (spirit of sin),,
yaksman (consumption) and fire-god should be (worshipped)
in one and a half square each in the (eight) directions north¬
east etc.
17. O Guha (Kumara, son of Lord Siva and Parvati) !
I shall briefly describe the measures (of different forms of
temples) in order. It should measure twentyeight cubits in
length and twentyeight cubits in breadth.

Agni Purd^
18. The entire circumference would measure twenty- two
cubits. The width of the wall would measure nine. Th^ above
measures would hold good in the case of pavilions known as
iiv&iraya^ Sivdkhya^ rudra-hina and sadobhaya.
19. (The pavilions of) the Savitra class would measure
eighteen cubits in length and fifteen in breadth, and the width
of the walls would be made equal to a thirtieth part of the above.
20. The height of the walls above the plinth would measure
thrice the width thereof. The ground elevation of manifold
kinds depending on the passages should be in a same line with the
foot of the wall.
21 . In the Bhadra (type of temples) there should be passages
(on all sides) except at the front. There should be a passage at
the entrance. The Srijaya (class) would be devoid of the hinder
(passage). If there are no passages on the sides it is Bhadra
class.
22. The passage (should be) as wide as the adytum or
half of it. The supplementary passage (should be) half (that) of
the (main) passage and should link one, two or three chambers.
23. I shall describe the common features of the temples
which would confer all the desires (on the consecrator) . (It
should have) one, two, three, four or eight rooms in order.
24. In a temple having one room the southern part should
face the north. If there are two, one of them should have its
western part facing the east. If there are four rooms there should
be one room each as stated above facing the north and east res¬
pectively.
25. If it faces the west it is known as i§iva, the east (it is
known as) Yamasuryaka, the. east and north (it is known as)
Da^da^ ^nd the east and south (it is) known as Vata.
26. If it faces the west and north it is called Bali. That
which is (known as) the Triiula will get destruction of wealth.
A house devoid of its eastern wing will be Suk^etra which con¬
fers prosperity.
27. One devoid of southern rooms is (known as) Sull.
That are having three rooms confers excessive prosperity. The
building without any room on the west destroys the progeny
of the consecrator) and also creates many enemies.
28-29. I shall describe the eight chambers commencing with
the east (known as) ^vaja etc. The washing and fragrance

chambers as well as the kitchen (should be) on the south-east.
The parlour and bed chambers (should be) in the south. (The
chamber) for bows and weapons (should be) at the south-west.
(The chamber) for costly articles (should be) at the west.
(Room) for articles of perfume (should be) at the north-west.
30. (The chamber) for wealth and cattle should be made in
the north. The excellent place for initiation (should be) on the
north-east. The building (should be made) according to (a
standard) measured with the consecrator’s hand and co¬
extensive with the pedestal.
31. The cubit measures should be tripled and then divided
by eight. Then the remainder should (be the measure) of the
dhvaja etc. upto the end of v&yasa.
32. A building (raised on) the second, third, fourth, sixth,
seventh and the eighth (parts of the ground) as well as in the
middle and end will be ruinous.
33. Hence, the divine edifice built on the ninth part is deemed
to be auspicious. The pavilion built at the centre thereof having
a breadth equal to or twice the breadth (of the edifice) is com¬
mendable.
34-38. Eight rooms each should be built on the east, west,
north and south. The effects of these from east onwards are
respectively (described). Fear, association with woman, victory,
prosperity, fame, righteousness, strife and poverty are the eight
effects of the door on the east. The eight effects of the door on
the south are conflagration, unhappiness, annihilation of friends,
loss of property, death, (gain of) wealth, becoming a sculptor
and (birth of) children. long life, banishment, grains, wealth,
peace, destruction of wealth, emaciation, enjoyment, progeny
are the effects of the door on the west. Illness, intoxication
affliction, prominence, wealth, longevity, intelligence and
honour are the effects of the door on the north.

Agni PurSna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIX
V&stu relating to Cities
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the vdstu (worship of the presiding deity)
relating to a city for the prosperity of the kingdom. Land mea¬
suring eight miles or half of it or a quarter of it should be set
■apart.
2. After having worshipped the presiding deity of the city,
enclosure should be made ready in the thirty squares of lord I^a
(Siva) and others. The eastern gate (should be) on that of
(lord) Sun.
3. The southern (gate) should be (raised) on (the squares)
of the gandharvas (semi divine beings) while the western one
(should be raised) on that of (lord) Varuna. The northern gate
(should be) made on that of (lord) Soma. The low-roofed
chambers should be made extensive.
4. The doors should be six (cubits wide) so that the ele¬
phants and other (animals) could easily pass through. A city
should never be founded (on grounds) far away from one an¬
other, or of shape of the crescent moon or hypotenuse (of the
plot) broken.
5. (A city of the shape) of the face of a vajrasQci (diamond
needle) or having two or three easy ways is not favourable. The
frontage of a city resembling (the shape of) a bow or vajrandga
is beneficiary.
6. After having worshijpped (the gods) Vi§nu, Siva,
Sun and others and bowing down, the founder (of a
city) should make the offerings. The goldsmiths and blacksmiths
should be provided for at the south-eastern quarter of the city.
7. The houses of professional dancers and courtesans
(should be located) in the southern quarter. (The houses) of
actors, potters and fishermen (should be located) in the south¬
western quarter.
8. (Space) should be (set apart for) war-chariots, weapons
and swords in the western quarter (of a city). Distillers of liquor
and those engaged in the service (of the state) (should be located)
in the north-western quarter. %

9. Brahmins, ascetics and holy men (should be provided
for) in the northern quarter. Those who sell fruits and other
articles and merchant community in general should be located
in the north-eastern quarter.
10. The commanders of army (should be given quarters)
in the eastern quarter. Different regiments of the army (should
be provided) in the south-eastern quarter. The officers who
attend upon the ladies (should have their residence) in the
southern quarter. Royal camps should be located in the south¬
western part.
11. The chief ministers, treasurers and architects (should
be located) in the western direction. Men of judiciary
belonging to the clan of brahmins and eminent men (should be
located) in the northern part.
12. The military men (should be located) in the southern
part, the tradesmen and Sudras (fourth class of men) in the wes¬
tern part. The physicians (should be provided with quarters)
in all directions and horses and army should be placed in all
quarters.
13. The movable cla.ss of lihgas (should be placed) in the
east and the cremation ground in the south. Cattle-sheds (should
be located) in the western part and farmers in the northern part.
14. Foreigners should be located in the angular points.
This should be observed even in small villages. Those who see
(the goddess) Laksmi and Kubera at (each side of) the eastern
gate-way (of the city) obtain prosperity.
15. The temples of gods (should be established) in the west¬
ern part facing the east. (The divine edifices should) face to¬
wards the west and north respectively in the east and the south.
16-17. The temples of gods Brahma, IiSa (Siva) and
Vi?nu (should be built in the city) for the protection of the city.
A city, a village, a fortress or a house not having a (guardian)
deity will be swallowed by the goblins etc. and becomes infect¬
ed by diseases. The cities protected by deities confer victory,
enjoyment and emancipation.
18. The treasure-house should be in the east, the kitchen in
the south-east, the bed-chamber in the south and the arsenal
^n the west.
19. The dining (chamber) (should be) in the western part,

322 Agni Pwrltna
the granary in the north-west, store-house in the north and the
chamber for the deities in the north-east. ,
20-23. The palaces may have four chambers or three or
two or one. In the case of palaces having four chambers there
are two hundred and fiftyfive subdivisions based on the terraces
in front of the buildings, whereas those having three chambers
(will have) four (sub-divisions) and those having two chambers
(will have) five (sub-divisions) and those having one chamber
(will have) four. The terraces should number twentyeight
both in a house and city or they should be four, seven, fiftyfive,
six, twenty-eight or eight only.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVEN
The creation of Svdyambhuva Manu
Fire-god said :
1-3. I shall describe the different worlds, the earth and the
continents. King Priyavrata had ten sons Agnidhra, Agnibahu, Vapusman, Dyutiman, Medha, Medhatithi, Bhavya,
Savan^, Jyoti^man, and Satya. The father gave them seven
continents as follows: He gave Jambudvlpa to Agnidhra and
Plak^a to Medhatithi.
4. He gave (the continent of) Salmala to Vapusman,
(continent) Kui$a to Jyoti^man, continent of Kraufica to Dyuti¬
man and (continent of) Saka to Bhavya.
5. He gave Pu^kara to Savana. What Jambudvipa was
given to Agnidhra by his father (was divided by him and given
to his sons). He gave (the country) called Hima to Nabhi.
6. (He gave) Hemakufa to Kimpuru^a, Nai^adha to Harivar^, central Meru to Ilavrta, NllScala (Nila mountains) to
Ramya.
7. (He gave) Svetavar^a to Hira^vat, Kuru to Kuru,
Bhadralva to Bhadrkiva, western (countries) to Ketumala.
8. The king having established the sons of Priyavrata (in
the regions) of Mem, went to the forest. After having performed
penance, he reached god Hark

9. O Foremost among beings ! the eight countries Kimpurusa and others by nature abound in happiness and felicity
and have natural perfection.
10. There is no fear of old age or death, (adherence or
non-observance of) moral obligations relating to yuga periods,
or lower or middle class of beings in (the country) of Hima.
11. R|abha was born to Nabhi through Meru. Bharata
was born to R§abha. After having entrusted the kingdom to his
son, Rsabha resorted to 8alagrama and attained Hari.
12. The country was called Bh&rata after the name
Bharata. Sumati was born to Bharata. Bharata resorted to
8alagrama (to worship) Hari after entrusting his kingdom (to
his son).
13. He became a yogin (on practising _yo^a). I shall des¬
cribe his life later at the time of narration o^yoga. From Sumati,
Tejas (was born). Indradyumna was born from him.
14-15. Paramesthi was born from him and Pratihara was
born then. Pratiharta (was born) from Pratihara and then
Bhuva, Udgitha and Prastara from Pratiharta. Vibhu was the
son of Prastara. Then (was born) Prthu and Nakta. Gaya
was the son of Nakta.
16. Nara was the son of Gaya. Then Virat was his son.
Mahavirya was the son (of Vira^). Dhiman was born to him.
17. Mahanta was his son. Manasya was his (Mahanta’s)
son. (Then) Tvasta (was born to him). Viraja (was born)
to Tvasta. Raja was his son.
18. Satyajit (was born) to Raja. O Sage ! one hundred
sons were born to him. They were the lights of the universe.
The (country of) Bharata was well-developed by them. The
creation of the Svayambhuva (Manu) was remembered (so far)
relating to Krta and Treta (yugas).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHT
Cosmographical account
Fire-god said :
1. The seven continents are Jambu, Plak$a, l§&lmali»
Kuia, Krauftca, J^aka and Pu^kara.

Agni PurSna
2. These continents are surrounded by seven oceans
namely, Lavana (salt), Iksu (sugarcane juice), Sura (n^tar),
Sarpis (clarified butter), Dadhi (curd), Dugdha (milk) and
Jala (water) of even proportions.
3. The Jambudvipa (continent of Jambu) is situated at
the centre of continents. The Meru mountain which is the
kind of sixteen mountains towers majestically extending to eightyfour (jiojanas).
4. The mountain rises to thirty two thousand (jojanas)
above (the earth) and spreads to sixteen thousand (jojanas)
under the earth. Its peaks are in the shape of a pericarp of a
lotus.
5. Himavan, Hemakuta and Nisadha are in the southern
part. Nila, 6vcta and Sfhgi are the varmparvatas (boundary
mountains) in the northern part.
6. Two of the above (mountains) extend to two lakhs
(jojanas)z.t their middle, while the others are ten thousand (^oj<2nas) less. Their altitude is two thousand and they have
an equal breadth at the base.
7. O Twice-born one ! Bharata is the first mountain.
Kimpurusa is known as the next one. Harivarsa is the next one
to the south of Meru.
8. Ramyaka, Hiranyaka and Uttara Kuru are in the north
just as the Bharata (in the south).
9. O Excellent sage ! Each one of them is nine thousand
(jojanas) in their extent. Ilav^ta is at the middle. Meru rises
up from the centre with its golden peak.
10. O Fortunate one ! Ilavrta spreads to nine thousand
(jojanas) all around Meru. There are four mountains here.
11. They are beams of support for the Meru, each one
extending to one lakh (jojanas). (Among these) the Mandara
(mountain) is in the east and the Gandhamadana is in the south.
12-13. The Vipula (mountain) is in the west and the
Supar^va (mountain) is in the north. The Kadamba, Jambu,
Pippala and Vata are the trees in these extending to eleven hund¬
red (jojanas) (serving as) their banners. Jambudvipa gets its
appellation on account of the Jambu fruit of the size of an ele¬
phant.
14. The waters of the river Jambu deposit the 'golden ores.

The Supar^va (mountain lies) on the east of Meru and the
Ketumala (mountain) on the west.
15. The forest of Caitraratha (lies) on the east, Gandhamadana on the south, Vaibhraja on the west and Nandana on
the north. (I shall describe) the lakes herein.
16. fThey are) Arunoda, Mahabhadra, Sitoda, Manasa,
Sitambha, Cakra and Munja. The mountains known as Kesaracala^ are in the east.
17-18. The mountains (called) Trikuta® (group) lie
on the south. The Sikhivasa® (group) (lie) on the west. The
jSahkhakuta* (group) lie on the north. The abode of lord
Brahma is on the Meru (mountain) extending to fourteen thou¬
sand above. (The abodes) of Indra and other guardian
deities are around the abode of Brahma.
19. The river Sita, after falling from the feet of (lord)
Visnu, washes the lunar region and falls- from heavens on the
east (on the Bhadrasva mountain). It falls from Bhadra^va on
the hills below successively and reaches the ocean.
20-21. Similarly, (the river) Alakananda flows in Bharata through the south and reaches the ocean after dividing
itself into seven branches.
(The river) Caksu reaches the ocean on the west. So also
(the river) Bhadra (passes through) the Uttara Kuru (country)
and reaches the northern ocean. (The mountains) Malyavat
and Gandhamadana extend up to the Nila and Nisadha (moun¬
tains in the north and south respectively).
22-27. The Meru (mountain) lies in between them in the
shape of a lotus, (The countries) Bharata, Ketumala, Bhadrasva,
and Kurus situated outside these boundary mountains are the
petals of this lotus of the world. The two boundary mountains
Jathara and Devakuta extend upto the Nila and Nisadha moun¬
tains on the north and south. The Gandhamadana and Kailasa
1. They are Sitambha, Kumuda, Kurari, Malyavaii and Vaikahka.
See VLP. Il.ii.2G.
2. They are Trikuta, Sisira, Patahga, Rucaka and Nisada. See Vi. P.
II.ii.27.
3. They arc Sikhivasa, Vaidurya, Kapila, Gandhamadana and JSrudlii. See Vi.P. II.ii.28.
4. They are Sankliakflta, B-^abha, Hariua, NSga and K&lafijara. See

Agni PurSm
(mountains) spreading in the east and west to eighty yojanas
lie in the ocean. The two boundary mountains Nisadha and
Pariyatra are situated on the west as in the east. (Similarly),
the boundary mountains Jathara and others (are situated)
around Meru in four directions.
28. O Excellent sage ! Abodes of (goddess) Lak^m?,.
(lords) Visnu, Agni and Surya and other gods are situated in the
caves in the mountains Kesara and others.
29-30. They are the abodes of gods on the earth. Sin¬
ners do not go there. Lord Visnu resides in Bhadra^va as
Hayagriva, in Ketumala as Varaha, in Bharata in the form of
Kurma (tortoise) and in Kurus in the form of Matsya (fish).
Lord Hari is worshipped everywhere in his universal form.
31. In the eight countries Kimpurusa and others, there is
no (misery such as) hunger, fear, grief and others. The twentyfour thousand inhabitants live without diseases.
32. There is no imaginary division of time such as the Kfta
{yuga) etc., the division of worlds, waters and clouds. There are
seven principal mountains in each one of these countries.
33. Hundreds of rivers rise from them giving rise to sacred
waters. I shall describe the sacred spots situated in Bharata.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINE
The greatness of sacred spots
Fire-god said :
1-4. I shall describe the greatness of all sacred spots which
confer enjoyment and emancipation. One, whose hands, feet
and mind are well-disciplined and one who possesses learning,
austerity and penance, reaps the fruits of pilgrimage. One who
has restrained from accepting alms, one who eats less, one who
has conquered his senses, one who is devoid of sins, such a person
on pilgrimage would get the fruits of all sacrificial rites. One
would be born as poor, if he has not fasted three nights, had not
gone on pilgrimage and had not given gold and cows as gift.
Whatever fruit is got by doing sacrificial rites wUJ be gained
by going on pilgrimage.

5. O Brahmin ! Puskara is the excellent sacred spot.
One should dwell there atleast for three nights. There are
thousand crores of sacred places in Puskara.
6. Lord Brahma resides here along with celestials.
The sages who desire for everything and the celestials have had
perfection here after bathing and worshipping the ancestors
and celestials.
7. They attain the fruits of performing Asvamedha rite
and reach Brahmaloka. One who gifts food in (the month
of) Karttika, gets free from sins and reaches Brahmaloka.
8. It is difficult to go to Puskara and the austerity at Puskara
is still more difficult. It is difficult to give gift at Puskara and
it is still more difficult to stay at Puskara.
9. One elevates hundreds of manes by staying therein, by
repetition (of divine names) and by doing ancestoral rites. The
path to Jambu also lies therein, as also the sacred spot of Tanejulikasrama.
10-11. The Kanvasrama, Kotitirtha, (river) Narmada,
Arbuda, Carmanvati, Sindhu, Somanatha, Prabhasa, con¬
fluence of (river) Saras vat i at the ocean, the ocean, Pindaraka,
Dvaraka and Gomati yield all fruits.
12-13. The Bhumitirtha, Brahmatunga and the (land of)
five rivers, the king of mountains, Devika, the destroyer of sins,
the meritorious Vina^ana, Nagodbheda, the destroyer of sins
the Kumarakoti are spoken as bestowers of all benefits.
14. Whoever always says, “I will go to Kuruk§etra and live,
therein”, becomes free of sin and goes to heaven.
15. The gods Visnu and others dwell there. (One who)
lives therein reaches lord Visiju. One who bathes in the river
Sarasvatl and Sannihata reaches the region of Brahma.
16. Even the dust particles at Kuruk^etra confer excellent
position. The Dharmatirtha, Suvarna and Haridvara are excel¬
lent places.
17. The sacred places Kanakhala and Bhadrakarnahrada
are meritorious. The confluence of the rivers Ganges and
Sarasvati and the Brahmavarta destroy sins.
18. The Bhrgutunga, Kubjamra and the place of origin of
Ganges destroy sins. Varanasi is an excellent sacred spot.
Avimukta is unsurpassed.

Agni Purdi}a
19. The sacred Kapalamocana and Prayaga, the excellent
sacred spot, the confluence of Gomati and Gahga aiyl (the
river) Gahga throughout do not confer hell.
20. The sacred Rajagrha is meritorious. Salagrama removes
sins. Vatesa, the sacred Vamana and the confluence of
Kalika are excellent places.
21. Lauhitya, (river) Karatoya, Sona, Rsabha (hills)
are excellent places. Sriparvata, Kolbagiri, Sahyadri and
Malayagiri (are sacred).
22. The rivers Godavari, Tuhgabhadra, Kaveri, Tapi,
Payosni and Reva are the bestowers (of fruits). The Dandaka
forest is excellent.
23. Kalanjara, Mufijavata, Surparaka, (river j Mandakini,
Citrakuta and Sfhgaverapura are excellent spots.
24. Avanti is an excellent place. Ayodhya destroys one’s
sins. Naimisa is an excellent place which yields enjoyment and
liberation.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TEN
The greatness of Gahga
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the greatness of (river) Gahga. She
should be worshipped. She yields enjoyment and liberation.
The countries through which she flows are holy and excellent.
2. The (river) Ganges is the succour for the beings who
resort to it always. The (river) Ganges duly worshipped, suc¬
cours the two lines of ancestors.
3. The drinking of the waters of Ganges (confers the merits
of performance of) thousands of Candrayana. One who
worships the Ganges for a month gets the fruits of all sacrificial
rites.
4. The goddess (Ganges) destroys all sins and confers (ac¬
cess to) heavens. One continues to stay in heavens as long
as (his) bones remain in the (waters of the) Ganges.
5. Blind people and others attain equal staftis with the

celestials by worshipping her. The carrying of the earth dug up
from the beds of Ganges destroys one’s sins just as the Sun.
6. (The river) purifies hundreds and thousands of holy
men who look at it, touch it, drink (its waters) and repeat (the
word) Ganges.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN
The Greatness of Praydga
Fire-god said :
1 . I shall describe the greatness of Prayaga, the excellent
place, which confers enjoyment and emancipation. O Excel¬
lent sages ! the gods Brahma , Visnu and others stay at Prayaga.
2. So also the rivers, oceans, siddhas (accomplished persons),,
gandharvas (semi-divine beings) (stay there). There are three
fire-pits and the Ganges (flows) in the middle.
3. (The river Yamuna), the daughter of Sun, renowned
in the three worlds flows there with force having all sacred spots
before her.
4. (The land) in between (the rivers) Ganges and Yamuna
is known to be the thigh of (goddess) earth. The sages knew that
Prayaga is the generative organ situated in the thigh.
5. Prayaga and Pratisthana are the woollen blanket and the
mule. The holy place of Bhogavati is the platform for the god of
creation (Brahma).
6-7. The scriptures and sacrificial rites are endowed with
forms at Prayaga. By singing in praise of this sacred place, or by
the repetition of (lord’s) names or by touching the earth here
(one) gets free from all sins. Charity, ancestral rites and recita¬
tion (of names of the god) done at Pray^a, the place of con¬
fluence (of the two rivers), has undecaying merits.
8. O Twice-born ! One who has resolved to die at Prayaga
at the end (of his term of life) should not change his mind on the
authority of scriptures or on the words of the people.
9-12, Ten thousand and six crores of sacred places are pre¬
sent only here. Hence Prayaga is the foremost (place). The

Agni Purd^a
Bhogavati, sacred spot of Vasuki (serpent chief) and the flight
of swans are present here. One reaps the fruits of making a*charity of a crores of cows by bathing at Prayaga three days in the
month oHmagha (February-March). The learned have declared
thus. It is easy to have access to Ganges all along its course,
but very difficult at the (following) three places — Gahgadvara
(Haridvara), Prayaga and the confluence of Ganges with the
ocean. One goes to heaven by giving alms here and one will
become a monarch here itself.
13-14. One who dies at the root of the banyan tree and the
confluence goes to the abode oflord Visnu. The sacred sands
on which Urvasi (a nymph) had sported, the Sandhyavata, the
Kotitirtha, the Asvarnedha, the pure Manasa, and Vasaraka are
all excellent places.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWELVE
The greatness of Varanasi
Fire-god said :
1. (Lord) Mahesvara (Siva) said to Gauri (consort of
Siva) that Varanasi is the sacred place. It confers enjoyment
and emancipation on those who reside there and recite (the
name of god) Hari (Visnu).
Rudra {&iva) said :
2. “The sacred place, O Gauri, has never been forsaken
(by me) and hence it is called Avimukta^. The repetition (of
god’s names), the performance of penance and giving alms at
Avimukta indeed (yields) undiminishing benefits.
3-5. After rubbing away dust from the feet with a stone,
one should stay at Ka^i (Varanasi). He should never forsake it.
The eight holy spots — Hariscandra, AmratakeiSvara, Japyesvara,
Sriparvata, Mahalaya, Bhfgu, Candesvara and Kedara, remain
concealed at Avimuktaka (Varanasi). Avimuktaka is the most
sacred place among all sacred places.
6. It extends to two^tyanaj in the east and half s^yojana in
1. Avimukta is one of the names of Virioasl.

the opposite direction. The (two) rivers Varana and Asi (flow)
and Varanasi lies between the two.
7. Bathing, muttering (of divine names), oblations (to
gods), (one’s) death, worship of gods, ancestral rites, alms¬
giving and stay and whatsoever done here is capable of confer¬
ring enjoyment and emancipation.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN
The greatness of Narmada
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the greatness of Narmada which
yields great pleasure. The water of the Ganges purifies the
bather at once. The water of the river Narmada (purifies)
at the mere sight of it.
2-3. It extends (in length) to one hundred and two
yojanas in breadth. There are sixty thousand holy places and
sixty crores on the hills on either side at Amarakantaka. (The
place of) confluence with Kaveri is meritorious. Listen to me.
I shall describe about Sriparvata.
4-5. (Goddess) Gauri in the guise of (goddess) Sri (Laksmi)
did penance here. Lord Hari told her, who was doing pen¬
ance, that she would attain salvation, and that hill will be known
after her name as Sriparvata. Hundred yojanas all along (the
hill) would become greatly meritorious. Charity, penance,
chants and ceremony done here all yield undiminishing
merits.
6. Death at this place (conveys one) to the world
of Siva. This excellent sacred place yields everything. Lord
^iva sports here with his consort. (The demon) Hiranyakasipu
performed penance here and became mighty. Tlie sages
attained perfection here.

Agni PurSna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN
The greatness of Gaya,
The Fire-god said ;
1-2. I shall describe the greatness of Gaya. It is the most
excellent among the sacred places. The demon Gaya practised
p>enance. Being tormented by the heat of his penance, the celes¬
tials (approached lord) Visnu who was lying in the milky
ocean and told him “Kindly protect us from the demon Gaya.”
(I.ord) Hari (Visnu) said yes. He met the demon and asked
him to request for a boon.
3-4. The demon requested that he would be the holiest of
all places. Lord Visnu granted his request. Having seen that
the demon (was on the earth) and the earth had become deserted
without Lord Vi.snu, the celestials, Brahma and others in the
heaven met lord Hari (Visnu) and said, “O (lord) Hari !
The earth has become deserted.”
5. On seeing the demon’s presence, lord Hari (Visnu)
asked (lord) Braluna, “You go to the demon along with the
celestials and request for his body for the purpose of a sacrifice.”
6. After having heard that, Brahma went to the demon
Gaya along with the celestials and said to him as follows:
“I am your guest. I request you (to give me your) pure body
for (the sake of being offered in) a sacrifice.”
7. The demon Gaya granted the request. He fell down.
(Lord Brahma) did the sacrifice on the skull. As it was moving,,
(lord Visnu) asked lord Brahma to offer the final oblation.
8-9. Even as the final oblation was being offered, the demon
moved. Hence lord Brahma asked Lord Visnu. Lord
Visnu then called Dharma (the god of virtue) and said, “O
celestials ! you all support this divine stone. The club-wielding
form of mine along with the gods will be present on this slab.”
10-11. Having heard that, lord Dharma supported that
excellent divine slab. Marici, the son of Brahma married Dharma
vrata, the daughter of Dharma and Dharmavatl. She was devot¬
ed to doing penance. (They two spent happily) just as (lord)
Hari sported with (goddess) 5ri (LaksmI) and (lord) Sambhu
(Siva) with (goddess) Gauri (Parvati).
12. (Once) he returned from the forest with*)l:M/a (grass)

and flowers and was very tired. After taking food he said to
Dharmavrata, “Massage my feet.”
1 3. The dear wife accordingly was massaging the feet of the
sage who was taking rest. In the meanwhile, as the sage fell into
a nap, lord Brahma came there.
14. Dharmavrata began to think, “Shall I worship lord
Brahma ? Or shall I continue to massage the feet (of my lord) ?
Brahma who is the lord of my lord should be worshipped.”
15-17. After thinking (for some time) she began to worship
lord Brahma with all the honours. MarJci (woke up and)
saw her (doing service to Brahma). As she was not doing as di¬
rected he cursed her angrily, “You will become a stone”. Dharmavratci also said to him, “After having slopped massaging your
feet, I had worshipped (Brahma) your lord. As you have cursed
me, a faultless person, you will be cursed by (lord) Sankara
(Siva)”. Dharmavrata bore the curse singly and resorted to
fire-god.
18. She performed penance for a long period. Then Visnu
and other celestials appeared in front of her and asked her to
request for a boon.
19-22. Dha'rmavrata said to the celestials, “O Gods let
my curse come to an end. The celestials said, “The curse given
by Marici will not be otherwise. You will become a sacred stone
bearing the marks of the foot-prints of lord (Visnu). You will
be endowed with the essence of the gods, O Devavrata (Dhar¬
mavrata) ! You will be representing the forms of all celestials.
You will be meritorious for making the demon motionless”.
Devavrata said, “If you are pleased with me, may Brahma,
Visnu, Rudra, Gauri, Laksrni and other gods stay in me ever.”
The fire-god said, “Having heard the words of Devavrata,
the celestials said in affirmative and repaired to the heavens.”
23. That divine stone slab of the demon was supported by
(lord) Dharma. The demon began to move with the stone slab
on which (the gods) Rudra and others remained.
24. The demon was still moving along with celestials.
Then lord Hari (Visnu), who was reclining in the milky ocean,
was requested by celestials and he gave his form of wielding
a mace.
25. (He said) ‘You all may go. I shall myself go there with
the form known to all celestials.” There lord Gadadhara

334 Agni Purana
manifested (in the form of) manifest, unmanifest and both mani
fest and unmanifcst.
26-30. (Lord) AdigadMhara was himself present in order
to make (the stone slab) steady. There was a demon named
Gada. He was killed by lord Visnu. Visvakarma (the celes¬
tial architect) made a mace from the bones (of that demon) .
(Lord) Gadadhara killed Heti and other demons with that first
mace duly. Hence, he is known as Adigadadhara. When lord
Adigadadhara was manifest in the divine stone slab and the
demon remained steady, then lord Brahma offered the final
oblation. The demon Gaya asked celestials “Why I was
deceived ? By the more command of lord Visnu I would have
remained steady. Because you have tormented me you should
give me a boon”.
The celestials said’.
31-32. “Since you have been made steady by us, this will
become a holy place of the lords Visnu, Sambhu (Siva) and
Brahma. (It would become) more renowned than all other
sacred places. It would confer the region of Brahma on the
(departed) ancestors”. Having spoken thus, the gods and god¬
desses remained there. All the sacred places also were present
there.
33-35. After having performed the sacrifice, Brahma gave
fees to the priests. The sacred place of Gaya (extends to)
fiwtkroias (ten miles). Fiftyfive villages were endowed with (the
following): Golden hills flowing with rivers, milk and honey,
reservoirs of curd, clarified butter, plenty of hills of food, kdmadhenu (the celestial cow), kalpataru (the celestial tree) and abodes
made of gold and silver. Let the brahmins here do not seek
alms. The lord gave all these things after having spoken very
little.
^6-37. (The brahmins) at Gaya were cursed by lord
Brahma when they on account of their greed received gifts of
money and other things of the righteous sacrifice “You will be
deprived of learning. You will be greedy. The rivers will be
bereft of milk and other things. The mountains will become mere
rocks.”
38-40. The brahmins said to (lord) Brahma, “Everything
has been lost on account of the curse. Kindly be gracions to us

for the sake of our livelihood”. He replied to the Brahmins, “You
will be dependent on (the pilgrims to) the sacred place as long
as the moon and sun (exist). The people who come to Gaya
and worship you by offering gifts of food, wealth etc. and ances¬
tral rights shall elevate hundreds of their families to heaven from
hell and excellent position after heaven.”
41 . Gaya also performed a sacrifice offering plenty of food
and profuse fees. The place has been named as Gaya after him.
The Pandavas worshipped lord Visn u.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED FIFTEEN
Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gayd
Fire-god said :
1-7. When he has decided to go to Gaya after having duly
performed the ancestral rite, he should wear ochre robes and do
circumambulation of the village. He should control his mind
and should not seek alms as he proceeds on the journey everyday.
As soon as he has started from his house to go to Gaya, he
secures for his ancestors the steps to ascend to heaven at each one
of his steps. What is that to be done by acquiring knowledge about
the brahman (the absolute) ? What is the benefit of dying at a
cowshed ? What is the use of stay at Kuruksetra ? If the son
goes to Gaya, the ancestors celebrate it on seeing that the son
has reached Gaya. (They would think), will they (the sons)
offer us waters atleast by touching with their feet ? The knowledge
about brahman, the ancestral rite at Gaya, the death at the cow¬
shed and stay at Kuruksetra are the four ways of attaining libe¬
ration. The ancestors who are afraid of hell desire that their
sons who go to Gaya would be their saviours. Tonsure and
fasting is a general rule (to be adhered) at all the sacred places.
8. There is no restriction about time at Gaya. The obla¬
tions may be offered always. One who stays there for three
fortnights purifies seven generations.
9. In the offaka ceremony and in the vfddhi rite at Gaya
on the day of death, separate rite is performed for the mother at
Gaya. But it is performed along with the husband at other places.

Jgni Purana
10. So also with the rites for the nine relatives such as the
father etc. and for the twelve relatives. One should bathe iA the
sacred water of Uttaramanasa on the first day.
11. One should bathe in the sacred Uttaramanasa for the
sake of increase of longevity and good health, for the destruction
of all sins and for liberation.
12. By satisfying gods and ancestors with offerings,
the doer of ancestral rite is deemed to have offered them the
balls (of rice) “I am satisfying gods remaining in heaven, sky
and earth.”
13-16. One should satisfy beings in heaven, sky and
earth, and father and mother (with the words), “I make
these offerings of balls (of rice) for (my) father, grandfather,
greatgrandfather, mother, (paternal) grandmother, (paternal)
great-grandfather, (maternal) grandfather, (maternal) great¬
grandfather and (maternal) great great grandfather and others
for their uplift. “Our salutations to the Sun-god who is of the
forms of (the planets) Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus,
Saturn, Rahu and Ketu. Whoever bathes in the Uttaramanasa
elevates his entire family.
17-18. After having saluted Sun (god) one should goto
the Daksinamanasa without speaking (any word). (One should
contemplate as follows) : “I bathe in the Daksinamanasa for the
satisfaction of (my) ancestors. I have come to Gaya. May all
my ancestors ascend heaven.” After having performed
ancestral rite and offered balls (of rice), one should utter as
follows after worshipping Sun (god) :
19. “Om, salutation to Sun (god), lord (of the
universe. O Supreme god ! get me the cherished end. Graci¬
ously grant enjoyment and emancipation to all my ancestors.
20-21. May the most propitious Fire-god, the conveyor
of oblations. Soma, Yama, Aryama, and groups of manes —
Agnisvattah, Barhisadah, Ajyapah come here. My ancestors
such as mother, (maternal) grandfather and others were
protected here by all of you.
22-24. I am the person to offer them balls (of rice).
I have come to this Gay& (Ksetra). The sacred place named
Kanakhala, renowned in three worlds and being worshipped
by celestials, sages and ganaSf lies to the north of

pirstha (the place where tonsure is done). It is being guarded
always by the licking great serpents that give pleasure to accom¬
plished persons and frighten sinners. The mortals on earth
go to heavens and sport there by bathing there (in the waters of
Kanakhala).
25. Then one should go to Phalgutirtha situated on the
Mahanadi after having visited Uttaramanasa, Naga, Janardana, sacred well and banyan tree.
26. This is spoken as the Gayasira. It is also called
Phalgutirtha. The Mundaprstha, Naga hill and other places
are the most excellent among outstanding.
27. The water on the earth is veritable Kamadhenu which
yields prosperity and heaven. The Phalgutirtha causes delight
to the eyes. No other place is like the Phalgu (tirtha).
28. The man who bathes in the Phalgutirtha and
worships lord Gadadhara (Visnu) is deemed to have achieved
all things got by the doers of good deeds.
29. The sacred places on earth, commencing with
oceans and ending with tanks go to Phalgutirtha once every¬
day.
30. Whoever bathes reverentially at the Phalgutirtha, the
foremost among tirthas, causes forefathers to reach the region
of Braluna and the own self to get enjoyment and emanci¬
pation.
31-33. One who performs the ancestral rite here should
bathe, offer balls (of rice) and worship (lord) Brahma.
In this Kaliyuga, all regions (of the universe) are presided
over by (lord) Mahesvara (Siva). But (lord) Gadadhara
(Visnu) is the presiding deity here. (Lord) Brahma (remains
here) in the form of a linga. (One should say), “I make obei¬
sance to (lords) (Mahesvara) $iva, Gadadhara (Visnu), Bala,
Kama (god of love), Aniruddha (a form of Vishu) and Narayana. I also make obeisance to Brahma, Visnu, Nrsirhha and
Varaha (forms of Visnu) and others.” Then one elevates hund¬
reds of his family after worshipping (lord) Gadadhara.
34. Then one should go to Dharmaranya on the second
day, bathe in Matahgavapi at the excellent Matahga^rama,
do the ancestral rite and offer balls (of rice).
35-36. One should utter the following (words), after wor¬
shipping gods Matangeia and Siddheia: “Let the gods and

Agni Puram
guardian deities be the witness (to the fact) that I had come here
and performed rites at this Matahga for the liberation of my
fore-fathers. Bathing, offerring waters of liberation, performance
of ancestral rite and other acts (should be performed) at
Brahmatirtha and the sacred well.
37. The performance of ancestral rite between the well and
the sacrificial post lifts hundreds of fore-fathers. The righteous
person who salutes the Mahabodhi tree gets the region of heaven.
38-39. On the third day, having control over the senses,
one should bathe in the Brahmasaras, with the words, “I bathe
in the sacred Brahmasaras for the favour of lord Brahma
and convey forefathers to the region of Brahm& served by the
brahmarsis and ganas. The doer of ancestral rite should offer
waters of libation, offer balls (of rice) and sprinkle (water
over his body). One who wants to have Vajapeya (rite) should
circumambulate tht brahmay upa (post).
40. One sage offers water at the root of the mango tree hold¬
ing a pitcher and kuia in his hand . The mango trees are watered
and the forefathers are satisfied. One act is well known as yield¬
ing two fruits.
41-42. By making obeisance to lord Brahma one elevates
hundreds of generations. On the fourth day, after having bathed
in the Phalgutirtha and offering tarpana to gods, one should
do the ancestral rite together with (the offering of) balls (of
rice) at the Gayafiras. The extent of sacred Gaya is five kroias
(ten miles) and the extent of GayaiSira is one kroSa (two miles).
43. By offering balls (of rice) there, one elevates hund¬
reds of generations. The great lord Mahadeva (Siva) has
placed his foot at the Mundaprstha.
44. The Gayasira is said to be the sanctuary at Mundaprstha. The Gayalira itself has been made the hermitage at
Phalgutirtha.
45-48. The nectar flows therein. Wliatever is offered there
to the forefathers never decreases. After having bathed at
Dala^vamedha and worshipped lord Brahma, whoever
touches the Rudrapada (the foot mark of lord Rudra) will
not be born again. Having offered the ball of rice of the mea¬
sure of a Sami leaf at GayaSira, those who are in the hell go to
heaven and those who are in heaven attain UbeiUtion. The offer

of ball (of rice) (is made) along with (sweet porridge)
flour made into a paste, gruel, rice and wheat and mixed with
sesamum. By offering the ball (of rice) at Rudrapada, one ele¬
vates hundreds of generations.
49. Similarly, one who offers the ball (of rice) at the ances¬
tral rite at Vi^nupada gets released from debts (due to
ancestors). One will elevate hundreds of fore-fathers as also
his own self.
50-53. So also, one who does the ancestral rite at the Brahmapada (the place where the footmarks of Brahma are situated)
conveys the forefathers to the region of Brahma. Similarly, (the
performance of) ancestral rite at the daksinUgnipaday gdrhapatyapada and the ShavantyapaddS confers the fruits of (performance
of a) sacrificial rite. One who does the ancestral rite to dvasthya^
(fire), (gods) moon, sun, gana^ (sage) Agastya and Karttikeya
elevate the family. After having saluted the chariot of Sun,
one should make obeisance to Karnaditya. After having worshipp¬
ed the foot of (lord) Kanakeiia, one should make obeisance
to Gayakedara. (By such acts) one gets freed from all sins
and conveys his fore-fathers to the region of Brahma.
54-55. Prince Vi^ala at Vi^ala became father of children by
offering balls (of rice) at Gayasiras. He asked the brahmins,
“How can I have children ?*’ The brahmins told Viiala,
“All things will be got by offering balls (of rice) at Gaya.”
56-59. Then Vi^ala also offered balls (of rice) to the fore¬
fathers at Gayaliras. Having seen white and red (coloured)
souls in the sky, he asked them, “Who are you ?”. One among
them, the white person, said to Viiala, “I, the white person,
am your father now going to the region of Indra on account of
(your) good deeds. O son ! the red coloured (person) is
my father and the black coloured is my grand-father. We had
reached hell and we are liberated by you. Because you have
offered balls (of rice) we are gomg to the region of Brahmi”.
After saying thus they went away. Viiala got progeny, ruled
the kingdom and (finally) reached lord Hari (Vi$nu).
60-62. The foremost among the pretas said to the merchant
for his liberation, “Good fruits arc enjoyed by all pretas, who
1. The places associated with the fires of the household.
2. A household fire.

Agni Purd^a
are tormented by sufferings. Once, a pitcher together with food
and water was given on a l^ravanadvada^i day at noon. 14131 lias
been sustaining (us ever since). You go to Gaya with money and
offer us balls (of rice)”. The merchant went to Gaya with
money and offered balls (of rice).
63-64. The foremost among the pretas was led to the region
of (lord) Hari (Visnu) along with the other pretas. (One libe¬
rates) his own self, his forefathers and those who have died on the
paternal and maternal side, as also those related to the preceptor,
the father-in-law and other relatives, by the offer of balls (of
rice) at Gaya^iras.
65-67. (One should utter the following words): “Those
who have been deprived of the offer of balls for their sake, those
who do not have a wife or children, those for whom the rites
could not be done, those who were blind, lame or of deformed
limbs, those who were born prematurely and other known and
unknown (relatives) in my family, for their sake, I have offered
the ball (of rice). Let it remain undecaying. Those fore-fathers
of mine who remain in the form of a preta, let all of them be pleas¬
ed for ever by the offer of the ball (of rice)”.
68. All those who desire to elevate the family should offer
balls (of rice) to all. So also one desirous of (elevating his own
self) and getting imperishable place should offer (ball of rice).
69-70. The wise man should bathe at Gadalola with
the (repetition of) mantras. O lord Janardana ! I bathe in
this sacred Gadaprak$alana at the extremely sacred Gadalola
in order to appease sufferings due to mundane existence.
Obeisance to the Akfoyavafa (banyan) tree, which yields undecay ing heaven.
7 1 . One should do the ancestral rite at the spot of the banyan
tree and feed brahmins for (securing) undecaying position
of forefathers and for the destruction of all sins.
72. If one brahmin has been fed, crores (of brahmins)
would become fed. What more to say ? If many are fed, the offer¬
ings done to the fore-fathers become undecaying.
73. The fathers of those who offer food at Gaya become
virtually the putr^ (i.e. having sons). After having saluted the
1. The word puira means — one who saves parents from the hell
called put. ^

banyan tree and the lord of the banyan tree, one should worship
the great grand-father.
74. One would attain imperishable position and elevate
hundreds of his family members. The pilgrimage made to Gay4
always (bears) fruit whether it is done in the proper way or not.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN
Mode of making a pilgrimage to Gayd
The Fire~god said :
1. One should do sandhya (twilight worship) after
bathing in (the river) Mahanadi with (the recitation of)
gayatri {mantra). The ancestral rite and offer of balls (of rice)
in the morning preceded by (the recitation of) gdyatri (man”
tra) yields undiminishing (fruits).
2. Having bathed in the noon (as the sun remains up)
and having worshipped with songs and (playing of) musical
instruments, the (evening) twilight worship is done there itself
in front of the sun and the offer of balls (of rice) is made.
3. (Similarly) one should (offer) at the place of Agastya.
One, who has come out after having entered the yonidvdra (the
fissure in the hill), does not enter the yoni (the womb) again and
will be liberated from the cycles of birth and death.
4. (He) should then pay obeisance to Bali (a demon king)
at K&kafila and (lord) Kumara (Subrahmanya).Then one
should offer balls (of rice) at Svargadvara, Somakunda and
Vayutirtha.
5. Then (he) should offer balls (of rice) at Akasagahgi
and KapiU. After having paid obeisance to Siva, the lord of
Kapils, one should offer balls (of rice) at Rukmikunda.
6. After having worshipped (lord) KofHa at Kolidrtha,
one (should offer balls of rice) at Amoghapada. Then the balls
(of rice) should be offered at Gadalola, Vanaraka and Gopracara.

Ag^i Purdi^a
7. After the worship of the cow, one who does the ancestral
rite and offers balls (of rice) at (the river) Vaitarirl, elevates
twentyone generations. Then one should offer balls (of rice)
at Krauiicapada.
8-11. (The pilgrim) should then offer balls (of rice) at
Viiala and Ni^cira on the third day. One who bathes in the
Rnamok^a and Papamoksa and with the sacred ash at the Bhasmakund^ gets free from sin. One should then worship lord
Janardana (uttering as follows) : *T have placed this ball (of
rice) on your hand. O Janardana ! When I die let this remain
without decay.” (Lord) Janardana himself (remains) at
Gaya in the form of forefathers. Having worshipped that
lotus-eyed lord one gets liberated from three debts. After having
worshipped (lord) Markandeye^vara, one should worship (lord)
Grdhresvara.
12. Then the balls (of rice) should be offered to (lord)
Maheia at the Mulaksetra at Dhara. Balls (of rice) should be
offered at Grdhrakufa, Grdhravafa and Dhautapada.
13. (The pilgrim) should then offer balls (of rice) at the
Pu^karim, Kardamala and Ramatirtha. One should make obei¬
sance to (lord) Prabhasesa and offer pin^a (balls of rice) at
Preta^ila.
14. (The following words should be recited on these occa¬
sions) : ‘‘May all (my) fore-fathers and relatives who are still
in the form of pretas (the dead people still in the state of a spirit)
in the heavens, sky or earth get released from that state by my
offer of pitj^ias.''
15. One who offers pin4a at the following three placesPretaiila, the sacred Gaya^iras and Pretakunda at Prabhasa,
liberates liis family.
16. (The pilgrim) should pay obeisance to (lord) Vasi?-
(heia and offer pii(i4a in front of that (deity) . He should then
offer pin4a at Gayanabhi, Su^umna and Mah^o^i.
17. {Pin,4a should be offered) in front of (lord Gadadhara)^
at Mu^dapr^tha and in the presence of the goddess. The Mu^dapf 9{ha together with the guardian deities should be worshipped
first.

18. By doing such worship, one will not have fear and the
effects of disease and poison will be destroyed. One who worships
(lord) Brahma conveys his family to the region of Brahm&.
19. One who worships Subhadra (sister of lord Kr9na),
Balabhadra (brother of lord Kr?na) and Purusottama (here
refers to lord Kr?na), gets all his desires fulfilled, elevates his
family and attains heaven.
20. One should pay obeisance to (lord) Hr?ikesa and offer
pintjla in front of that (deity). Having worshipped (lord) Madhava, one becomes honoured by the celestials.
21. One who wor,;hips (the goddesses) Mahalaksmi, Gauri,
Maiigala and Saras vatl elevates his fore-fathers and enjoys all
pleasures in heaven and becomes a learned man (in his next
birth).
22-24. One who worships the twelve Adityas (suns). Firegod, Revanta and Indra, gets free from diseases etc. and attains
heaven. One who worships Kapardi, Vinayaka and (lord)
Karttikeya (Subrahmanya nourished the six Kfttikas) gets his
desire accomplished without any impediment. One would get
everything by worshipping the eight mysterious lingas — Somanatha, Kalei^a, Kedara, Prapitamaha, Siddhe^vara, Rudre^a,
Rame^a and Brahmakesvara.
25. By worshipping (lords) Narayana, Varaha and Narasimha one would get prosperity. By worshipping (lords) Brahma,
Vi^nu, Mahe^a and Tripuraghna (destroyer of Tripura) one
would get all things.
26. He who worships Sita, Rama, Garuda and Vamana
gets all the desired things and conveys his forefathers to the
region of Brahma.
27. By worshipping lord Adigadadhara in the company of
celestials, one gets free from three debts* and redeems the
entire family.
28. The stone slab is of the form of celestials and it is
hence meritorious. There is no place in Gaya where there is no
sacred spot.
29-32. That person in whose name a piisdo, is offered, is con¬
veyed to (the region of) Brahm4 eternally. After having paid
obeisance to Phalgvila, Phalguca^d^ ^**<1 Ang&rake^vara, one
should perform the ancestral rite at the place of Matanga and
1. They are due to the sages, gods and manes.

Agni Purina
Bharatasrama. So also one should offer food at Hamsatirtha,
Kotitirtha and PanduSila. There, at the Agnidhara, and at
Madhusravas, pin4a should be offered. One should offer pin4a
at the forest of Dhenuka and worship the cow at Dhenupada.
One who offers pin4a in the Sarasvati (river) redeems all the fore¬
fathers.
33. After having worshipped the evening twilight, one
should pay obeisance to (goddess) Sarasvati. The brahmins
proficient in the Vedas and Vedangas should do the three twilight
worships.
34. After having done circumambulation of Gaya and
having worshipped the brahmins at Gaya, offer of food or any¬
thing else becomes undecaying.
35-42. The lord Adigadadhara should be glorified and
prayed to as follows: “I pray to the conferer o{ yoga, (lord)
Gadadhara, the resident of Gaya, who redeems the fore-fathers
for the sake of dharma (righteousness), artha (prosperity) kdma
(pleasure) and mokfa (redemption), I salute that true brahman,
who is devoid of a body, organs, mind, intellect, life-force and ego
who is always pure, and who is endowed with intellect. I always
salute the lord who is bliss, without a second form, who is wor¬
shipped by the celestials and demons, and who is surrounded by
gods and goddesses. I pay obeisance to the destroyer of the
sinful propensities of the Kali period, the person wearing the
garland of wild flowers, the protector of all the worlds, the one
bent on the redemption of the family, the one divided himself
into the manifest and unmanifest. I worship that destroyer of
frightful sins and one who remains as the permanent essence. O
lord ! Gadadhara ! I have come to Gaya in order to do the
ancestral rite. You be the witness for me here today. Let me be
free from three kinds of debts. May the gods Brahma, I^ana and
others be the witness for me. I have come to Gaya and have
redeemed my forefathers. Whoever reads (about) the greatness
of Gaya at the time of (doing) the ancestral rite, attains the
region of Brahmi. The ancestral rite done to the forefathers
becomes undecaying and it confers the region of Brahma.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN
Mode of performing the ancestral rites
Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall describe (the mode of performing) iraddha
(ancestral rite) as described by sage Katyayana to the sages.
One should do iraddha at Gaya especially on the sahkrdnti^
etc. or on the day of the new moon or on days after the fourth
day. After having reached there, one should invite (any one of
the following for the iraddha) : the mendicants, pious householders
one who has completed his studies, learned brahmins, those who
are faultless, those who strictly observe the propriety of conduct.
Persons afflicted by white leprosy or leprosy should not be invit¬
ed. So also people who are present uninvited should not be
entertained. They should have bathed, be pure and have selfcontrol. They should face the east while doing divine acts.
The three fore-fathers (father, grand-father and great grand¬
father) should separately be invoked. So also the fore-fathers on
the maternal side (to whom one is entitled to offer) should be
invoked.
6. The performer of the irdddha should observe continence
that day. (He should be) gentle, calm, not hasty, true and not
intoxicated. (He should) not stir out. (He should) not read the
scriptures and practice silence.
7. Kind enquiries should be made of the chief among those
seated. Even number of darbha should be spread for the fore¬
fathers. The (appropriate) deity should be invoked.
8. One should ask, “Shall I invoke Vi^vedevas ?” (He
should be replied), “you invoke”. After having invoked
ViiSvedevas, and having spread barley, one should repeat the
following :
9. O Vilvedevas ! You hear this. I invoke the fore-fathers.
Having asked thus and being permitted to invoke, one should
invoke them (saying) “You be pleased.”
10-12. After having spread the sesamum, one should invoke
the fore-fathers with the repetition of (the OTtm/ra), “Fore-fathers”
One should sprinkle on' the kuia with the mantra iarh no devL
1. The day on which the sun enters a new sign of the zodiac.

Agni Purda^a
After having scattered the grains of barley with the (repeti¬
tion of the mantra) “You are the barley grains”, the seSamum
(is scattered) (with the repetition of the mantra) “You are the
sesamum. You are permeated with the essence of Soma.
Graciously gratify the souls of forefathers. Salutations,” Flowers
should be offered with (the mantra “^risca te” in a golden or silver
vessel or a wooden (vessel) or sword or vessel made of a leaf.
The circumambulation is done clockwise in the case of
celestials and anticlockwise in the case of fore-fathers, wearing
the pavitra (made of darbha) on the hand, one for each one
(of the fore-fathers).
13. (Then he should recite the following mantra)'. “May
the celestial waters together with the waters of the earth and sky
and the golden sacrificial waters confer blessing on you.” (Then
the waters of respectful offering should be offered to the Visvedevas with the mantra ) : “O Visvedcvas ! Here are the offerings
for each one of you”, (Similarly, offerings should be made to the
forefathers saying) “Here is the ofl'ering for you, O Forefathers !
14. Similarly, offerings should be made (to the grand¬
fathers) with (the mantra) “Obeisance to the grand-fathers.”
The sacrificial vessel is lowered with (the repetition of the mantra)
“You are the seats of my forefathers.”
15. Then perfumes, flowers, incense sticks, lamps, shawls
and food with clarified butter should be raised up (by the per¬
former of ancestral rite). (The brahmins should then be asked)
“Shall I offer them in the sacrifice ?”
16. Being permitted (by the brahmins) to do so, those things
should be offered to the fire in the case of those who maintain
fire and on the hands of forefathers in the case of those who
do not maintain fire with the repetition of the following
mantra and (wearing) the pavitra (made of darbha worn on the
finger).
17. The first oblation is (made with the mantra): “Obei¬
sance to the Fire-god, the conveyor of offerings.” The subse¬
quent (mantras) are to Soma, to forefathers, to the god of
death and Angiras.
1 8. The remnants of oblations should be collected in the
food vessel. “O Nectar 1 this earth is your receptacle, the sky
is the covering. The brahmin is your mouth. 1 am cas|mg in that
mouth permeated with the nectar.” After having repeated (the

mantra) “This Vi|nu’’, the thumb of the brahmin is placed in
the food.
19. The sesamum should be scattered with (the mantra)
“Removed”, and the food should be given. After saying, “Be
pleased”, the gayatri and other mantras should be repeated.
20. “Obeisance to the gods, the forefathers, great yogins,
Svadha and Svaha always.”
21. After having known that they are satisfied, the food
must be scattered and water should be given to each one of them.
After repeating the gSyatrl [mantra) as before, (the mantra)
“honey, honey” should be repeated.
22-23. They should be asked, “Are you all satisfied ?”.
They should say, “We are satisfied.’ Being permitted by them
the residual food should be gathered together and water should
be sprinkled by the side of the place where food was eaten. Three
pin4as should be placed on ku§a^ after they have done the acamana
(rinsing of the mouth).
24. After the rinsing of the mouth, water, flowers and un¬
broken rice should be offered. The water given may be undimi¬
nishing. Then (the forefathers) should be requested (as follows):
25-31. “May the forefathers be gracious: May our progeny
prosper always. May the donors enjoy prosperity. So also (may)
the Vedas and progeny (prosper). May our earnestness never
fail.. May we have plenty to give. May our food get profuse.
May we get (enough) guests. May there be (plenty) seeking
alms. May we not seek alms from anybody. The stems of kuSa
over which the (term) svadha (obeisance) has been repeated
are then gathered along with the pavitras and (permission) should
be asked to say obeisance (to forefathers). After having been
permitted, (the following mantra) should be recited: “Obeisance
to the fathers (includes the brothers and cousin of the father)
grandfathers and great-grand fathers. Obeisance.” As one is
repeating this, water should be sprinkled from the raised pot and
fees should be paid according to one’s means. In the ceremonies
related to the gods and forefathers one should say : “May the
Vi^vc devas be pleased”. They should be bid adieu (with the
mantra) “Vaje vaje**. Then one should accompany the brahmins
(with the repetitipn) of (the mantra) “amavajasya,*’ do circumambulation of them and enter the house. One should do this on
the new moon day every month.

Agni PurQna
32. I shall describe (the mode of doing) ekoddisfa (rite done
for an individual only). The fraddha rite is done as beforrf. One
pavitrOy argha and one pinda are offered.
33-34. In this rite, there is no invocation and the offering
is not made in the fire. The Visvedevas are not (invited) here.
At the (time of) query about satisfaction (one should ask) “May
it be relished”. The brahmin should say, “well relished”. They
should be asked to be seated and be pleased with the offering.
They (should say), “We are pleased”. The remaining (part of
the ceremony) should be done as before.
35-37. I shall describe (the mode of performing) the sapindikarana (a rite in honour of the dead person done on the 1 2th day
after death or at the end of one year). (It is done) at the end of
a year or in the middle. Three vessels should be kept for the fore¬
fathers and one vessel for the dead person. The four (vessels)
should be provided with the sesamum and flowers along with the
pavitra. Having filled them with scented water, sprinkle the
vessel of the dead person with the mantra “ye samana”. The
offering of the pinda should be (done) as before. By this rite
(the soul of) the dead person attains the position of fathers.
38-49. I shall describe (the mode of doing) the fraddha
rite which confers prosperity. Everything is done as before. One
should repeat (the mantras) except the mantra of the father and
(do) circumambulation in the forenoon. The materials (re¬
quired are) good kuSUy and barley grains instead of sesamum in
this rite. The query about satisfaction is “Is it well done”.
The brahmin should say, “well done”. The pindas should be
composed of curd, broken rice and the jujube. One should ask,
“Shall I invoke the ancestors who are fit to receive ndndi
(rite)”. They should be requested to be satisfied with the offer¬
ings. The manes (who are) the h&ndimukhaSy I shall describe.
One should ask the clan of manes, the nOndimukhas to be pleased.
The nandimukhas are — father, grand-father, great-grandfather,
maternal grandfather, maternal great grand-father and maternal
great great grand-father^ (In this ceremony) the term svadfUt
should not be added. Even number of brahmins should be fed.
I shall describe the country herbs whichwould satisfy the manes.
They would get satisfied with the roots and fruits of the forest
for a month, with the flsh f or two months, /with the ominous bird
for three months, with the deer for four (months), mth the goat

for five or six, with the tortoise for seven or eight, with the boar
for nine (months), with the meat of the ram, (meat) of the
buffalo and the spotted antelope for ten months, with the milk
of a cow and pdyasa (sweat gruel) for one year. They would
be satisfied for twelve years with the meat of a sacrificial goat.
The meat of a rhinoceros, the kdlaidka (a kind of vegetable),
(meat) of a red goat, honey and sea crabs offered in the rainy
season and srdddha (done) in the (asterism) of maghd (tenth in
the cycle) (yields) undiminishing benefits. The brahmins who
study the Vedas, who do agnihotra, who study their own branch
of Vedas, those who are learned in the six ancillary texts (of the
Vedas), one who worships the Naciketa fire thrice a day, the three
madhu (rks of the ^gveda), those who read the dharmadrona, one
who knows the trisuparna {sukta) and the jyesthasdman arc those
spoken as the panktipdvanas (the purifiers of an assembly).
50-53. I shall describe the mode of performing fruit-bearing
(rites). (The irdddha done) on the first lunar day confers plenty
of wealth, on the second day (gets) beautiful wives, on the fourth
day the fulfilment of heartfelt desires, on the fifth day (confers)
progeny, on the sixth day (makes the doer) thrive well, on the
seventh day (increases) agricultural prospects, on the eighth day
(confers) material prosperity, on the ninth day mules, on the
tenth day plenty of cows, on the eleventh day off-springs, on the
twelfth day wealth and grains, on the thirteenth day (ensures)
excellent position among one’s kinsmen. The irdddha of those
dead by means of weapons (should be done) on the fourteenth.
It is said that one gets all (desires fulfilled by doing irdddha )
on the new moon day.
54-58. *‘The seven hunters (who resided) in Da^^i^a,
the deer (which dwelt) upon the mountain Kalafijara, the
cakraodka (a species of water birds) in the l§aradv!pa, the harhsas
(ganders) in the Manasa lake were bom at Kuruk$etra as
brahmins well-versed in the Vedas. They had gone a long way.
May you excel them.” When this verse is read at the (time of)
irdddha etc., the irdddha gets completed and it yields the region of
Brahma. A son may perform irdddha of his grandfather even
as his father is alive, or of the grandfather when the great grand¬
father is living, or of the great grandfather when the great great
grandfather is living. So also {irdddha is done) for the mother,,
maternal grandfather etc. Whoever reads the irdddhakalpa (that

350 Agni Purina
relating to performance of Mddha) gets the fruits of perforpiing a
Sriddha.
59-63. A iriddha performed at a sacred place, or on the days
of the commencement of the^^a or Manu period gets undimini¬
shing fruits. Similarly, (sraddha done) on the ninth day of bright
fortnight in (the month of) Asvayuk (October-November),
on the twelfth day in Karttika (November-December), on third
day in Magha and Bhadrapada (February-March and September-October), on the new moon day in Phalguna (MarchApril), on the eleventh day in Pausa (January-February), on the
tenth day in Asadha (July-August), on the seventh day in the
month of Magha (February-March), on the eighth day of dark
fortnight in Sravana (August-September), on the full moon day
in Asadha (July- August) and on the full moon days in Karttika,
Phalguna and Jyestha (June-July) (confer manifold benefits).
The days of commencement of the Svayambhuva Manu periods
are also of undiminishing benefits, Gaya, Prayaga, (river)
Gahga, Kuruksetra, (river) Narmada, Sriparvata, Prabhasa,
Salagrama, Varanasi and river Godavari (are sacred places)-.
Sraddha (done) at those places and also at the Purusottama
(ksetra) (Puri) (yields manifold fruits).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN
The country of Bhirata
Fire-god said :
1 . That country which (lies ) to the north of ocean and south
of Himadri (Himalaya) is known as the Bharatavar^a ex¬
tending to nine thousand {yojanas).
2-4. This is a land of religious rites. It gives accomplish¬
ment of action in getting redemption. Mahendra, Malaya,
Sahya, Suktimat, Hemaparvata, Vindhya and Pariyatra are the
seven principal mountains here. Indrad>dpa, Kaseni, Tamravar^a, Gabhastiman, Nagadvipa, Saumya, Gandharvt, Varu^
and Bh&rata are the nine territories here surrounded by the ocean.

5-8. The continent extends to one thousand yojanas from
north to south. There are nine divisions of the Bh^ata lying
around the central part. The kirdtas (hunting tribes) (are)
in the east. The j>avanas (the foreigners) (are in the west). The
brahmins and others devoted to the Vgdas and sm^tis (code books)
(are) in the central part. The rivers rise from the Pariyatra
(mountains). Narmada and other (rivers) flow from the Vindhya.
(The rivers) Tapi, Payosnika, Gk)davari, Bhimarathi and
Kr^naveni and others flow from the Sahya (mountains). (The
rivers) K^tamala and others flow from the Malaya (mountains).
(The rivers) Tris^ma and others originate from the Mahendra
(mountain). (The rivers) Kumara and others rise from Suktimat (mountain). (The river) Gandrabhaga rises from the
Himalaya (mountains). The countries Kuru and Paftcala and
the Madhyadesa are situated in the western part.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN
Description of different continents
Fire-god said.:
1. The Jambudvipa extends to a lakh of yojanas. It is sur¬
rounded by the K§iroda (ocean) measuring one lakh yojanas.
2. The Plaksadvipa is surrounded by the Ksara ocean.
The seven sons of Medhatithi are the rulers of Plaksadvipa.
3. They are S^tabhaya, l§i^ira, Sukhodaya, Ananda, Siva,
K$ema and Dhruva after whom the countries are named.
4. Gomedha, Candra, Narada, Dundubhi, Somaka, Sumana and Vaibhraja are the boundary mountains. The inhabi¬
tants are good.
5. There are seven principal rivers here. The inhabitants
from Plaksa to Saka live for five thousand years and they adhere
to righteous way of life adhering to the institutions of caste and
stages of life.
6-7. Aryakas, Kurus, VivimlasandBhavins are respectively
the brahmins and others (kfoiriyast vaiSyas and iUdras) here. They
worship (lord) Soma (moon). Its extent is two lakhs yojanas

Agni PurJ^a
and it is surrounded by the ocean of ikfurasa of equal measure.
The Salmala (dvipa) is twice that. The seven sons of Vapujmat
were the rulers of Salmala.
8-12. Sveta, Harita, Jfmuta, Lohita, Vaidyuta, Manasa
and Suprabha are their names and the countries were known by
their names. This twice bigger continent is surrounded by the
Suroda (ocean) of equal measure. The seven (boundary moun¬
tains) are Kumuda, Anala, Balahaka, Drona, Kahka, Mahisa
and Kakudmat. The brahmins and other (three castes) are
Kapila, Aruna, Pita and Kysna (respectively). They worship
(the lord) in the form of Vayu (wind god). This is surrounded
by Suroda. Udbhida, Dhenumat, Dvairatha, Lambana, Dhairya,
Kapila and Prabhakara, (the sons) of Jyotismat were the rulers
of Ku^a (dvipa). Dadhimukhya^ and others are the brahmins
and others. They worship (the lord) in the form of Brahma.
13. Vidruma, Hemalaila, Dyutimat, Puspavat, Kusesaya,
Harisaila and Mandara are the boundary mountains.
14-16. This is surrounded by the Ghrtoda ocean as well
as the Krauftcadvipa. The sons of Dyutimat were the rulers of
Kraufica and the countries (ruled by them) were named after
them. They are seven — Ku^ala, Manonuga, Usna, Pradhana,
Andhakaraka, Muni and Dundubhi. (The names of) the seven
mountains here are Kraufica, Vamana, Andhakaraka, Devavrt,
Pundarlka and Dundubhi. Each one of them is twice as big
as the other.
17-19. The mountains in the respective continents are also
twice as the corresponding one in the others. The brahmins and
others (three castes) are Puskara, Pu^kala, Dhanya and Tisya
and (they) worship Hari. The Krauficadvipa is surrounded by
Dadhimandodaka (ocean) dnd the Sakadvipa. The sons of
Havya and the rulers of l§akadvipa were Jalada, Kumara,
Sukumara, Manivaka, Kusottara, Modak i and Druma. The
countries were known by their names.
20-21. Udaya, Jaladhara, Raivata, Syama, Kodraka,
Ambikeya and the beautiful Ke^ari are the seven (boundary)
mountains. The brahmins and others are Maga, Magadha,
Manasa and Mandaga. They worship (the lord) in the form of
the Sun. The Saka dvipa is surrounded by the K^Irabdhi.
1. These are Damina](^ Su^iijah, Snebah^ and .Mandehfil^

22-24. It is also surrounded by Puskara {dvipa). (The
ruler of Pu§kara), Savana had two sons — Mahavita and Dhataki.
They ruled over two countries known by their name. There is
one boundary mountain called Manasa at the centre in the shape
of a bracelet. It extends to one thousand and is of equal
height. (The people here) live for ten thousand years. (Lord)
Brahma is worshipped here by celestials. This continent is
surrounded by the Svadudaka ocean of equal measure.
25-26. The waters of the ocean neither decrease nor in¬
crease. O Sage ! At the moon-rise or moon-set and at the
white and dark fortnights, an increase or decrease of waters by
five hundred and ten angulas (equal to one finger-breadth) is
seen in the oceans.
27-28. The Svadudaka is of many good qualities. The land
is golden and is devoid of living beings. The peak (called) Lokaloka extends to a lakh oiyojanas. It is engulfed in darkness in the
form of the pan of the egg-shaped (universe). This land found
with this pan of the egg-shaped (universe) extends to fifty crores.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
The extent of the universe
The Fire-god said :
1 . The extent of the earth is believed to be seventy-thousand
{yojanas). Its height is ten thousand. The nether worlds (extend)
to one thousand each.
2-3. The seven nether worlds are Atala, Vitala, Nitala,
Gabhastimat, Mahatala, Sutala and Patala. The demons
dwell in those pleasant lands which are respectively coloured
black, yellow, red, white, stony and golden.
4. Lord Vi§nu in the tdmasa (darkness) form as Se§a
(the serpent) lies under the nether worlds. He, the Ananta
(infinite) on account of his infinite (good) qualities, (lies there)
supporting the earth with his head.
5. There are many hells tmder the earth. A vaif^am (devo-

Agni PurS^
tee of lord Visnu) should not fall therein. The extent upto which
the earth is illuminated by the sun is known as the sky.^
6. O Vasi^fha ! The region of the sun is at (a distance of)
one lakh (jojanas) from the earth, the region of the Moon at one
lakh (jfojanas) from the Sun, and the region of the stars at one
lakh {jojanas) from the moon.
7-8. (Planet) Mercury is at two lakhs (jojanas) from the
region of the stars. (Planet) Venus (is) at two lakhs from Mer¬
cury. (Planet) Mars (is) at two lakhs from Venus. (Planet)
Jupiter (is) at two lakhs from Mars. (Planet) Saturn (is) at
two lakhs from Jupiter. (The region of) the seven sages (ursa
Major) (is) at one lakh from Saturn, the polestar (is) at one
lakh from the sages (Ursa Major) and is at the apex of the three
worlds.
9. The Maharloka (lies)at a crore (jojanas) from the polestar, where those who have seen a full cycle of time reside. The
Jana (loka), wherein dwell (the sages) Sanaka and others,
(lies) at two crores (of yojanas) from that.
10-11. The Tapo (loka) (is) at eight crores from Jana (loka)
where Vairajas (a class of celestial beings) are the presiding
deities. The Satyaloka is at ninetysix crores from the Tapo
(loka). It is known as the Brahmaloka where dwell celestials
who do not die. The region fit for one to move on foot is the
Bhuloka (the earth). The region of Bhuvarloka is said to be
between (the earth and) the Sun.
12. The Svargaloka lies between the Sun and the pole-star
in the fourteen lakhs (jojanas of space). These regions cover as an
exterior shell of the universe.
13. They are again covered by ten-fold layers of elements
water, fire, wind and ether.
14. O Great sage ! Each one of the ten latter regions lie
enfolded in one another and thus form an exterior cover of the
primary thing.
15. O sage ! One does not have any knowledge about the
limit of that infinite. That nature has been the source of every¬
thing else.
16. This kind of innumerable eggs had come into being
there. The pumSn (brahman) exists in a potent state in the univer¬
sal nature just as the fire in the wood and oil in ti^ sesamum.

17-19. This pumdn lies embedded in the natui e as a conscious
onlooker and knower. O Wiseman ! The nature and the brah¬
man are held together by the force of Visnu, the form of the
essential virtues of all beings. That is the cause for their separate
existence as well as union. O Great sage ! That is the cause for
the agitation at the time of creation (of beings). It is similar to
the wind sustaining hundreds of water particles after its contact
with water.
20. The celestial beings and others are born through the
concerted action of the nature and the effect of the foice of
Visnu acted upon by the force of the former.
21-29. Visnu is identical with brahman itself from whom
this entire universe (has come into being). The chariots of the
Sun are nine (occupying) thousand yojanas. O Excellent
sages ! The axis is double that (measure). The axle of its wheel
is one and half crores and seven lakhs {yojanas). The wheel is
fixed there. It has three naves^, five spokes*, six circumferences*,
two movements* consisting in the cycle of period. O Great
intellectual ! The second axis of the Sun’s chariot is twentytwo
thousand seven hundred and fifty {yojanas). The measurement of
the two axles is equal to its yoke. The shorter axis and its yoke
rest on the polestar. O Best disciplined ! The seven metres
gayatri^ and others are its horses. Sun’s rise and setting are his
being perceived and not being perceived. O Vasistha ! The
regions from the earth to those where the polestar remains
get lost at the time of deluge. The region where the polestar is
stationed to the north of Ursa major is the excellent shining
third place of (lord) Visnu in heaven. This is the excellent
place of ascetics who have become free from impurities.
30. The river Ganga which purifies one by mere remem¬
brance flows from there. It is to be known that the porpoise shape
of the planets in the sky is that of lord Visnu.
31-32. The polestar is situated at its tail. It revolves (on
its non axis) and causes the planets to go round. That chariot
1. Forenoon, midday and afternoon.
2. ParuxUsara etc.
3. The seasons.
4. Northern and southern.
5. gi^atrf^ bthatU uf^ik, jagafft triffupj anuffup and paAkti.

zigni Purdna
of the Sun is ridden by different celestials, Adilyas (sons of
Aditi), sages, gandharvas (semi-divine beings), apsaras (semi¬
divine beings), grdmani Tsemi-divine beings), serpents and de¬
mons. Lord sun is the cause of snow, heat and rain.
33-36. He is the manifestation of lord Visnu of the form
of Rgveda and other (yedas) and is the cause of good and evil.
The chariot of moon has three wheels drawn by ten horses yoked
to its left and right and of the colour of jasmine. Thirtysix
thousand three hundred and thirty-three celestials drink (the
phases of) the moon. The manes (drink) one phase. One
(phase) (is lost) being associated with the rays of the new moon.
The chariot of the son of the Moon Mercury is composed of
the fiery and windy material. Mercury moves on drawn by its
eight horses.
37-41. The chariot of Venus (has got) eight horses, as also
the chariots of Mars, Jupiter and Saturn (drawn) by horses.
The chariot of Rahu (ascending node of the Moon) (has) eight
horses. The chariot of Ketu (descending node of the Moon)
(has) eight liorses, O Bralimin ! From this body of (lord)
Visnu this lotus-shaped earth with the mountains etc. has
originated. (Lord) Hari (Visnu) is the galaxy, worlds, rivers,
mountains, oceans and forest. Whatever exists or ceases to exist
is (lord) Visnu, known through true knowledge about (lord),
Visnu. There is nothing beyond the purview of knowledge.
Knowledge is the supreme place, the (lord) Visnu. One has to
do that act by which that true and infinite knowledge, namely,
(lord) Visnu, may be attain sJ.'Whoever reads (the section on)
cosmogony would attain aappiness.
CHAFl ER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE
The science of Jyoti§a {Astronomy and Astrology)
Fire- god said ;
I. I shall describe the science of astrology which gives dis¬
crimination of good and bad events. It is the quintessence of
four lakhs (of treatises). By knowing this (science) one becomes
omniscient.

2. The marriage of girls should not be done when there is
^aias^akciS or dvidvadasa^ as well as in trikona^. In other cases as
well as in samasaptaka, there will be happiness.
3. If there is friendship between the lords of the second and
twelfth (houses) or the trines or there is single lordship, then there
will be prosperity in the married life even if there be hostility.
4. Even in such a condition the union maybe made, but
not in sixth-eighth (sadastaka) condition. (If the marriage is
done) when Jupiter or Venus has set, the bridegroom and bride
would die.
5. A marriage is not commendable when the Sun is in the
house of Jupiter or Jupiter is in the house of the Sun.
6. The marriage should be postponed by three fortnights
or by four months respectively when there is transit (of a planet
from one house to another) or retrograde motion (of a planet).
A vow or marriage should not be done when there is retrograde
motion or transit of Jupiter.
7. (Marriages done) in (the months of) Gaitra (AprilMay), Pausa (January-February) on the riktd days (fourth,
ninth and the fourteenth day of a fortnight) or when (lord)
Hari (Visnu) is asleep, or on Tuesdays and Sundays or on the
new moon day would bring forth unfavourable result. But the
twilight (time) is auspicious.
8. A marriage is said to be commendable in the asterisms
rohinit uttard, mula, svdti, hasta and revati (when the Sun is) in
Libra or Gemini.
9. One should avoid a viddharksa* in celebrating a marriage,
piercing the ears, vow, rite to determine the sex of a child before
its birth, the first feeding of the child, and the tonsure.
10. The rite to determine the sex of the child before its
birth should be done in (the asterism) Sravanay mula and pusya^
on Sundays, Tuesdays and Jupiter and in (the signs of) Aqua¬
rius, I.eo and Pisces.
1 . The sixth and eighth ; counting from the ascendant in the horoscope
of the proposed life partners the ascendant in the other person’s horoscope gives
sixth or eighth.
2. The second and twelfth; counting as before which gets the second or
twelfth.
3. The trine, Leo, Taurus, Virgo, Sagittarius, Libra and Aquarious are
the trines for the planets sun etc.
4« Certain asterisms said to be opposed to certain other asterisms.

Agni Purdjfa
1 1 . The discharge of a debt (should be done) in (the asterisms) hastCy mulay mrga^Hrfa) and revati and on Wednesday and
Friday. The (rite of) chewing of betal leaf should be done on
Sunday, Monday, Thursday and Friday and in (the asterism)
mala.
12. The first feeding (of a child) (should be done) on a
Friday or Thursday or in (the asterism) mrga{iirsa) in (the sign
of) Pisces, in the five asterisms (beginning with hasta (citra and
svatl) and in the three asterisms beginning with krttika {rohini
and mrgaiirfa).
13. New fruits and food should be eaten in (the asterisms
of) aJvini or revati y pusy a, hastUy jye^fha, rohiniy iravana and aivini.
14. Medicine should be administered in (the asterisms of)
svSti, saumya (name of the five stars in orion’s head), the three
pUrvas {PUrvaphdlgmiy purvabhadrapada and purvdsdihay maghd^
ydmya {bharani) and the three (beginning with) Sravana which are
auspicious.
15-20. One should bathe first after becoming free from ill¬
ness on Tuesday or Sunday or Saturn. One should write eight
times the syllable ‘hrim’ and the name (of the enemy) in the
middle and the (names of the eight) vasus as well as the (syllable)
hrim in the (eight) angular points on a Tuesday and wear it in
his cloth on the neck with the gorocand (pigment got from the
cow) and saffron. It is certain that one’s enemies get sub¬
jugated by this mantra. Srim hrim is the protective {mantra) when
the {mantras) irim and hrim are written on the bhurja leaf as stated
above in the eight (points) together with gorocand and saffron
and covered by turmeric. (Similar writing) on a stone slab
kept buried under the soil with its face downwards nullifies them.
Om hdm sah is the mantra. This mantra written on a bhUrja leaf
along with gorocand and saffron wards off death. The first, fifth
and ninth houses confer satisfaction and second, sixth and
twelfth confer general welfare.
21-23. The third, seventh and eleventh cause acquisition;
fourth, eighth and twelfth cause enmity. (The twelve houses
Me^a etc. denote) respectively the body, wealth, brothers,
friendship, progeny, enmity, wife, death, righteousness, activity,
income and expenditure. One should speak about the nine

tSrdbala^ (as follows) : the jan/na (birth), satnpat (prosperity),
vipat (misfortune), ksema (welfare), pratyari (enmity), s&dhaka
(seeker or accomplisher), nidhana (death), miira (friend) and
paramamitra (close friend).
24. The first shave (of a child) is commended on Sunday,
Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday in the six months
commencing with Mdgha (February-March).
25-26. The kamavedha (piercing of the ear) (should be done)
on Wednesday and Thursday in the (asterisms of) pusya, iravana
and citrd. The commencement of study in the fifth year (should
be done) after worshipping (lord) Hari (Visnu) and (goddesses)
Vani (goddess of speech) and Sri (Laksmi, goddess of wealth),
avoiding the sixth, first and the fifteenth, the riktd days (fourth,
ninth and fourteenth days) and Tuesday. The tying up of the
girdle is auspicious (if done) in the six months commencing
with Mdgha.
27-31. The tonsure and other (rites) are not commended
in (the asterisms) iravana etc. The investiture of a brahmin
(boy) performed when the Jupiter or Venus has set and the
Moon is waning brings forth death or stupidity. The rite mark¬
ing conclusion of the study should be done on an auspicious day,
in the asterism suitable for shaving, at an auspicious place on
the rising constellations in a good house. The imparting of the
science of archery in the asterisms aivini, maghd, citrd, svdti,yamya
{bharani), uttard, punarvasu and pusya is commendable. One who
desires to live should not wear new clothes in the asterisms
bhararii, ardra, maghd, dilesd, krltikd and uttaraphdlguni. (Wearing
of new) clothes on Wednesday, Thursday and Friday is not
objectionable at (the time of) marriage (and other festive occa¬
sions).
32. Wearing of gems like conch-shell and coral is commen¬
dable in (the asterisms of) revati, aivini, dhanif}hd, and the five
commencing with hasta.
33. Anything bought in (the asterisms of) bharani, sarpa
(a particular constellation), dhaniffhd, the three purva {purva1. Counting from the birth asteriam to tlxe asterism of tliat day that
number should be divided by nine, the remainder indicates the tSrdbeda as
shown above.

360 Agni Purd^a
phdlguni, purvabhadrapada and purvd$a4ha) and vdru^a (Satabkifok)
causes adversity. Also its sale causes adversity.
34. Anything bought in (the asterisms of) aivinl, svdtly
citrdy revatl and iatabhisak and on Sunday causes profit. If any¬
thing is sold (on the days ruled by these asterisms ) causes adver¬
sity.
35. An employer should not be attended upon in (the
asterisms ol' bharani, the three purvas (see verse 33 above), drdrdy
dilesd, maghd, svdti, krltikd, jj>effhd and viidkhd.
36. Money is deposited or articles are given or taken back
in (the asterisms of) uttaray iravana and §dkra (jjesfha). The
coronation of a king should be done (in these asterisms).
37. Entering a house (for the first time) is auspicious in
the months other than Cfli/ra (April-May), (June-July),
Bhddra{pada) (September-October), Aivina (October-November'), Pausa (January-February) d^ndMagha (February-March).
38. The commencement (of the construction) of a house in
(the asterisms of) aSvini, rohini, mula, the three uttaras (uttaraphalguni, uttarabhadrapada, anduttardsd4ha)ymrgaiirsa, svdti, hasta
and anuradha is commendable.
39-40. Sundays and Tuesdays should be avoided for (the
excavation of) a tank or (the construction of) a palace. So
also the building of a house should be avoided when Jupiter is
in Leo or in (the conjunction of) Jupiter and Sun or in an inter¬
calary month or when Venus is in the transit ascension or descension or has set. (It would cause ) burning by fire, fear, disease,
affliction from the sovereign or loss of wealth.
41. Hay should be gathered in the five (asterisms of iravana
etc.). One should enter the (new) house in the asterisms of
dhanisthdy uttard and vdruna {Satabhisak).
42. The second, third, fifth, seventh and thirteenth days
(of a fortnight are commendable) for the construction of a boat.
A sovereign should be seen in (the asterisms of) hasta, revati and
aivinl.
43. Pilgrimage undertaken in (the asterisms of) the three
uttara (uttardfddha, uttaraphdlguni, axiduttarabhddrapada) , dhanisfhd,
ardrd, kfttikd, saumya {migaiirfa), viidkhd, dile^d and aivinl accom¬
plishes prosperity.
AAAI. One should not graze the cows in the three (aster¬
isms of) uttard, rohii^i or on sinlvdli caturdail (day^prior to new

moon) or in (the asterisms of ) Sravana^ hasta, citrd and vaisnavl
{Sravana). One should not enter (the cow-pen) in (the asterisms
of) anila (svdti), uttard, rohini, mrga {Ursa), punarvasa, Sravana
and hasta. One should do agriculture in (the asterisms of) punar~
vasu, uttard, svdti, Bhaga {purvaphdlguni) , miila, Indra {pdrvd^diha)
and varum {iatabhisak) or on Thursday or Friday or Monday
or Sunday or in (the zodiacal signs of) Taurus, Virgo and
Gemini.
48-5 1 . One who desires forttine should sow seeds except
that of the mandara (coral) on the second, third, fifth, seventh,
tenth and thirteenth (days of the fortnight) and in (the asterisms
of) revati, rohini, Indra {purvasadha) , Agni {krttikd), hasta, maitra
{anurddhd) and uttard. Harvest of grains should be done in (the
asterisms of) revati, hasta, miila, Sravana. Bhaga [purva-phdlguni),
maitra (anuradha), pitfdaiva (maghd) and saumya {mrgaSirsa) .
One should take them into the house at the time of the rise of
(the asterism) mrgaSfrsa or in (the asterisms of) hasta, citrd,
Aditi {punarvasu), svdti, revati or in the three stars (commencing
with) iravatia or in a fixed sign or on Thursdays, Fridays and
Wednesdays or in (the asterisms oi) ydmya {bharani) Aditi {punarvasu), maghd, jyesthd and uttara.
52. (The following mantras) written on a leaf and placed
amidst the heap of grains in (the asterisms of) the three purvas
{purvasadha, purvaphdlguni and purvabhadrapada) ,viidkhd, dhanisfhd
and vdruna {Satabhisak) increases the grains “Om, (salutation)
to the bestower of wealth and the lord of all wealth. Give me
wealth. Oblations. O goddess Ila (Laksmi) ! One who
makes the world thrive ! The desire incarnate 1 Grant me
wealth in the new year ! Oblations.
53. Wisemen know that grains should be taken out in the
(above) six asterisms. Tanks, gardens and (images of) gods
should be consecrated when the Sun is in the Cancer. (Lord)
Cakrapani (the wielder of the disc) (Visnu) should always be
laid down when the Sun is in the (sign of) Gemini and it is the
twelfth day after the new moon.
54. When the Sun is in the (sign of) Leo and in Libra and
the two twelfth days after the new-moon, the first is the day of
getting up of (lord) Indra and (the second one) is the waking
up of (lord) Hari.

AgniPurdna
55-57. Similarly, (the goddess) Durga is made to get up
when the Sun enters (the sign of) Virgo. When a bhttdratithi
(the second, seventh and twelfth days of a lunar fortnight) occurs
on a Tuesday, Sunday or Saturday and is marked by three fourth
of a constellation that (combination) is known as tripuskara.
All ceremonies should be done when the moon and star arc pure.
58. One has to forecast prosperity for those in whose (chart),
the Moon is situated in the sixth, seventh, tenth or eleventh
house from the ascendant.
59-60. The second, fifth and ninth in the bright fortnight
brings good. The asterisms are (known to be ) friendly, extremely
friendly, accomplisher of riches and welfare etc. (The one known
as friendly) causes death by its ascendancy. That which is
calamitous (causes) destruction of wealth. One should know
that which \s pralyari (enemy) (causes) death. One gets death
in that which is (known as) destruction.
61. The period from the eighth day of the dark (fortnight)
till the eighth day of the bright (fortnight), the moon is known
to be waning and is known to be full thereafter.
62. It is known to be mahdjyaisthi if the Sun is in (the signs
of) Taurus or Gemini and Jupiter is in (the asterisms of) rntgaUrsa or jyesfhd and the full moon (occurs) on a Thursday.
63. It is also called mahdjyaisthi when Jupiter and Moon
are in (the asterism oi) jyesfhd and the Sun is in (the asterism of)
rohini on the full moon day in the month ofjyeffhd (Junc-July).
64. The banner of (lord) Indra fastened to the support
should be hoisted in (the asterism of) svdti. It should be lowered
down after a week in (the asterism of) amni and in the sign of
Leo.
65. When the Sun is eclipsed by Rahu (the ascending node)
any gift is deemed to be gold, all the brahmins are equal to
(lord) Brahma and all the waters are equal to Gahga.
66. O Brahmins ! The entry of the Sun in the different signs
is know’n by the names of dhvdnksi, mahodari, ghord, manddy manddkini and rdjasi.
67. If the Sun passes (from one sign to the other) in the
karanas (divisions of a day) bdlava^ kaulava and taitila, then the
people would be happy. ^
68. People would suffer from poverty and harassment by

the sovereign if (the Sun) enters (the astral combinations known
as) gara, vava, vanik, viffi, kintugkna and iakuna.
69. If the Sun makes a transit in lying position in catu^-
pada, visti or vdnijya {karanas^ or divisions of the day), it would
cause famine or war between sovereigns or quarrel among hus¬
bands and wives.
70. If (the Sun) stays in one’s birth-star it would cause
disease or mental anguish, while (its presence) in the asterisms
of krtlikd and rohini would cause misery for nine nights and three
nights respectively.
71-76. It is said that the transit in (the asterism of.) mfgaHr a (causes misery) for five nights, in drdrd (causes) death, and
in punarvasu or pusya (causes) (misery) for seven nights. Its
entry in (the asterism of) ailesd (causes misery) for nine nights,
in maghd (causes misery) until one’s death, in purvaphdlguni
(causes misery) for two months and in uttard (causes misery)
for fifteen (days). While the sun is in (the asterism of) hastOj
the (asterisms) cilrdy svdti and vi§dkhd would bring misery for
a fortnight, two months and twenty days respectively. Its transit
in (the asterisms of) anurddhd,jyesfhd, mula and purvdsddha (would
cause misery) for ten days, a fortnight, no relief (from misery)
or fifteen days respectively. (The Sun’s transit) in (the asterisms
of) uttard, Havana, dhanis}& and Satabhisak (would cause misery)
for twenty days, two months, fifteen days or ten days respecti¬
vely. There will not be relief (from misery) if it enters (the
asterism) bhadrapada. (The Sun’s transit) in (the asterisms of)
uttard, revati and aivini would (cause misery) for fifteen days or
ten days or a single day respectively.
77. Its transit in (the asterism) bharani causes danger to
life and it becomes auspicious by doing oblations with the gdyatri
{mantra). Making a gift of a cow with five kinds of grains, sesamum, clarified butter to a brahmin compensates (the evil in¬
fluences).
78-79. The periods of influence of the Sun, Moon, Mars,
Mercury, Saturn, Jupiter, Rahu and Venus are six, fifteen,
eight, seventeen, ten, nineteen, twelve and twentyone years
respectively.
1 . These ate different karavas or eleven divisions of tlie day.

Agni PurUtj^
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO
Pancanga : The Almanac*
God Agni said:
la. Time is (reckoned by) the accumulated number of
years, (months etc,, from the epoch up to the point of time under
consideration). I shall set forth the calculation involved in reckon¬
ing time.
lb. The accumulated (i.e. elapsed) number of years (up to
the required point of time) is to be multiplied by 12 {arka) and
the (number of months elapsed in the current year from) Citra
is to be added to the product)^
2a. The sum obtained is doubled and placed at two places.
To one is added 4 (veda) and to the other 865 (pahcdugdsla).
(The latter figure is to be divided by 60 and the quotient added
to the first, while the remainder is kept as the second figure) .
The resultant is to be called ‘guna’.^
*General : PaUcdnsa or the five aspects of reckoning time for each day, com¬
puted and recorded in Hindu almanacs arc: (i) Vara (day of the week), (ii)
Tithi (lunar day), (iii) Nakfatra (the Constellation through which the moon
moves), (iv) Yoga (Sum of the longitudes of the Sun and the Moon), and(v)
Karai^a (half- tithi) . All these reckonings have religious and ritualistic signi¬
ficances.
The verses in this chapter are all of a highly cryptic nature and, like philo¬
sophical aphorisms, imply much more than what is actually expressed, and
can be conectly understood only with suitable explanations. While the implied
information is given brackets in the tr2inslation, an example is worked out in
the Notes illustrating the working, step by step.
1. Any epoch or starting point in time might be adopted, like, for
instance the Kalpa or the beginning of creation, the Caturyuga, Kaliyuga etc.
or any of the eras like the Saka.
Let the point of time taken for consideration, for which the Paftcdnga is
required be Saka 10 (elapsed), in the month of Vaisakha, 1st tithi of the bright
fortnight.
Multiplying by 12, the elapsed years, lOX 12 =120
Adding the 1 month, Mc?a, elapsed, = 1
Total months elapsed from epoch =121
2. Multiplying the months from epoch by 2 (i.e. 121 X 2 = 242)
and placing them in two places: 242 242
Dividing the second figure by 60 and
adding to the first ,264 27 (Gupa)

2b. (The gui}a) is placed at three places (one below the
other, in the serpentine fashion, each being written one step to the
right of the preceding one). The ‘middle’ is multiplied by 8
{vasu) and the product again multiplied by 4 (veda). (The
columns are to be added up. ) and again written as ‘upper%
‘middle’ and ‘lower*. ^
3. Subtract 398 (asta-randhra-agni) from the lower and 87
(saika-rasasfaka) from the ‘middle*. Divide (the ‘middle’ and
the ‘lower’) by 60 and add the quotients to the preceding, (keep¬
ing the remainders in their places ).2
4a. Vara-tilhi correction. The first (i.e. ‘upper)’ when divided
by 7 will give the week-day constant for tithi. (The quotient is
to be rejected as of no more use.) The resultant is to be used as
the Vara-correction for tithi-nddikas'.^
4b-5. Maksatra-Toga constants. The ^gum' derived above
is to be multiplied by 2, and 3 subtracted from the second figure.
Gum is set down before the result (in the serpentine fashion).
30 {kha-rdma) is set down below the last figure, and 6, 12 and 8
{rasa-arka-asta) , respectively, below the three figures, (and the
columns added up and elevated by dividing by 60 ) . Divide the
first figure by 28 and place it below the ‘correction for tiihV (ob¬
tained in verse 4a). (add and take the result as a second ‘upper’).*
1. Placing the gum) in three places
in the serpentine fashion: 264 27 (upper)
264 27 (middle)
Multiplying the ‘middle’ by 8 (i.e. 2112-216) and again by 4 (i.e. 8448864), and setting it down in the above scheme:
Adding the columns, the new ‘upper’, ‘middle’
3. Dividing the ‘upper’ by 7 for weekrdays and rejecting the quotient,
we get the i;arfl-correction for tithi as 5-0-10.
4. Multiplying the ‘guptf’ (264-27) by"2 (*.«. 528-54 and subtracting 3
eon et

Agni Pur&t^a
6-8a. The ‘guna* is halved, 3 subtracted (from its second
figure) and the whole expression multiplied by 2. The first figure
here is multiplied by 11 {judra)\ the second figure is increased
by 1 and divided by 39, the quotient being subtracted from the
first figure and the remainder kept in its place. The resultant is
termed madhya. Subtract 22 from the first figure and divide it
by 60; the remainder is deductive; the quotient is added to the
(second) ‘upper’ (of verses 4b-5). The first figure is divided by
27 and the remainder set down in its place. The resultant expres¬
sion is the constant for the correction of naksatra ^.ndyoga.^
8b-9a. Naksatra. For the calculation of there is a
monthly constant, being 2 pin das (i.e. whole units) and 32 mdikds (which has to be added to the tithi correction contained in
verses 4a). Similarly, for the naksatra, there is a monthly constant,
being 2 naksatras and 1 1 nadikds, (which, when added to the
naksatra correction of verse 8a, will give the elapsed naksatra and
the nadikds gone in the current naksatra.)^
1. The (2G4-27) is halved (132-14), 3 subtracted from the second
figure (132-11) and multiplied by 2 (i.e. 264-22). The first figure is multi¬
plied by 11 (i.e. 2904); to the second figure 1 is added (i.e. 23) and divided
by 39 and the remainder (i.e. 23) is retained. This is termed the new ‘middle*.
Subtracting 22 from the fiist figure (i.e. 2882-23) and elevating by GO, we
the correction for naksatra and 7 30 38
2. Adding the h7/«-constant (2-32-00) to the t'era-hVAi correction (j-0-10),
we have 7-32-10, being the eara^A' (\^■eck, day etc.) correction for the point of
time taken for consideration. For the nakfatra of that point of time, add the
nakfatra constant (2-11-00) to the nakfatra correction (got in verses 6-8a), i.e.
7-30-38, and we have the nakfatra as 9-41-38. In other words, at the point of
time taken, nine nakfalras have passed by, and in the curren^lOth nakfatra,
magha, it is 41 nddikds and 38 vinddikas.

9b- 10. Weekday and commencing point of Tithi. Add the titHcorrection above (to the varddi-tithi correction got in verse 4a),
placing the tithi number below the vara number. Divide by 7
(if vara plus tithi exceeds 7 ) ; the remainder will give the elapsed
week-day counted from Sunday, and the nddikds gone in the next
day at the point of the commencement of the relevant tithi)
In the case of tithis after adding the complete units (pindakas)^
the sum should be divided by 14 (if the sum exceeds 14, and the
remainder taken as the tithi.)^
11 -14a. True-Tithi correction. The correction, in nddikds,
for the fourteen tithis would be, in order, minus, plus, plus, minus,
(minus and so on). Whi e the correction for the 14th tithi is
zero), the correction for the thirteenth and the first is 5 {pind~
dikds) (each, minus and plus, respectively), that for the 12th
and the 2nd, 10 {vinddikds), that for the 11th and 3rd, 15 {vinddikds), that for the 10th and 4th, 19 {yinadikds), that for the 9th
and 5th, 22 {yinddikds), that for the 8th and the 6th, 24 {vind~
dikds), and that for the 7th, 25 (vinddikds). These khandakOrS
(correction-bits) are to be applied appropriately to the pindakas
(full units).®
14b-17a. Vikdld correction. In the case of (the three), Karkataka, (Simha and Kanya), divide the rdSis, respectively, by 6
{rtu)y 4 {veda) Q.nd'i (Jlraya)] in the case of Tula, (Vfseika and
Dhanus), divide, respectively, in the reverse, i.e.by 3, 4 and 6;
in the case of Makara, (Kumbha and Mina), respectively, by
3, 4 and 6; and in the case of Mesa, (Rsabha and Mithuna),
divide, respectively, in the reverse, i.e. by 6, 4 and 3. The cor¬
rection, in vikalds, which is positive in the case of the three, Me§a
etc., are 50 {kha-isu), 40 (kha-yuga) and 12 {mitra); in the case
1. Adding the constant (2-32-00) to the vdra-tithi correction (5-0-10).
we get 7-32-10 for the week, day, which means that 7 days have elapsed as /
counted from Sunday, and at the point of time in consideration, i.c. ^uklapratipad in Vaisakha, it is Sunday at 32 nddikds and 10 vinddikds (Mean).
2. The nddikd corrections enunciated are:

Agni Pmd^a
of the three, Karkataka etc., it is in the reverse order, ^i.c. 12,
40 and 50, but positive) ; in the case of the three, Tula etc., (it
is 50, 40 and 12), negative i (and, in the case of the three, Makara
etc., it is 12, 40 and 50, negative).'
17b- 19a. Application of the vikald correction. The vikald cor¬
rection is to be applied to the tithi multiplied by 4. Multiply
their eleven vikalds by the dilTerence in liptds (i.e. kalds) bet¬
ween the elapsed and to-elapse portions of the tithi and divide
by 60. If the elapsed portion is less than/the portion to-elapse,
treat the correction as positive even if it be negative and or posi¬
tive, retain it as positive ; while, in the case of the portion toelapse being greater, the reverse is the case (i.e. the correction is
to be taken as negative both if it is negative or positive).
19b-21a. Further correction to the Tithi. Double (PTrcble)
(the nd4ikds of) the tithi and subtract from it one-sixth of (the
product). Apply to it the tlthi-nd^ikds obtained for the sun in
the reverse order, and subtract the result from 60; the true
ndflis of the tithi would be obtained. If not subtractible, add 60
and subtract; if more than 60, reduce it by 60 and subtract.^
2 lb-22. Toga. The tithi is associated with the constellation
The tithi multiplied by 4 and a third (of the tithi) added to it.
Apply to it the negative correction. (By dividing it by 27, the
yoga elapsed and the ndiikds in the current joga are obtained.)
True tithihas be to be used as the means for calculating theyoga.^
23a. The yoga is, indeed, got also by adding (the longitudes
2. For the third correction, multiply the 32-10 (of vciscs
9b-10) by 3 (i.e. 96-30), and deduct a sixth thereof (i.e. 16-5), resulting in
80-25. Adding to this the tithi •nd^ikds (32-10), wc get 1 12-35. The correction
for one tithi (viz. 5 nadikds, of verse ll-14a) being applied negatively, wc get
107-35. Dividing it by 60, the true nd^ikas in the current tithi is got at 47-35.
3. Togas form variable divisions of time during which the joint motion
of the Sun and the Moon in longitude is 13°’ 20’ or 800 kalds. In a cycle there
are 27 yogas, some of them being considered as auspicious and others inauspi¬
cious. Their significances are taken due note of in deciding i^pon the times
for rituals and domestic ceremonies. The 27 yogas are:

of) the sun and the moon (in kalds and dividing by 800 ).i
23b-24a. Karana. (The number of) the tithi reduced by
1 and multiplied by 2, and the product divided by 7, gives the
karana of day-time. The Mi-number multiplied by 2 and the
product reduced by I and divided by 6 (krfa) gives the karana
of the night.*
24b-c. The karana of the end (i.e. seeond half) of the 14th
tit/ll of the dark fortnight is called Sakuni; (that of the first half
of the full moon day is called Catuspada; that of the end (i.e.
second half of the full moon day) is called Ahi (Naga) ; and that
of the beginning (i.e. first half) of the prathama (of the bright
fortnight) is called Kiriistughna.
1. Viskambha 10. Ganc^a 19. Parigha
2. Priti 11. Vrddhi 20. Siva
3. Ayusman 12. Dhruva 21. Siddha
4. Saubhagya 13. Vyaghata 22. sadhya
5. Sobhana 14. Harsana 23. Subha
6. Atiganda 15. Vajra 24. Sukra
7. Sukarma 16. Siddhi 25. Brahma
8. Dhrti 17. Vyatipata 26. Indra
9. Sula 18. Variyan 27. Vaidhyti
Multiplying the true iitAi (viz. 47-35 of verses 19-20) by 4 (i.e. 190-20)
and adding a third of the tilM (viz. 15-52), we get 206-12. Dividing by 27
(which is the total number ofj>ogas in a cycle) and rejecting the quotient, we
have 7-12. i.e. 7 yogas up to Sukarma have gone by and, in the current 8ih yoga,
Dhrti, 12 nadikiis too are over.
1. In the alternative method of calculating the yoga, the longitudes of
the Sun and the Moon are added and the sunx divided by 800 (which is the
said sum in terms of six kalds). The quotient will give the number of the yogas
elapsed and the remainder the nadikas etc. elapsed in the current yoga.
2. The Kara^ia is a measure of time extending over half a tithi, having
astrological significance. They carry eleven names, being: (1) Bava, (2)
Balava, (3) Kaulava, (4) Taitila, (5) Gara., (6) Vanija, (7) Visfii (8) Sakuni,
(9) Catuspada, (10) Naga and (1!) Kiriistughna. A cycle consists of 60
karaxias (during the 30 tithis or 60 half-<i7Aw). The last four karapas occur only
once and occupy the four half-tithis from the second half of the 14th of the dark
fortnight to the first half of the/ 1st titni of the bright fortnight, and, so, are called
sthira or ‘fixed’ karapas, while the other seven karapas occupy the remaining 56
half-ri/Atj, by repeating themselves eight times, and, so, are called cala or ‘moving’
karapas.
CORRECTIONS TO THE PRINTED TEXT (SV Edn).

Agni Purdna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE
Description of the Svarodayacakray Sanicakray Kurmacakra
and Rdhucakra
The Fire-God said :
1. I shall describe the [svarodayacakra) in order to know the
victory and welfare in a military expedition. The vowels a, i,
u, e and o (should be written) in order (in the different squares)
and then the days (tithis) nandd and others (should be written
below) in order.
2. (The names of) the planets Mars, Sun, Mercury, Moon,
Jupiter and Venus (are marked) on the right-hand side and
Mars, Sun and Saturn on the other side in the letters ‘ka’ to
‘ha’.
3-7. The time between the rising of the Sun to its rising on
the next day should be multiplied by thirty-nine and then divid¬
ed by twelve, and the quotient should be divided by nine and
three respectively, the quotient being the time of predominance
of the vowels or the principles they represent from day to day.
The tithi on which the predominance takes place, brings death
(to the organiser of any expedition).
Three sphuranas (throbs) make up one ucchvdsa (breath).
Three ucchvdsas make up one pala (a measure of time). Sixty
palas constitute one liptd. Sixty liptds (make up) a day.
The five (vowels are known to be) child, boy, youth, old
and death in their half-rising state. It is said to be rising and
setting when it is in the eleventh place and together witli the
fifth (place) brings death and reverses.
(Thus-far the Svarodayacakra)
8. In the Sanicakra (the diagram of Saturn) the rise of the
planets is taken into account in a fortnight. There will be fifteen
squares herein. Therein the place of Saturn indicates death.
(Thus ends the Sanicakra)
9. (The Kurmacakra) is in the shape of a tortoise. (The
result is known) from the position of Saturn in the asterisms
beginning with maghd and ending with kfttikd.
(Thus ends the Kurmacakra)
10-11. In the Rdhucakra, one should write seven (squares)
above and seven below. On the full-moon day, !l^hu travels •

from the south-east by the north-west to the south-west occupy¬
ing the north-west on the new-moon day. The letter ‘ra* should
be written in the southern part and the letter ‘ha’ in the north¬
west. The letters ‘ka’ etc. (arc marked) on the first lunar day
and other (days) and the letter ‘sa* in the north-west.
12-20. When it happens to be in the face of Rahu it brings
reverses. On the full-moon day and in the south-east it is viffi.
It is karSU in the east and on the third day. It is (known as)
ghorS in the south and on the seventh day. It is (known as)
saumya in the north-east and on the tenth day. One should
avoid travel towards the north-west on the fourteenth day,
towards the west on the fourth day, towards the south on the
eighth day of the bright fortnight, and on the eleventh day. The
(names of the) fifteen muhUrtas (a period of fortyeight minutes)
are Raudra^ ^vetUy Maitra, SSrabhafa, Sdvitra, Virocanay Jayadevay
Abhijity Ravana, Vijayay Nandiny VarunOy Tanuiy Saumya and Bhava.
One should do violent deeds in the Raudray ceremonial bathing*
in the SvetUy the marriage of one’s daughter etc., in the MaitrUy
auspicious deeds in the SSrabhafay establishing in the Sdoitra,
deeds relating to the monarch in the Virocanay victorious deeds
in the JayadevOy battles in the Rdvaryiy agriculture and commerce
in the Vijayay wearing the turban in NandtUy the digging of tanks
in the Varunay acts of destruction in the Yama and good acts in
the Saumya.
21-22. yogas (a division of time) are known to be indi¬
cating good or bad from their names. Rdhu (ascending node)
(travels) from the cast to north-west and thence to the south.
From the south (it goes) to the north-east, and from the north¬
west to the west, then to the south-east, then to the north for
three (ghafikas). Then after four ghafikas it affects the (point of)
concurrence.
(Thus ends the Rdhucakra)
23-24. The (following) excellent herbs (should be) worn
for victory can4ly indrdniy vdrdhiy musaliy girikarnikdy baldy atibaldy
kfiri, mallikdy yUthikdy Suetdrkuy Satdoarl and guddcl.
25. One should tie up the tuft of hair with (the repetition
of) the mantray “Om, salutations to (lord) Bhairava (a form of
l^iva ) , the wielder of a sword and axe in his hands ; *Om, hrOm*^
(salutation) to the destroyer of obstacles, (“Ow, hrUmy phaf**,
for success. With the same mantray mark on the forehead, colly->
rium to the eyes and scented fumes should be applied.

Agni Purdfjui
26>32. Listen to me. (I shall describe) the different kinds
of unguents for bathing and drinking and powdered drugs.
A mark on the forehead composed of subhagS, manafyiili (arsenic )
tSlOj shellac and the milk of (gives) conquest (over one’s
enemy). Visnukrdnta, sarpdkfiy sahadeva and rocand made into a
paste with the milk of goat and worn on the forehead gains
success (over one’s enemy). PriyaAgu, saffron, kuffha, mohani
and tagara worn along with clarified butter subjugates (the
enemy). Rocand^ red sandal, niidy manahSild, tdluy priyangu Sind.
mustard (made into a paste and worn) also yields the same result.
Mohini, haritdy kdntdy sahadevi and JHkhd made into a paste in the
juice of pomegranate and worn on the forehead as a mark sub¬
jugates (all). Even the celestials including Indra are subjugated.
Then what about the poor mortals? MaAjisfhd, red sandal, kafukandd and vildsini together with punamavd as a paste subjugates
even the Sun (god). Sz-ndaXy ndgapuspdy manjifthd, tagara, vacd,
lodhra, priyaAgu and rajani mixed with oil otmasi controls others.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR
The essence of astrology as described in the science of victory in battles
Fire-God said :
1 . I shall describe the essence of astrology as propounded
in the (science) of victory in battles, without the employment of
mantra and herbs and as narrated by Isvara (Lord Siva) to Uma.
The Goddess said :
2. Explain to me the strategy by which the demons were
conquered by celestials. So also (explain to me) the knowledge
relating to success in battles which give discrimination about
good and bad.
The Lord said :
3. Energy comprisii^ fifteen letters was bom by the desire
of the chief god. The movable and immovable were born then.
One finds one’s desire fulfilled by the worship (of the energy).

4. I shall explain the base of the mantra which is produced
from five mantras. Those mantras remain in all the mantras in
their beginning and end.
5-6. They are the mantras of Tajus^ SSmanyZJid.Atharva
vedas in order. The mantras of lords Brahma, Vi?nu, Rudra, lia
(Siva), Indra and others who are (known as) SaptaiSikha devas
are these five mantras, ‘a, i, u, e, o* (are) the parts. The funda¬
mental {mantra) is stated to be Brahma.
7. Just as the fire in the wood which has not developed
fully is not seen, the energy of lord Siva remainii^ in the body
is not seen.
8. The energy adorned with the syllable of ‘Om’ is first born.
O Great lady ! the bindu (dot) (was) then (born) together
with the letter *e’.
9. The letter ‘u* which is the soul of the sound was born
then. It produces the sound remaining in the heart. Then the
letter ‘i’ of the shape of a crescent, which gives knowledge about
the path of release, (was born).
10. The letter ‘a’ which is the supreme one giving enjoy¬
ment and emancipation, was born manifest. The letter is
under the power of control of the lord. It is remembered as the
part of cessation of activity.
11-12. The fragrance, the mysticallctter ‘na’, prdt^ (life
breath), idd (a tubular vessel in the body) and the energy known
as fixed rest in this. The letter ‘i’ is known as the stable part.
The essence, the ap&na (one of the five life-winds) in the body),
piiigald (a tubular vessel in the body), the energy (known as)
krdrd and the mystical letter ‘i’ remain united inside. The letter
*u’ is the knowledge part. The form which is the characteristic
of fire, the mystic letter ‘ra’, the samdna (one of the five lifewinds in the body), the gdndhdri (one of the tubular verse in the
body), and the energy damanl (rest therein).
13. The letter ‘e* is the tranquil part. The sense of touch
which is the characteristic of the wind, the uddna (one of the
five life-winds in the body), the ctUd (one of the tubular organs
of the body) and the energy (called) kriyd (rest therein). The
syllable is that beyond the tranquil part. The sound which
is the characteristic of the sky and the vydna (one of the five lifewinds in the body) (rest therein).

Agni Purd^
14. The (above-mentioned) are the five kinds of letters.
The (planets) Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn res¬
pectively (preside over) the letters ‘a* etc. The letter* ‘ka*
and others are placed below these.
15. Everything relating to the movable and immovable
(objects of the world) is known through these. I shall describe
the knowledge-base. The pranava (syllable ‘oot’) is stated to be
(lord) Siva.
16. (When we say) Uma, it denotes (lord) Siva along with
(his consort) Uma. Uma is the energy (of Siva) This energy
remains (in three forms) as Varna, Jye§tha and Raudr!. (It
remains in the three forms of) Brahma, Visnu and Rudra duly.
Creation etc. are the three qualities (associated with them).
17-18. Three nd^is (tubular vessels in the body) which are
gem-like (are also present). (The pranava) is moreover gross
and subtle (which are respectively) highest and lowest. One
should contemplate (on) that {pramva)^‘a.y and night as whitecoloured, as showering the excellent ambrosia and flooding the
soul. O Goddess ! One would become unaging and attains the
qualities of lord l§iva.
19. The limbs (of the body) (are assigned) in (the fingers)
beginning with the thumb and the eye at the centre. Then one
should worship (lord) Mrtyufijaya (Siva, conqueror of earth)
and become victorious in the battles.
20. The sound is void and without any support. The
sparia (consonants ka to ma) should be touched bending hori¬
zontally. The form is stated to be having upward motion and
rests under the water.
21. The fragrance remains detached from all places. The
principal part is at the centre. The bulbous root, which is of the
form of (lord) Siva remains at the base of the navel.
22. The formation with energy houses the moon, sun and
(lord) Hari (Vi^nu). It is endowed with the ten winds and the
five primary elements.
23. (That bulbous root) which is the soul of lord Siva
is of the shape of the destructive fire that is shining. That is the
life of the entire world of living beings of the immovables and
movables. When that one having the fire as its soul is lost, I
consider that it is dead.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE
Different circles which get success in battle
The Lord said :
1. *'Orh hrirh (Goddess) Kamamo^ani ! Manifest in differ¬
ent forms ! Possessor of many teeth ! hrUm phaf om hafy. Om
devour devour. Cut cut. Suck suck. HrUm phaf salutation".
When this mantra is repeated by persons angrily and with red
eyes, it would bring about the death or the downfall (of his
enemy) or stupefy (his mental calibre).
2. The great incantation of (Goddess) Karnamotini is the
protector of all castes. I shall describe the rise of five
principles which rests on the svarodaya (science of sound).
3. The wind moves in the space between the navel and the
heat. One should repeat this at the time of battle etc. It
would pierce the ears and eyes (of the enemy).
4. The accomplisher should be bent on repetition (of
mantras) and oblation (to fire). When the wind (moves) from
the heart (downwards) to the anus and (upwards) to the throat,
the acts of bringing fever on the enemies or causing their death
(should be undertaken).
5. When the wind blows through the larynx with the essence,
(the votary) should do rites conferring peace and prosperity.
When (the wind flowing) from the eyebrows to the nostrils
(known as) gandha (smell) (is present) one should practise the
divine paralysing or drawal.
6. There is no doubt that one would be able to paralyse
by making the mind absorbed in the smell. The votary should
perform the (acts of) paralysing and wedging.
7. (To accomplish this he) should worship (the divinities)
Ca^da, Ghanda, Kar&li, Sumukhi, Durmukld, Revati, Prathaml^^
and Ghora in the wind-circle.
8-10. The goddesses who accomplish the charm remain
well-established in lustre. They (are) Saumya, Bhlsa^t, Jay&,
Vijaya, Ajita, Apariyita, Mahikopi and RaudrX. (These
goddesses who possess) dry bodies take away life. (The
goddesses) dwelling in the essence are Virupakfl, Para, J!)ivya,
Akalam&trs, Sathh^rX, Darh^p'&la and Su^kareyatl.

Agni Purdita
11-12. Pipilika, Pu§tihara, Mahapu?tipravardhana, Bhadrakali, Subhadra, Bhadrabhima, Subhadrika, Sthira, (Ni^tliura,
Divya, Niskampa and Gadini) (are the goddesses staying in the
circle of smell. These thirty- two mothers reside in the circles
at the rate of eight in each.
13. There is only one Sun and only one Moon (in the
world) . Each one of these goddesses preside over each one of the
sacred places on the earth.
14. The one (universal) life force remains divided through
(different) circles among created beings. It remains in tenfold
forms on account of division into left and right.
15. Out of the skull (cup) of the universe (they) drink the
supreme nectar, the mystical drops, encircled by the apparel
of -principles.
16-18. Listen to those five groups of letters which give vic¬
tory in battle. (The letters), a, a, ka, ca, ta, ta, pa, ya and ia
are said to be the first group; i, i, kha, cha, tha, tha, pha, ra,
and sa (form) the second group; u, u, ga, ja, da, da, ba, la and
sa (form) the third group, c, ai, gha, jha, dha, dha, bha, va and
ha form the fourth group and o, au, am, ah, ha, fta, na, na and
ma form the fifth group.
19-20. These fortyfive letters (indicate) the prosperity of
men. (These letters in each group) are respectively) known as
the child, boy, youth, old, death, affliction to one’s self, emacia¬
tion, indifference and destroyer. The (asterism) krttikd, the
first day of a fortnight and (the planet) Mars are known as bene¬
ficial to one’s self.
21-22. The sixth day (of a fortnight) and (the asterism)
maghd (occurring) on a Tuesday and the eleventh day (of a fort¬
night) and (the asterism) drdrd (occurring) on a Tuesday (cause)
affliction. (The asterism) maghd and the second day (of a fort¬
night) occurring on Tuesday (yields) gain. (The asterism)
drdrd and the seventh day on a Wednesday bring loss. The asterisms bharani and Sravat^a on a Tuesday (are) also of the same type.
A Thursday marked by (the asterism) purvaphdlguna and third
day is profitable.
23. A Thursday (marked) by (the asterism) dhanifthd
and drdrd on the eighth day, and the same day (ruled by (the
asterism) diUfd on the thirteenth day causes death. A Friday

(marked) by (the asterism) p&rvahhddrapada on the fourth day
(also yields the same).
24. A Friday ruled by (the asterism) pUrvSsSdhd and the
ninth day as also by (the asterism) bharani and the fourteenth
day causes affliction.
25. The fifth day and the (asterism) krttikd occurring on a
Saturday is said to be prosperous. The tenth day together with
the (asterism) dile^d in conjunction with Saturday would be
causing affliction.
26-27. The conjunction of (asterism) maghd^ Saturday
and full moon is held as fatal. First to the ninth have (the direc¬
tions) east, north, south-east, south-west, south, north-west,
moon and Brahma as the aspects. If they have aspects
together with the signs (artificial division of the ecliptic) as well
as the planets that would confer perfection.
28. The four constellations me^a to kumbha cause victory if
full and death if otherwise. It is to be duly calculated, the absence
of Sun etc. as well as whether they are full.
29. The Sun has no influence in the case of war. The Moon
influences to appease defeat. One should know that Mars
causes riot. Mercury (influences) to realise desire. Jupiter
influences to get success.
30-31. Venus influences to get mental happiness. Saturn
would influence to get defeat in battle. In the piAgaldcakra, the
asterisms in which the Sun moves should be arranged (in the
shape of a human figure), at the face, eyes, forehead, head,
hands, thighs and feet. If the three stars at the foot (are
identical with the natal star of the person concerned) (it
indicates) death. (It indicates) loss of prosperity if on the sides.
32. (If the three asterisms) on the face (are identical with
the natal star) (it indicates) affliction. If that on the head (is
identical) (it indicates) failure of the task undertaken, and that
on the head (indicates) fruitfulness. (I shall) describe the Rdhu^
cakra now.
33-35. It goes from the east to the south-west, from the south¬
west to the north, from the north to the south-east, from the
south-east to the west, from the west to the north-east, from the
north-east to the south, froih the south to the ncM'th-west and
then again to the notth, daring (thet>eriod of) four {ghafikat

Agni Purdx^a
every day). O dear ! I shall now tell you about the lunar
phases which act as the above said Rahu and about different
directions south-east to north-east and from the full-moon etc.
to which a journey should be held inauspicious during their
respective continuance. (An expedition commenced) at the
back of Rahu brings success in battle, (while that undertaken)
at its front brings death.
36. Till the eighth day of the dark fortnight, the east aspected by Rahu would cause fright. (Similarly) Rahu acts in
the north-east, south-east, north-west and south-west (on the
same day).
37-38. If the constellations Aries etc. are in the directions east
etc., and when the Sun is (present) there it causes death, The
third day in the dark fortnight, the seventh day, the tenth day,
the fourteenth day in the bright (fortnight) ; fourth day, the ele¬
venth day and the fifteenth day vi§ti (a kind of adverse period )
in the south-east and north-west.
39-42. (The letters) a, ka, ca, ta, ta, pa, ya and la are the
(five) groups (of letters) (standing for) the planets Sun etc.
The vulture, owl, hawk, a small owl, owl (kauJika), crane, pea¬
cock and the water-fowl are known to be birds (in the dia¬
gram). At first the mystic syllable should be accomplished by
means of oblation. Then it is known as expansion when it is
uccSfa (a kind of charm which drives away one’s enemy). Then
the application (of the mystic syllable) accomplishes (the
desired results) in bringing another under one’s control, in fever
and in attraction. The syllable ‘salutations’ should be used in
acts of bliss and peace-making, the syllable vaufap in (rites for)
nourishment and in controlling etc. (The syllable) hum (is
used) for (causing) death, breaking amity (between two per¬
sons), while (the syllable) phaf (is used) for driving away one’s
enemies. (The syllabic) vofat (is used) in (connection with)
progeny and bringing splendour etc. Thus there are six kinds
of mystic syllables.
43-45. I shall now describe the medicinal plants which
provide good protection. MiJUtkdlff can^iy vdr&hiy iloari, sudarSand
and indrdni when worn on the body protect. BtUdy t^baldy bhiruy
musali, sahadeviy jdtiy mallikdy yOthiy gdmfi, bkfdgardja and cakra-

fUpd are great herbs which confer victory when worn (on the body ) .
46-48. O Greatest Goddess ! if these are gathered during
an eclipse they confer good. Making an elephant endowed with
all characteristics out of earth, one’s enemy should be benumbed
by doing the rite at its foot. After having gathered earth from
an ant-hill (the rite should be done) at the summit of a moun¬
tain or at (a place having) a single tree or at a place struck by
lightning. Then (the previously invoked) two divine mothers
should be attached. Om ! obeisance to Mahdbhairava ! to the
Fierce form with deformed tooth ! to the Yellow-eyed ! to the
Bearer of trident and sword Waufaf. O Goddess ! One should
worship the mud and benumb multitudinous weapons (of the
enemy).
49-50, I shall describe rites relating to fire which ensures
victory in battle etc. The votary should remain nude, have
the tuft untied, face the south and offer human flesh, blood and
poison mixed with chaff of grain, pieces of bone as oblations to
fire kindled with logs of wood at the cremation ground in the
night uttering the name of the enemy one hundred and eight
times. '‘Om obeisance to Goddess Kaumari ! (You) dally,
(You) coax !0 Ghantadevi ! (You) kill this person at once.
Obeisance tp you O Goddess of knowledge ! Oblations.” By
oblations made with this formula the enemy gets fettered.
Om ! One having a hardy frame ! One having a fierce
mouth ! One possessing a tawny complexion ! One having a
dreadful face ! One possessing erect hairs ! One having great
strength ! One possessing a red face ! One having the lightning
as the tongue ! Most fierce ! Possessing large teeth ! Having
dreadful form ! One who strikes very firmly (at the battle) !
One who built the bridge to the city of Lanka ! The
carrier of the mountain ! One who moves about in the ethereal
space ! You come O lord ! Possessor of great strength ! Vali¬
ant ! The Bhairava makes known (his presence). O Great
Raudra (fierce) you come ! You encircle this person with
the long tail, pierce and trample him. Hr&m phaf. O Goddess !
(oblation should be made) one hundred and thirty-eight times
(with the above). Hanumat (monkey-faced god) accomplishes
all acts. The enemies get routed on seeing Hanumat in the
picture.

Agtti PurSna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX
Combinations of good and bad asterisms
The Lord said :
1-2. I shall describe combinations of asterisms deter¬
mining good and bad. One should count the asterism in
which the Sun is present and assign three (asterisms) from that
at the head (of human figure drawn), one at the face, two in the
place of the eyes, four at the hands and feet, five at the heart,
the genital organ and the knee. Then one should determine one’s
longevity etc. (based on that).
3. The presence of the natal star on the head or at the face
indicates acquisition of kingdom. (Its location) on the eyes
(indicates) fortune and lustre. (Its location) at the heart (indi¬
cates) acquisition of wealth.
4. (Its presence) on the arms (indicates) that one would
be a thief (Its presence) on one of the feet (indicates) death or
(the natal would be) a wanderer.
5. (Commencing with the asterism in which the Sun is
stationed, the respective names of the days associated should be
written on eight pitchers leaving the pitcher for the Sun as
empty). The pitcher of the Sun exerts malignant influence and
the pitchers in the east and other directions benevolent influence.
I shall describe the (method known as) Phani RShu, which indi¬
cates success or failure (in battle).
6-10. Twenty-eight circles should be drawn, intersected
by four lines. The asterisms should be arranged therein in rows
of three. The asterism occupied by Rahu (the ascending node)
should be deemed as the head of the serpent. Commencing with
that, the twenty-seven asterisms are arranged in successive order.
The presence of seven asterisms at the face (of the serpent)
(indicates) that one will die in the battle. The presence of
seven asterisms at the shoulders as well as the middle part (of the
body) (portends) complete rout. Their presence at the belly
foretells honour and success for the native. Their presence about
the waist indicates success over rivals in the battle. One would
get fame if (the asterisms) are situated on the tail. The asterisms
aspected by R&hu indicate death. I shall describe ybui^ differ¬
ent (combination) known as the strength of the Sun and R&hu.

11-12. Sun, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mars andRahu respectively preside over one-sixteenth part of
a day. One who (sets out) after the expiry of (the periods of)
Saturn, Sun and Rahu, conquers battalions of army, and a mar¬
ching force and wins in gambling.
13-15. (The asterisms) Rohini and the three Uttaras
(Uttaraphalguni, Uttarasadha and Uttaraprostapada) and the
Mrgaiirsa are the five fixed (asterisms). (The asterisms)
Asvini, Revatl, Svati, Dhanis|:ha and the Satabhisak are the
five movable (asterisms). One should undertake journeys in
these (asterisms). Anuradha, Hasta, Mula, Mrgasirsa), Pusya
and Punarvasu are (commended) for all acts. Jyesfha, Citra,
Vi^akha, the three Purvas (Purvaphalguni, Purvasadha and
Purvaprostapada), Krttika, Bharani, Magha, Ardra and A^lesa
are evil.
16. (All acts) at fixed places (should be done under the
influence) of fixed asterisms. Movable asterisms are excellent
for journeys. One should do (acts) in mild (asterisms) for con¬
ferring prosperity and frightful (deeds) in malignant (asterisms).
17-21. An evil (act) should be done (under the influence)
of an evil asterism. I shall now describe (the asterisms known to)
have their faces downwards etc. (The asterisms) Krttika,
Bharani, Aslesa, Vi^akha, Magha, Mula, the thi'ee Purvas
(Purvasadha, Purvaphalguni and Purvaprostapada) (are
known to be) downward-faced. One should do such acts (which
require) keeping one’s face downwards. (Digging) of wells and
tanks, acts relating to imparting knowledge and preparation of
medicine, the launching of a boat, installation of a prince and
pitching (of a royal camp) etc. (should be performed) in these
(asterisms). (The nine (asterisms) Revati, Alvini, Citra, Hasta,
Svati, Punarvasu, AnurMha, Mrga(iir§a), Jye^fha are known
as having their faces lateral. One should perform coronation
of kings, construction of stables for elephants and horses, laying
of garden houses, building of palaces, walls, doorways, fixing
of flagstaff and banner etc. under these (asterisms).
22-26. The twelfth day falling on a Sunday, the eleventh
day on a Monday, the tenth day on a Tuesday, the third day on
a Wednesday, the sixth day on a Thursday, the second day on a
Friday, and the seventh day on a Saturday are inauspicious.

Agni Purdi^
I shall now describe the (combination known as) tripuskara.
The second, twelfth, seventh and the third day with the Sunday,
Tuesday and Saturday, these six (are known to be tripuskara.
(The asterisms) Vi^akha, Krttika, the two Uttaras, Punarvasu
and the Purvabhadrapada, these six (are known to be) tripufkara. Any profit, loss, victory, disease, birth of a son, loss, some¬
thing which has slipped and that which has strayed, all these
get multiplied thrice (during the tripuskara period).
27-28. The seven (asterisms) A^vini, Bharanf, AiSlesa,
Pusya, Svatl, Visakha and Sravana are known (to be having)
firm look. They have their look in ten directions. The jour¬
ney undertaken to a far off place at an auspicious moment (is
followed by a safe) return journey.
29-31. The five asterisms — the two Asadhas (Purvasadha
and Uttarasadha), Revati, Citra and Punarvasu (are) squinteyed. The person undertaking a journey under these asterisms
(has a safe) return. Kfttika, Rohini, Saumya (the five stars on
the Orion’s head), Phalguni, Magha, Mula, Jyesfha, AnurMha,
Dhanistha, l§atabhi$ak and Purvabhadrapada are known as
blunted. One who undertakes journey under these asterisms
would again return home.
32. Anything lost (on days ruled by the asterisms) Hasta,
Uttarabhadra(pada), Ardra and Asadha cannot be recovered
and a battle commenced in these asterisms) would not continue.
33-36. 1 shall again describe the gan(jldnta (the first fourth
of an asterism preceded by a node of asterisms) in the midst of
asterisms as such. The four nd^is (one nd(jli equals 24 minutes)
of the (asterism) Revati and the four (nd^is) of A^vini
(are known as gan^as). One has to avoid with great care those
yamas (three hours) (in undertaking a journey etc). The four
ghafikds (one ghafikd equals 24 minutes) forming last part of
Alle^ and the first part of Magha are called the second ga^i/a.
Listen to me ! O Bhairavi ! The third (ga^ifa) is between the
asterisms of Jye§tha and Mula, and that is of the form extre¬
mely malignant for three hours. One should not do auspicious
acts in these, if he wants to live. At the time of birth of a
<:hild in these periods the parents would die.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN
The auspicious and inauspicious periods of the day based on certain
combinations
The Lord said :
1. The three ghafikds (one ghafikd is equal to 24 minutes)
(from the commencement) of oi^kambha (an inauspicious
period), the five ghafikds of Sula (an adverse period), the six
(ghafikds) respectively in the ganda and atiganda {types of impedi¬
ments) and the nine {ghafikds) in the vydghdta and vajra (a kind
of adverse period) should be avoided.
2. One should avoid all undertakings when the whole day
is ruled by both parigha and vyatlpdta (obstacles) and the
undertaking of any journey or commencing a battle on the day
ruled by vaidhrta (obstacle).
3. O Goddess ! I shall describe the good or bad (effects
of the positions of planets) in the constellations of Me^a and others.
The Moon and Venus occupying the first house confer good
when they leave (the same).
4. One has to forecast loss of property, absence of gain and
reverses in the battle if the Mars, Sun, Saturn and Rahu
(occupy) the second house.
5-6. The second (house) occupied by the Moon, Mercury
Venus and Jupiter confers good. Just as the Sun, Saturn, Mars
and Venus in the third (house) confer good so also all the planets.
Mercury, Moon and Rahu yield benefits. Mercury and Venus
in the fourth (house) are beneficial. All other planets are
ominous.
7. Just like Jupiter in the fifth, the presence of Venus,
Mercury and Moon yield the desired gains. The Sun is auspi¬
cious in the sixth (place).
8. O Goddess ! The planets Moon, Saturn, Mars and
Mercury confer good (if they remain) in the sixth (place) from
the native sign. One should avoid Jupiter and Venus in the
sixth (house).
9. The Sun, Saturn, Mars and Rahu in the seventh (house)
(indicate) misery and Jupiter, Venus and Mercury (in the
seventh house) indicate happiness. The Mars and Venus are

Agni Pur&^a
auspicious in the eighth (house).
10. All other planets (in the eighth house) (indicate)
evil propensities. The Mars and Venus in the ninth ^house)
are auspicious. The other (planets) (in the ninth) (exercise)
evil influences. The Venus and Sun in the tenth (house) confer
gains.
11. The Saturn, Mars, Rahu, Moon and Mercury bring
good. All planets are good in the eleventh (house). One should
avoid Jupiter in the tenth (house).
1 2 . The Mercury and Venus in the twelfth (are beneficial ) .
One should avoid all other planets in the twelfth. The twelve
zodiacal signs exercise influence over the whole day (in order).
I will describe them (now).
13-14. (It takes) four nd^is for the Sun to traverse the (zo¬
diacal signs). Pisces, Aries, Taurus and Gemini, six nd(its (to
traverse) Cancer, Leo, Virgo and Libra and five nd^is (to traverse)
Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn and Aquarius. The (Zodiacal
signs) Aries and others are respectively movable, fixed and of
dual nature.
15. The Cancer, Capricorn, Libra and Aries are movable.
One should do all acts involving movement and permanent
victory, both good and bad.
16. The Taurus, Leo, Acquarius and Scorpio are the fixed
signs and ail acts of fixed nature (should be done in them).
(A person going away under their influence) will not return
quickly. (One who) falls sick (under their influence) will not
get cured.
17. The Gemini, Virgo, Pisces and Sagittarius are of dual
nature. These dual-natured ^signs) are always auspicious for
all acts.
18. One would get increase, victory and gains in sojourn,
trade, battle, marriage and royal audience. One would get
victory in battle.
19. (The asterisms) A^vini (consisting of) three stars is
of the form of a horse. If it rains in this (asterism), it would rain
for a Aight. If it rains in the asterism presided over by Yama
(god of death) (Bharani) it would rain for a fortnight.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT
The kopacakra — a drawing to forecast results
The Lord said :
1 . 1 shall describe kofacakra. One should draw a square.
One should draw another square inside that (square) and again
another square inside the second.
2. The zodiacal signs Aries etc. (should be assigned) to
the directions east etc. (in the three squares) which are the
symbols of the three nSdis (tubular organs in the body). The
(asterism) Krttika (is located) in the east and the (asterism)
Alle§a in the south-east.
3. (Asterism) Bharani should be placed in the south.
Visakha should be assigned in the south-west. (Asterism) Anuradha (should be located) in the west and Srava^a in the north¬
west.
4. (Asterism) Dhanistha should be located in the north
and Revati in the north-east. These eight asterisms are located
in the outer n&di carefully.
5. The asterisms Rohini, Pu§ya, (Purva) Phalguni, Svati,
Jyestha, Abhijit, 8atatara and Aivini (are located) in the middle
square in order.
6. I shall describe the n&4i the middle of the drawing.
In that inner square, the (asterism) Mrga(iirsa) (is located)
at the east, and Punarvasu at the south-east.
7-8. The UttaraphalgunI (is placed) in the south. (The
asterism) Citra (is located) in the south-west. Having placed
Mula in the west, the Uttarasadha in the north-west, the Purvabhadrapada in the north and Revati in the north-east, the central
square should be thus made to contain the eight asterisms.
9. (The asterisms) Ardra, Hasta, the four A^adha^ and the
three Uttara* should be placed inside the central square as four
pillars.
10. Fortifications should be made thus. A belligerent com¬
ing from outside from the direction of lord (planet) (that
presides over the day) and the asterisms (representing tlxat
1. The POrv&t&^a and Uttar&^ai^.
2. Hie Uttaraph&Igunl, Uttar&f&dha and Uttarapro^pada.

Agni PurS^
quarter) is sure to get the benefits.
11. If the planets and asterisms at the innermost square
are good, it is known that those remaining in the inner
square would be victorious and defeat for that person coming
(from outside).
12-13. One should enter the fort when the conducive asterism (rules) and one should come out under the influence of
conducive asterism. One should know if the battle commen¬
ced when the planets Venus, Mercury and Mars leave their
respective asterism one would face defeat. If the battle com¬
menced when the asterism held auspicious for entering the castle
was ruling, then that fort would be captured. One need not get
surprised.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE
Guidelines for storing and selling grains
The Lord said :
1-2. I shall describe the quantity of food-grains to be
gathered when there may be fall of meteors, earthquake, hurri¬
cane, eclipse, entry of foreign matter and conflagration in
different directions in different months (of the year).
If these occur in the (month of) Gaitra (April-May), the orna¬
ments etc. gathered (would become) four-fold (worth) in (the
course of) six months.
3. All things collected in the (month of) Vaiiakha (MayJune) would become six-fold (worth) in eight months. In the
same way, the grains such as barley and wheat (stocked) in the
(months of) Jye?{ha (June-July) and Aj^^lia (July-August)
(would fetch m ore ) .
4. (Similarly) one would get (increased returns) in the
month of Margalir^a (December-January) from ghee, oil etc.
purchased in (the month of) Srava^a (August-September),
apparels and grains in Alvina (October-November) and grains
(purchased) in Karttika (November-December).

5. (One would get) profit by the purchase of saffron and
perfumes in Pusya (January-February), food grains in Magha
(February-March) and perfumes in Phalguna (March- April).
Thus the arghakdn^a (section on storing and selling of grains
and goods) has been described.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY
Different spheres marked by asterisms indicating victory in battle etc.
The Lord said :
1-2. O Good-natured Goddess ! I shall describe the four
kinds of spheres (to find) one’s victory. (The asterisms) Krttika,
Magha, Pusya, Purva (phalguni), Visakha, Bharan! and Purvabhadrapada belong to the sphere of fire. I shall describe its
characteristic.
3-9. If the wind blows, holes (are noticed) in the disc of the
Sun and Moon, earthquakes (occur), hurricanes (strike), (there
be ) the eclipses of Sun and Moon, smoky flames, conflagra¬
tion in (different) quarters, and comets are sighted and
(there be) blood-like red showers, heat waves and fall of meteo¬
rites (under these asterisms), (there would follow) epidemics of
eye diseases and hiarrhoea. The fire would rage. The cows would
yield reduced (quantity of) milk. The trees (would bear) lesser
(quantity) of flowers and fruits. The food grains would get
destroyed. One should foresee little rain. The four castes of
people would be harassed. The entire humanity would suffer
hunger. The inhabitants of (the regions of) Sindhu, Yamuna,
Gurjara, Bhoja, Vahlika, Jalandhara, Ka^mlra and the Uttarapatha as well as these countries would be destroyed when these
portents are noticed. (The asterisms) Hasta, Gitra, Magha^
Svati, Mrga(sirsa) or Punarvasu, Uttaraphalguni and A^vinf
are spoken as comprising the sphere of wind.
10-12. The people would become bereft of virtues. All
would lament in despair. (The countries) Dahala, Kamarupa,
Kalinga,'KoJala, Ayi^hya, Avanti, Koiikana and Andhra would

Agni Purdna
get destroyed. (The asterisms) Aslesa, Mula, Purva^adha,
Revati, Bhadrapada and Uttara (form the regions •where)
water reigns supreme. If something unusual takes place under
their influence, it should be spoken as resultant of their respective
influences.
13-14. Cows would have plenty of milk and trees would
abound with flov/ers and fruits. There would be good health.
The earth would abound with grains. The grains would be highly
valuable. The kingdom would be prosperous. There would
be grave battles among kings.
15-19. (The asterisms) Jyestha, Rohini, Anuradha, Dhanistha, Uttarasadha and Abhijit witnessing any unusual com¬
motion are said to be related to celestial(region). The subjects
would be jubiliant being free from all diseases. Kings would
conclude treaties and the kingdom would be prosperous. The
eclipses are known to be of two kinds — by the head or by the
tail of Rahu. If the Sun or Moon and ascending node of Moon
are in the same sign, it is known to be eclipse by the head. If it
is ihjtjamitra (the seventh sign of Zodiac) it is said to be by
the tail. When the Moon stays at the fifteenth asterism from the
one occupied by the Sun and if the lunar day begins and ends in
between two sunrises, one should indicate the lunar eclipse.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE
Diagrams known as Ghatakacakra^ JVaracakra and Jqyacakra
indicating failure or success in battle etc.
The lord said :
1-3. The vowels commencing with ‘a’ should be written in
a circular form commencing from the east. One should write
such circles for the months Caitra (April-May) and the other
months. The vowels should be considered as representing the
lunar days first to thirteenth. If the (names of) lunar days
of first, full moon, thirteenth, fourteenth, eighth, eleventh and
seventh in the circle of Caitra happened to be pouched, one

should know about one’s victory or gains. One should know that
it augurs well if odd numbers (of vowels are present). It is said
that it augurs bad if even numbers (of vowels are present).
4-5. When the name of a person is pronounced at the time
of commencement of the battle, if one’s name begins with a long
vowel, he will always have victory even in dreadful battles. If
the name of the warrior (commences with) short vowel, he would
die without any prevention.
6. If the first letter is long and the middle letter is also
long (both indicate) death. If two letters at the middle are
first (among the letters), it would end in the death (of the
person) without any doubt.
7. If there are vowels at the beginning and the end, one
should know (impending) death (if the vowels are) short and
victory (if the vowels are) long.
8. I shall describe Naracakra (the figure of a man)
consisting of asterisms. A human figure is drawn first and
the asterisms are arranged (in order).
9-11. Three asterisms are placed at the head (of the figure)
one at its face, two at the eyes, four on the arms and two at the
ears. Five asterisms (are placed) at the heart and six asterisms
at the feet. The asterism for one’s name should be found out and
be placed at the centre of the drawing, at the eyes, head, rightear, right-hand, feet, heart, neck, left hand, secret organ and
feet (of the human figure).
12. One should know that fatality is certain at that
asterism occupied by the Sun, Saturn, Mars or Rahu (the
ascending node).
13. I shall (now) describe the Jayacakra (the circle of
victory). One should draw letters a to ha. One should
draw thirteen lines (on a plane) and six lines obliquely.
14-15. The quarters, planets, sages. Sun, priest and the
lunar days are placed (in the chambers above) in order. Stupe¬
faction, remembrance, scriptures, asterisms etc. and the
letters a, ka, ma etc. (are written) below them. The Sun and
other planets when placed in seven places, the planets are power¬
ful at the end of the name. (The planets) Sun, Saturn and Mars
(are) for victory and the planet Mercury for truce.

Agtti Purd^
16-18. Twelve lines are drawn, six on the right and six on the
left. Fourteen, twentyseven, two, one, fifteen, six, foui, three
and seventeen are known as weak points for wealth. The letters
a, ka, fa and pa should be located below. After having assigned
letters one by one the rest should be located as follows: the
figure made up of ^letters comprising the name should be divided
by eight. '
19-20. The quotient if identical with the number represent¬
ed by a crow (fourteen) would signify the diagram a strong
one, while the same equal to the numbers represented by an ass,
bull, elephant, lion, horse and camel would signify greater suc¬
cess respectively than the preceding one.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO
Description of Sevdcakra and the indication of accrual of benefits
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the Sevdcakra that indicates the gain or
loss from the father, mother, brother, husband or wife.
2. One should know from that from whom one would get
benefits. One should draw six vertical lines and eight different
lines obliquely.
3-4. Then there would be thirty-five chambers. The letters
should be written in these (chambers) . The five vowels are drawn
and afterwards one should discard the three (consonants known
as) hinahga (diminutive) and write letters ka to ha in groups
of siddha, sddhyuy susiddhay art and mfiyu.
5. Names (which begin with letters) falling under (the
chambers) ari and mftyu should be avoided in all acts by one’s
efforts.
6-7. (The letter) falling in the first place (should be deemed)
as yielding good. The second place would be a supporter and
the third one would confer materials. The fourth one causes
one’s own destruction, while the fifth one gives death. The
chambers occupied by friendly, servile and related letters would
indicate acquisition of wealth.

8. All the letters respectively occupying the siddha,
s&dhya and susiddha always yield fruits and the two ari and mr(ya,
should be rejected in all undertakings.
9. The vowels a, i, a, e and o are known as included in the
term akdranta as told now. Now I shall describe the different
species of beings for which the different groups of letters stand
for.
10-11. The celestials occupy letters falling under the
group of letter ‘a% the demons occupy letters of group,
the serpents letters of *ca* group and the gandharvas (a kind
of semi-divine beings) letters of ‘/a’ group. The sages are
stated to be in letters of ‘/a’ group, the demons are known to
be in letters of ‘j&a’ group, the goblins in letters of
group and the men in letters of group.
12-13. Demons are stronger than celestials, serpents than
demons, gandharvas than serpents and sages than gandharvas.
Demons are stronger than sages, goblins than demons and
men than goblins. One (under the influence) of a stronger
species should avoid (contact with one of) the weaker.
14-18. Listen again duly (to the narration) about
Tdrdcakra which indicates friendship. As before it is calculated
from the star and the first letter of the name of a person.
The nine stars which should duly be ascertained from the natal
star of a person are—janma, sampaty vipat, kfema, praiyari, dhanad&y fo^fhiy nidhana, mitra and paramitra. The star known as the
janma is inauspicious. The star (known as) sampat yields ex¬
tremely great result. The star (known as) vipat makes (one’s
attempts) futile. The star (known as) ksema is favourable for all
undertakings and pratyari destroys one’s wealth. The star
(known as) dhanadd gets the benefit of kingdom etc., and the
nidhana makes all attempts futile. The effect of the star (known
as)mitra is friendship and that of paramitra is conferring benefits.
19. O dear, the number of syllables which are the nume¬
rical equivalents of vowels in the names of two persons (to
be related in any way), should be counted and added and (the
total) be divided by twenty. The remainder indicates the result.
20. One should find the debt and credit between the two
names from the debt being indicated by lesser number of

Agni PurS^
syllables and the credit by greater number of syllables.
21. Friendship (would grow between two persons)* whose
names stand in relationship of credit and indifference in the
case of relationship of debt. This is said to be the Bevacakra
which indicates benefits or the contrary.
22. (There would be) friendliness (between those born
under the constellations) of Aries and Gemini as also between
those of Gemini and Leo. There would be great amity (between
the born under the constellations) of Libra and Leo as also bet¬
ween Sagittarius and Acquarius.
23-25. One should not accept the service of a person if
his natal sign and that of the other person are in (relation¬
ship of) friendship. There is friendship between the following
Taurus and Cancer, Cancer and Acquarius, Virgo and Scorpion,
Capricorn and Scorpion, Pisces and Capricorn when they are
respectively the third and eleventh signs. The constellations
Libra and Aries would be in great friendship, Taurus and Scor¬
pion would be in great enmity. There would be friendship bet¬
ween Gemini and Sagittarius, Cancer and Capricorn, Capri¬
corn and Acquarius as also Virgo and Pisces.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE
Different traits in infants and combinations indicating success in
battle
The Lord said :
1-5. I shall describe the character (of an infant) from the
nature of planets presiding over nativity. One would be
bom not extremely tall, neither lean nor stout, possess even loins,
of a reddish yellow complexion, having reddish eyes and would
be possessing good qualities and brave in the house of the Sun.
One who was bom in the house of the Moon would have good
fortune and be of mild disposition. One who was bom in the
house of Mars would be flatulent and greedy. A person born in
the house of Mercury would be intelligent, fortunate and res¬
pectable. A person born in the house of Jupiter Wbuld be ex-

trcmely irascible and fortunate. One born when the Venus
was rising would be charitable, enjoy comforts and fortune.
A person born in the house of Saturn would be intelligent, for¬
tunate and respectable. One born in a good-natured lagna (the
rising point at the east at the time of one’s birth) would be goodnatured and one (born) in cruel-natured lagna would be cruelnatured.
6-11. O Gauri ! I shall describe the effect of the presence
(of the planets) in the sign of one’s nativity according to one’s
name. The presence of Sun in such a position would get the
native elephants, horses, wealth, grains, wide sovereignty and
recovery of lost wealth. The period of Moon would get (the
native) a damsel of celestial beauty. In (the period of) Mars
one acquires land and happiness. One (gets) land, grains and
wealth in (that of) Mercury. One (gets) elephant, horse etc.
and wealth in (that of) Jupiter. In (that of) Venus one (is
blessed with) plenty of food and drink and wealth. One is afflict¬
ed with diseases etc. in (that of) Saturn. (One is blessed with)
good services with unguents etc. and good trade if Rahu (as¬
cending node of the Moon) is seen (in the nativity) even if the
name of person contained odd number of letters or if it be in the
flow of left nd^i. Similarly, the presence of Saturn, Mars
and Rahu (in the left nd^i) would make the native victorious in
the battle. The presence of the Sun in the flow of the right nd^i
would augur loss in trade. A person would certainly be victo¬
rious in battle if his name contains even (number of letters).
One should know victory in battle if the movement is down¬
wards and death if the movement is upwards. Om hUm om hrdm
am sphem break down the weapons. Om break to pieces. Om
rout all enemies. Om hrum om hrah phap.
12-14. One should place (the above) mantra (on his body)
repeating seven times and should meditate on his self as lord
Bhairava, auspicious, possessing four or ten or twenty hands,
wielding in the hands a spike, a club, a sword, raised kappdrif
devouring the army of others and having his back on his own
forces. One should repeat this one hundred and eight times in
front of the army of enemies. By the repetition of this and
the sound of small drum the enemy force would run away
abandoning their weapons.

Agni Purdifa
15-24. Listen ! I shall again describe another applica¬
tion that breaks the army of others. After having collected the
charcoal from the cremation ground and the excrements of owl
and crow one should draw the image of Bhairava on a cloth.
The name of the enemy together with the letters are to be
written at nine places such as the head, face, forehead, heart,
genital organ, feet, back and between arms. (The image)
should be broken down at the time of battle with the
repetition of the above sacred syllable.
I shall describe Tarksyacakra for the sake of victory and
which is (known as) irimukhaksara (three-faced syllable). Throw
away. Om oblations. Tarksya is destroyer of enemies, disease
and poison. It also sets right one possessed by an evil spirit or
afflicted by diseases or grief-stricken. One would accomplish
results proportional to his actions through the bird (Tarksya).
All poisons such as those due to a plant, movable beings and
spiders and artificial poison get destroyed by the look of an
accomplisher. One should again contemplate on the great
Tarksya having two wings and of the form of a man, having two
arms and a curved beak, supporting an elephant and tortoise
and coming in the middle of the sky having innumerable ser¬
pents at its feet. One would sec the enemies being swallowed,
eaten, hit and struck by the beak in the battle, some crushed by
the feet, some crushed by being struck by the wings and some
running away in ten directions. One who contemplates on
Tarksya would be invincible in the three worlds.
25-26. I shall describe the work to be done to accomplish
the sanctity of the bunch of peacock’s feathers. Om hrum bird !
Cast away ! Om hum sak ! The most valiant and of great
strength ! Devour all forces (of the enemy). Om trample down.
Om break to pieces. Om melt away. Omhumkhah om ! Bhairava
may accept oblations. One should repeat this at the (time
of) lunar eclipse and the bunch of peacock’s feathers should
be sanctified and waved in front of the army. Just as the one
riding the lion would do the herds of deer, one would rout (the
army of enemies) by the sound and contemplation on the
elephant and lion.
27-33. I shall describe the invocation with the sacred syl¬
lable (which would rout the enemy force) from a distance by its

sound. Porridge should be offered to the divine mothers, espe¬
cially to Kalaratri. One should invoke (the goddess) from a
distance with the flowers malati and cdmari together with the ashes
from the cremation ground and the roots of cotton (plant).
Om ahe he Mahendri ! Break ! hi om discard ! Devour the enemy !
lili kilt om hum phaf ! By this breaking sacred syllable {bhahgavidya) repeated from a distance the enemy would be destroyed.
A mark on the forehead made up of apardjitd and dhattura
(should be made use of) together (with the mantra). Om kill
kili vikili icchdkili ! (Goddess) Uma ! Destroyer of goblins !
!§ahkhini (woman fairy) ! Wielder of a club ! Ferocious !
Mahesvarl (Great goddess) ! Projecting meteors from the
mouth ! Emitting fires from the mouth ! Possessing ears like the
conch ! Possessing emaciated thighs ! One who vomits (Alambusa) ! Take away ! Om dug up all wicked persons. Om ! O
Goddess ! whoever looks at me (you) stupefy them. Om ! the
terrible (goddess) remaining in the heart of Rudra (Siva) !
By your gracious disposition protect me then. Oblations. After
having drawn the divine mothers surrounded by all their forms
outside, the (above) sacred syllable, which accomplishes all
desires, should be written on a betel leaf. It was worn by
(gods) Brahma, Rudra, Indra and Visnu on the hand before.
The celestials were adorned with this protective potent of (god¬
desses) NarasimhI, Bhairavi, all goddesses of the form of l§akti,
(goddess) Trailokyamohini and Gauri at the time of great
battle between celestials and demons.
O auspicious one ! It is known as the protective amulet
in which the letters consisting of the name (of the wearer)
sanctified by the principle sacred syllable on the petals of a
lotus (shaped diagram) and duly worshipped with the accesso¬
ries.
34-41. I shall describe mjrtyunjaya (conquering death).
The name surrounded by kal&s (syllables) should be in the
midst of sacred syllable and preceded by the letter sa. The
letter ja coupled with the dot and the syllable om, containing the
letter dha at the middle and with the letter va together with the
sanctified Moon at the middle that routs all the wicked (should
be placed) . Otherwise one should write the name and the object
on the petals. The syllable om should be written on the petal

Agni Pur Am
on the east, one’s right and north. The syllable hum (should
be written) on the south-east etc. and the (other) syllables on
the sixteen petals. (The consonants) ka etc. (should be written)
in the thirtyfour petals. One should write this sacred syllable of
conquering death outside on a bhurja leaf together with rocand
(yellow pigment), saffron, camphor and sandal. It should be
enclosed with a white thread, covered by bee-wax and worship¬
ped on a pitcher. By wearing this amulet one gets cured of his
diseases and his enemies would perish. I shall explain the sacred
syllable known as Bhelakhi that wards off separation and death.
Am Vatala (windy) ! Vitala (located in the lower region !
Cat-faced ! Daughter of Indra ! Born through the agency of
wind god ! Obstruct. Come. Hdjd in me, Vdha ityddi duhkha
nityakanthoccairmuh urtdnvayd aha mdrtiyasmaham upddi om Bhelakhi !
Om ! oblations. (Similarly) the sacred syllable of Navadurga
repeated seven times if worn on one’s mouth paralyses the mouth
(of the enemy). Om hum phaf oblations. One undefeated in a
battle with a word if held after repetition for seven times.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-FOUR
Sacred formula for the conquest of three worlds
The Lord said :
1-3. I shall describe (the formula) that conquers three
worlds and crushes all (other) amulets. Om hum ksum hrum om
obeisance, O Goddess ! Possessing (frightful) teeth ! Possess¬
ing fierce face ! One having a very fierce form ! Hili, hili !
Possessing red eyes ! Kili^ kili ! Possessing great sound I kulu
om ! Possessing a tongue resembling the lightning i kulu om !
One having no flesh ! kata kata ! Wearing the ornament of
gonasa (a kind of gem) ! Cili cili ! One who wears the garland
of dead bodies ! Drive away. Om ! One having a terrible form t
One who is clad in raw hide ! (You) gape ! Om ! Dance O
goddess wielding the creeper-like sword ! One whose side
glances have been hot with anger. One having the third eye J
One whose body has been besmeared with marro^ and fat 1

Kaha kaha om. Laugh. Be angry. Om. One possessing the colour
of a blue cloud ! One who has made the garland of cloud as the
ornament ! Shine ! Om. One having the body strewn by the
sound of the bell ! Om ! One who rides the lion ! One of lightred complexion ! Om hr dm hrim hrum. One of terrible form !
Hrum hrim klim om hrim hrum om. Attract. Shake. Om he hah
khau. One who wields the club ! Hum k^um ksdm. One who has
the form of wrath ! Inflame. Om. Terribly frightening one 1
Break. Om. One having a big body ! Cut. Om. One having
a dreadful form ! Burrow. The mother of great goblins ! One
who wards off all the wicked ! Victorious one ! Om. Victorious
one ! Om. One who conquers the three worlds ! HSm pha}
oblations. One should propitiate the goddess of blue comp¬
lexion, remaining on dead bodies and possessing twenty arms for
(gaining) victory. After having located on the five parts of the
body, red flowers should be offered (to the goddess). There
would be routing of the (enemy) forces in the battle by the
repetition of the formula (known as) conquering three worlds.
Om. (Obeisance) to (the god of) manifold forms. Paralyse.
Om. Stupefy. Om. Scatter away all enemies. Om. Attract
(lord) Brahma. Attract (lord) Visnu. Attract (lord) MaheiSvara ($iva). Om. Make (the god) Indra tremble. Om. Make
the mountains move. Om. Dry up seven oceans. Om. Gut
through. Cut through. Obeisance to (the god) of manifold
forms. One should then meditate (while pronouncing this
formula) that the enemy is present in an image of a serpent
made up of earth.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE
Formula for success in battle
The lord said :
1 . 1 shall describe the garland of words of the formula that
gives victory in the battle. Orh hrim (Goddess) C^un^a (hav¬
ing a terrific form) ! One who dwells in the cremation ground 1
One who holds in hand the club with a skull at the top !

AffliPurS)^
One who is riding the terrific dead body (or the body in the form
of universe at the time of deluge) ! One who is surrounded
by the great vehicle in the form of the decaying universe !
The dark night at the destruction of universe ! One who is
surrounded by the great attendant gods ! Goddess with a great
mouth ! Possessing several hands ! (One who holds) the bell,
the little drum and the small bell ! One who has a terrific lau¬
ghter ! Kili kili om hum phaf. One who makes (the world) dark
by her fierce teeth ! One who makes many kinds of sounds !
One who is clad in the hide of an elephant ! One who is bes¬
meared with flesh ! One whose terrific tongue is licking ! The
great demoness ! One having the terrible teeth ! One who lias
frightening roar of laughter ! One who has the splendour of
shining lightning ! Move. Move. Om. One who has the eyes
like the Cakora^ (bird) ! Cili. Cili. Om. One who has a lustrous
tongue ! Orh bhim. One who has a frown on the face ! One
who frightens by uttering the syllable hum ! One who
wears the moon on the crown on her matted hair surrounded by
the garland of skulls ! One who has the terrific laughter ! Kili
kili orh hrum. One who makes (the world) dark by her frighten¬
ing teeth ! One who destroys all obstacles ! (Yourfi) accomp¬
lish this act. Om. Do it quickly. Om phaf om subjugate with
(your) mace. Enter. Om Dance. Dance .Shake. Om. Make (the
enemies) move. Om. One who is fond of blood, flesh and
intoxicating drink ! Kill. Om trample. Om cut. Om kill. Om chase
Om make the strong body (of the enemy) fall down. Om.
Enter into the beings of three worlds whether wicked or not
wicked, taken possession or not. Om dance. Om extol. One who
has sunken eyes ! One having erect hairs ! One having the
face of an owl ! One who holds skull (in the hand) ! Om.
One who wears a garland of skulls ! Burn. Om. Cook. Cook.
Om. Seize. Om. Enter into the middle of the circle (of the ene¬
mies). Om. Why do you delay? Overwhelm (them) with the
strength of (lords) Brahma, Visnu and Rudra and the strength
of sages. Om Kili kili om khili khili vili vili om. One who dis¬
plays an ugly form ! One whose body is enveloped by a black
serpent ! One who subjugates all planets ! One who has a long
lip ! One whose nose rests on the frowning eyes ! One who is
1 . A fabulous bird supposed to live on the ambrosia of tiiS Moon.

having a frightful face ! One having tawny matted hair !
Brahmi ! Break. One whose mouth emits flames ! Yell. Om.
Make (the enemies) fall down. Om. One having red eyes 1
Roll the earth. Make (them) fall. Om. Catch hold of the head.
Close the eye. Om. Catch hold of the arms and feet. Split open
the posture (of the hands). Om phap om. Pierce open. Om. Cut
with the trident. Om kill with the mace. Om strike with the
stick. Om. Cut with the disc. Om. Break with the spear. Stake
with the teeth. Om. Pierce with the middle finger. Om. Seize
with the goad. Om. Relezise. Release the possessive spirits like
the Dakini and Skanda and also the fevers occurring every day,
second day , third day and fourth day (and the diseases of) the
head and eyes. Om. Cook. Om. Destroy. Om. Make them fall
to the ground. Om. Brahman! Come. Om (goddess) Mahesvarl ! Come. Om Kaumari ! Come. Om Vaisnavi ! Come.
Om Varahi ! Come. Om Aindri ! Come. Om. Camunda. Come.
Om Revati ! Come. Om. Akasarevati. Come. Om. One who
moves like the snow. Come. Om. One who has slain (the de¬
mon) Rnru ! One who annihilated the demons ! One who
goes in heaven ! Bind. Bind with the noose. Pierce with
the goad. Stand for the moment. Om enter the circle (of
enemies) ! Om. Seize. Bind the face. Om. Bind the eyes, arms
and feet. Bind the malefic planets. Om. Bind directions.
Charm the cardinal points, the space below and all places. Om.
Subjugate all with ashes or water or earth or mustard. Om.
Make them fall. Om. (goddess) Camunda ! Kili kilt dm vicce
hum phap oblations. This is known as the garland of words that
accomplishes all acts.
2-6. One gets victory in battle always by oblations, repeti¬
tions and reading of this formula. One has to contemplate (on
the goddess) as having twenty-eight hands holding the sword,
club, mace, stick, bow, arrow, clenched fist, .hammer, conch,
sword, banner, club, disc, axe, little drum, mirror, spear, dart,
plough, mace, nose, an iron club, large drum, panava (a kind of
musical instrument), conferring pose, clenched fist, threatening
posture, killing the (demon in the form of a) buffalo in the pairs
of hands. By making oblations one would conquer the enemies.
1. From Brahm&^i to G4mu9d& ^ die eight divine mothers.

Agni Purd^
The (above) oblations should be done with three sweet
things (honey sugar and clarified butter). This incantation
should not be disclosed to everyone.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX
The diagram of asterisms indicating the period for undertaking a
journey
The Lord said :
1-6. I shall describe the diagram indicating good or bad
results in journey undertaken. A diagram consisting of three
columns should be drawn and (the asterisms) Asvini etc. should
be represented therein (by their first letters). (The asterisms)
Asvini, Ardra, Purva (phalguni), Uttaraphalguni, Hasta, Jyestha, Mula, Varuna (Satabhisak) and Ajaikapat (Purvabhadrapada) consist of first column. (The asterisms) Yamya
(BharanI), Mrgasira, Pusya, Bhagya (Purvaphalguni), Gitra,
Maitra (Anuradha), Apya (Purvasadha), Vasava (Jyestha)
and Ahirbudhnya (Uttarabhadrapada) (are located in the
second column). (The asterisms) Krttika, Rohini, Ahih (Aslesa)
Citra, Svati, Visakha, Sravana and Revati are located in the
third (column). One should know the good or bad results from
the asterisms associated with ' three columns. This is known
as the diagram of phaniSvara (lord of serpents) divided into
three columns. The presence in Sun, Mars, Saturn and Rahu
(the ascending node) indicate bad luck and the rest good luck.
The position is the same, such as the country or village, the
brothers and wife indicate good. The twentyseven asterisms
should be known as (represented by letters) a, bha, kjr, ro^
mr, d, pUy pUy d, may pu, m, hay ci, svd, vi, a,jyey mu, pU, u, Sra, dha,
la, pu, u and re.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN
Description of the formula known as Mahdm&ri
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the formula known as Mahamari (that
which brings death) that routs the enemies. Orh hrim Maha¬
mari ! One having red eyes ! One having black complexion !
O One who commands the god of death ! One who destroys
all beings ! Kill such and such a person. Kill. Om burn, hum.
Om cook, cook. Om pierce, pierce. Om kill, kill. Om annihilate,
annihilate. Om one who charms all good (beings) ! One who
grants all desires ! Hum phap oblations. Om Mari ! Obeisance
to the heart. Om MahSmdrl ! Oblations to the head. Om Dread¬
ful night (at the time of deluge) ! Vausap to the tuft. Om
possessing black complexion ! Khah to the armour hum. Om
one having starry eyes ! One having the tongue-like lightning !
One who frightens all beings ! Protect, protect in all my under¬
takings. Hrdm. To the three-eyed va^at, Om Mahamari ! One
who controls all beings ! Mahakali ! To the weapons hum
phap. O Great goddess 1 This is the rite of location to be per¬
formed by the votary.
2-3. After having collected from the dead body, the cloth
of the shape of a square of three cubit’s length, one should draw
(the image of the goddess) of black complexion, having three
faces and four hands, (and draw) on the cloth with different
colours, (the weapons) bow, spear, scissor, staff with skull at its
top and the eastern face having black colour.
4-6. By the fall of the sight (of this face) it would devour
the man in front. The second (face) on the south (is) redred-tongued, frightening, licking, dreadful and frightful with pro¬
truded lips through which a row of horrid teeth are visible. A
look at this (face) is sure to devour the horses etc. (of the enemies).
The third face of the goddess is of white colour and is the des¬
troyer of the elephant etc. The western face (of the goddess)
should be propitiated with incense, flower, honey and clarified
butter etc.
7, By the remembrance of this sacred syllable the diseases
of the eye, head and others (limbs) get destroyed. Tht yahoos

402 Agni Purina
(semi-divine beings) and demons come under one’s control.
The enemies get destroyed.
8. There is no doubt that by oblation made with the twigs
of margosa tree mixed with the blood of a she-goat, the angry
votary would kill (his enemies).
9. If the oblation is done for seven days in front of the army
of the enemy, the army would be afflicted with diseases and the
enemies get routed.
10. In whose name eight thousand oblations are made with
(the same) twigs, he would die even if protected by Brahma.
1 1 . (If oblations arc made) for three days with the twigs of
unmatta (a kind of plant) with blood and poison for thousand
times, the enemy would get destioycd together with his army.
12. One would rout the enemy by doing oblations of black
mustard and salt for three days. The oblations made with the
addition of the blood of an ass would make the enemy fly away.
13. The oblation made with the addition of the blood of a
crow would cause annihilation of the enemy. Whatever
(the votary) does as he wished for the destruction (of the enemy)
(should be completed with an oblation performed with the same
material).
14-18. Then at the time of battle the votary should
ride an elephant accompanied by a couple of girls, his body
having been sanctified by sacred syllables. He should then charm
the musical instruments like the conch etc. at some distance
(from the enemy) and should cut (the enemy forces) at the
battle-field holding the cloth containing the figure of Mahamaya. He should show that great cloth against the army of the
enemy. The girls should be fed therein and the lump (of food ? )
should be carried round. The votary should then think that the
army has become immobile like a stone, crest-fallen, broken and
confused. This paralysing (formula) has been uttered by me.
It should not be disclosed to everyone. The cloth described
above (may also have the outlines of) Durga, Bhairavl, Kubjika,
(different forms of the consort of l§iva), Rudra and
Narasimha (man-lion) manifestation ofVi^nu) besides those of
(Maha) maya that conquers the three worlds.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT
The six accessory acts relating to all mantras
The Lord said ;
1-5. I shall describe six acts (to be used) in all
sacred syllables. Listen (to me). The sddhya (to be accomplished)should be written first being followed by the sacred syl¬
lable. This is known as the pallava (bud) and should be used in
all incantations. First the sacred syllable (is written), then the
sddhya and then the sacred syllable. This is known as the yoga
(combination). This should be employed for the utsddana (ex¬
tinction) of one’s race. The sacred syllable is written first and the
sddhya is added at the middle and again the sacred syllable
at the end. This tradition is (known as) the rodhaka (that which
arrests) and should be employed in stambhana (stupefying the
faculties of the enemy). The sddhya should be added at the
bottom and top, left, right and middle. This is known as the
samputa (casket) and should be employed in va.{ya (subjugation)
and dkarsa (attraction).
6. When the letters composing any particular sacred syllable
are of the category of sddhyd'X^tiG^rs, that sacred syllable is known
to be the first class. It is capable of attracting and subjugating
(another person).
7. Two of the letters constituting the sacred syllable are
written first and one sddhya letter afterwards. This is known to
be the vidarbha and should be made use of in attraction and sub¬
jugation.
8-10. The acts of dkarfana etc. as also (in subduing) high
fever should be performed only in the spring. The term svdhd
(oblations) is auspicious in attraction and su^ugation. The
term namaskdra (obeisance) should be employed for peace and
prosperity. The term vasal (should be made use of) for good
health and in acts of attraction and subjugation. (The term)
would be (used) for creating dissension, causing death and
to break an auspicious one. The term va^al gives accomplish¬
ment in gains and initiation in sacred syllables.
11. You are Yama (god of death). You are the sovereign
over the dead (Yamaraja). You are of the form of time. Yoa

404 Agni Purdi^a
are the reign of righteousness. You quickly make dead this enemy
offered by me.
12. The priest, who is the destroyer of the enemy, should
say with pleased mind, “O Votary ! Be calm ! I shall kill
(him) with (all my) efforts.”
13-14. This gets accomplished after worshipping the god
of death in white lotus and making oblations contemplating
himself as Bhairava and Kule^vari (as remaining) at the centre.
(The votary) would know in the night the result (of the incan¬
tation) on himself and the person (concerned). One would
become the killer of his enemy by propitiating the (goddess)
Durga with the formula “O (goddess) Durga ! Durga ! You
are the guardian !” One should kill the enemy by the
repetition of letters ‘‘Aa, sa, ksa, ma, la, va, ra andj>>a” sacred to
(the goddess) Bhairavl.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE
The names of sixty years of Hindu cycle and the good or bad
results from them
The lord said :
1. Listen ! I shall describe the names of sixty years
and the good or bad results from them. Sacrificial rites (would
be done) in Prabhava. The people would be comfortable in
Vibhava.
2. All grains (grow well) in Sukla. (People) rejoice in
Pramoda {Pramodat). There would be increase (of articles of
Comforts) in Prajdpati (Prajotpatti) . (The year) Ahgird (Ahgirasa) would increase comforts.
3. The people (population) increase in Srimukha. Thou¬
ghts flourish well in Bhdva (Bhava). (In the year) Yuva the life
essence gets filled up. Dhdtd makes the herbs sprout well.
4. livara (gives) welfare and health. Bahuddna gives pros¬
perity. In Pramdtkl (there would be) moderate rains. There
would be plenty of grains in Vikrama.
5. Vrfa {Vifu) makes all things thrive. CitrabhSnu sees many

wonderful events. Svarbhdnu (gives) prosperity and health.
The clouds are favourable in Tirana.
6. (There would be) abundance of rains in Pdrthiva. Jaya
(Vtjaya) (indicates) excessive rains. Sarvajit (indicates) good
showers. Sarvadhatrl gives prosperity.
7. Virodhi destroys clouds. ( Vikrti) causes panic. Men
become chivalrous in Khara. The people rejoice in Nandana.
8-9. Vijaya kills enemies. {Jaya) annihilates enemies
and diseases. People suffer from fever in Manmatha. People
become wicked in the cruel Durmukha. There will not be pros¬
perity in Hemalamba. O great goddess ! the year Vilamba gives
prosperity.
10. Vikdri causes the wrath of enemies. O Victorious
one ! (The year) Sarvadd {Sdrvarl) gives comforts to all.
Water inundates (the earth) in Plava. O Good-natured one !
The people do auspicious things in iSubhakft^.
11. The people (become) cruel in In Anala {Nala)
(there would be plenty of) different kinds of grains. (There
would be) good showers in Pingala and destruction of wealth in
Kdlayukti.
12. All things are accomplished in Siddhdrtha {Siddhdrthi),
Dreadful events take place in Raudr a (Raudri). (There would be)
moderate rains in Durmati. Dundubhi causes welfare and (plenty
of) grains.
13. It rains well in Rudhirodgdri. Raktdksa and Krodhana
(give) victory. InK^aya {Akfaya) people get reduced to poverty.
These are the sixty years.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY
Description of herbs used in charms
The Lord said :
1-3. I shall describe (drugs) used in charms. These
should be written in eight squares. They are bhiAgardja^ sahal. The text then omits the names of 12 years and continues from
Rdkfosa, the 49th year.

Agni Purdoa
deoii mayUraiikhdy putraHjivay kftSfijali, adhahpufpS, rudantikdy
kumdriy rudrajafdy visnukrdntdy white arkay lajjdlukdy mohalatiy black
dhattura, gorak^dy karkati, mesairdgi and snuhi.
4-5. The symbolical numbers of herbs are ftvijaf} (priests)
{\^) y vahnayah (fires) {3)yndgdh (elephants) (8)ypaksau (wings)
(2), muni (sage) (3), Manu (14), ^iva (11), vasavah (vasus)
(8) dik (directions) (10), rasd/i (tastes) (6), veddh (4), grahdk
(planets) (9), rtavah (seasons) (6), Ravi (Sun) (12), Candramdh (Moon) (1) and tithayah (phases of the Moon) (15). The
first four (of the above-said herbs) should be used to
fumigate (the body of the votary) or in the burning sticks.
6. Gollyrium should be made out of the third (in the list).
Bathing should be done with the fourth. The unguent of four
kinds should be made with the bhrngardja and the one following
it (in the list).
7-8. (The herbs represented symbolically by) muni in the
list should be used in unguent for the right side, hy yuga for the
left side, by bhujaga for the foot and iivara for the head. Fumiga¬
tion of the centre should be done with arka (12) and Saii (1),
in all acts. A body besmeared with these would be worshipped
even by the celestials.
9. Incense sticks made of the sixteenth (herb in the list)
should be burnt and taken round the house. (The herbs stand¬
ing as) the fourth should be used in the collyrium and those
(standing as) the fifth should be used in bathing.
10. (The herbs denoted by the number) eleven should be
used for eating and fifteen for drinking. A mark on the forehead
with (the herbs denoted by the numbers) yt^ik (16), veda (4),
rtu (6), nayana (2) captivates the world.
11. A lady being besmeared with (the herbs denoted by)
surya (12), tridaSa {\Z)ypak5a (2) and Saila (7) gets captivated.
Women get captivated by besmearing their genital organ with
(herbs denoted by) candra (1 ), Indra{\) y pha^i (8) and rudra (1 1 )•
12. A pill made of (herbs denoted by) tithi (15), dik
(8), yuga (4), and bd^a (5) can subjugate. This pill should be
given in eatables, food and drink as a charm.
13. (The herbs denoted by) r^vik (16), graka (9), akfi (2)
and Saila (7) if had on the face (are effective) in paralysing
weapons. One can remain in waters by besmearing limbs

with (the herbs denoted by) Saila (7) Iridra (1), veda (4) and
randhra (9).
14. A pill of (the herbs denoted by) h&t^a (5), aksi (2),
mam (14) and rudra (11) removes himger and thirst. A miser¬
able woman would be made happy by besmearing with (herbs
denoted by) tri (3), (16), rftA (8) and bdi^a (5).
15. One would (be able to) play with serpents by besmear¬
ing with (herbs denoted by) tri (3), daSa (10), dcfi (2), dik (8)
and netra (2). A woman delivers a child comfortably by an
application of the unguent of (the herbs represented by) tri
16. One is sure to win in dice (by wearing) a cloth bes¬
meared with (the herbs represented by) sapta (7)^ dik (8), muni
(3) axidrtmdkra (9). Male child (would be born) by besmearing
the penis with (the herbs denoted by) tri (3), da$a (10), ak^a
(2), abdhi (7) and muni (3) before coition.
17. A pill made (of the herbs represented by) graha (9),
abdhi (7), sarpya (8), tri (3) and daja (10) would be able to
charm. The efficacy of the herbs in the sixteen places has been
explained.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYONE
Description of herbs used in charms^ medicines etc.
The Lord said ;
1. I shall describe the effect of the herbs arranged in 36
squares which were used by lords Brahma, Rudra and Indra
and which if used make men immortals.
2-5. (They are) — haritakiy akfiy dhdtriy marica, pippalU Hlphdy
vahni, hi^fhiy pippaliy gudUcly vac&y nimboy vdsaka, SatamUliy saindhavoy sindhu-vdrakay kaiffakdriy gokfurakS, bilvoy paunarmvdy baldy
erandamundi, rmakuy bhftiga, kfdray parpapiy dhanydkay jirakuy
Satapufpiy javdnikdy vidaAgOy khadirUy kftamdlay haridrdy ^od
siddhdrtha located in the 36 squares.

Agni Pur&na
6-10. The herbs duly counted from one and placed in all
squares are highly efficacious in curing ailments, Imakin^
(men) immortal and cure wrinkles and baldness. Their crushed
powder compounded and treated with mercury and used as an
electuary with pieces of jaggery, honey or ghee or as an astrin¬
gent or through the medium of ghee or oil taken by all would
save their lives. One can take half a karsd^ or one kar$a or half
a pala^ or one pala and may live for 300 years although he may
be pursuing an indisciplined way of life. There is no other com¬
bination more (efficacious) than this remedy reviving the dead.
1 1 . One gets free from all diseases by the combination of
the first nine (herbs). One gets free from aches by (the use of)
second, third and fourth (herbs).
12. So also (one gets free from all diseases by the use of)
six herbs from first to sixth as well as ninth.
13. One gets free from wind (affecting the body) by (the
use of herbs) one to eight and from biles by agni (third)
'bhdskara (twelfth), twenty-sixth and twenty-seventh.
14. One gets cured of (deranged) phlegm by (the use of
herbs) (fifth), (sixth), iaila (seventh) va^u (eighth)
and tithi (fifteenth). (Herbs denoted by) veda (four), agni
(three), bdna (five) and six would be (efficacions) against
(diseases caused by) charm.
15. One would get freed from (all afflictions due to)
planets and being possessed (by goblins) by (the due use of
herbs denoted by) one, two, three, six, seven, eight, nine and
eleven.
16. There is no doubt that (they would also be cured by
herbs denoted) by thirty-two, fifteen and twelve. This knowl¬
edge relating to thirty-six places should not be imparted to
everyone.
1. One koTfa is equal to 16 md/At where stands for the weight of a
kind of grain.
2. One pala is equal to 4 karfos.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO
Description of medicinal incantations
The Lord said :
1-2. I shall describe the medicinal incantations and dia¬
grams which yield all (desires). The number of letters
composing the name of a thief should be doubled (and added
to) the number of its syllables multiplied by four. (The total
thus obtained) should be divided by (the number of letters in)
the name (of a person) and if there be any remainder (he should
be reckoned as) a thief. I shall describe (the process of reckon¬
ing) the birth (of a child). If there are odd numbers of letters
in the question (put to the soothsayer), it indicates that the child
in the womb would be a male.
3-4. (The child would be born) blind in the left eye if the
letters in the name are even and in the right eye if the letters are
odd. The number of letters composing the names of both the
male and female should be multiplied by the number of their
syllables and divided by four. (The quotient), if even, (would
indicate the birth of) a female child and if odd, a male child.
If there is no remainder, (it indicates) the death of the woman,
5. If there is no remainder in the former, (it indicates)
the death of the husband first. In hoary science one should take
the subtle aksara in all divisions.
6-7. I shall describe the diagram of Saturn. One should
avoid the aspect of that (Saturn) (at all times). (The Saturn
in) its house has one hundred and fourteen (units) aspect at the
seventh. It has one-fourth its aspect in the first, second, eighth
and twelfth (places). One should avoid them. The lord of the
day governs one eighth part of a day. The others govern half a
ySma (three hours).
8- 10a. One should avoid the period of Saturn during
the battle. I shall describe the rule of Rahu (the ascending
node) on a day. It (lies) always at the east on Sunday, at south¬
east on Saturday, at the south on Thursday, at the north-west
on Friday, at the south-east on Tuesday, and at the north on
Wednesday, while the PhanirShu lies enclosing at the north¬
east, south-east, south-west and north-west and kills one who
sets on a journey against it.

Agni Purd^a
10b.-13. I shall describe the position of Rahu on different
days of a month. Rahu kills the enemy facing it on the
full moon day at the south-east and on new moon day at the
north-west. Rahu will lie facing on the days represented by (the
letters) ka to ja and, in the south on (the days of) sa to da, in
the east on (the days of) dha to ma and in the north on (the days
of) ya to ha and one should avoid those associated with Mars
in the bright (fortnight). Three lines towards the east and three
lines towards the south (should be written) and then one should
write from SuryaraSi onwards in the main division. (If battle is
made) in the rSJi aspected by Rahu there will be defeat and
victory if otherwise.
14-1 8a. 1 shall describe the viffirdhu. Eight lines should be
drawn. The Rahu, the great, moves with the viffi (hell) from
the north-east to the south, south to the north-west, from the
north-west to the east, from the east to the west, from the south¬
west to the north, from the north to the south-east and then to
the west and from the west to the north-east. The Rahu kills
the enemies on the third day (of a lunar month) in the north¬
east, on the seventh day in the south and so also in the dark and
bright fortnights in the north-west. (One has to propitiate),
Indra and others, Bhairava and others, brahmin and others and
planets numbering eight in each class in the cast and other
(directions) and the vdta-yogini (the presiding goddess) in (the
directions) south and others. One should kill the enemy in that
direction in which the wind blows.
18b- 19. I shall describe (the rite) that strengthens one.
(The herb known as) SarapuAkhikd. if worn on the neck, arm etc.
on (a day ruled by the asterism) Pusya would prevent the
(enemy’s weapon) striking at the neck. Apardjitd and Pdfhd,
the two (herbs) in the same manner would ward off the sword.
(The following is the mantra to be used) : — Om. Obeisance.
Goddess Vajrafrhkhal^ ! Kill. Kill. Om. Devour. Devour.
Om. Eat. Am. Eh. Drink the blood with the skull O Red¬
eyed one ! One having the red cloth ! One having the body
besmeared with ashes ! One wielding the weapon of mace !
One who is covered by the action of the mace ! Close, close the
eastern direction. Om. Close, close the southern direction. Om,
Close, close the western direction. Om. Close, close^he northern

direction. Bind, bind the serpents. Bind, bind the wives of the
serpents. Om. Bind, bind the demons. Om. Bind, bind the
Yaksas, demons and goblins. Om. Guard, guard (me) from
the dead, goblins and Gandharvas, whoever troubles me. Om,
Guard, guard above. Om. Guard, guard below. Om. Bind, bind
the knife. Om. Burn. One of great strength ! Ghaji ghafot: Om
Mofimofi safdvali. Fiery mace ! One who strikes with the mace I
Him phat hrim hrUm Srim phat hrim hah phUm phem phaU. Yvom all
planets, from all diseases from all wicked afflictions, hrim from all
things guard, guard me. One should employ this in all acts
such as those relating to the planets, fevers and goblins.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE
Mode of worship of Goddess Kubjikd
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the mode of worship of (goddess) Kubjika that accomplishes all comforts. (It is only by such worship)
the celestials had conquered the demons together with their
weapons and kingdom.
2-3. One should locate th.Qmdydhija (the secret basic mantra
of the goddess) at the secret organ and the six (syllables) of the
weapons on the hand. (One should say) Kali, Kali (and touch)
the heart and Dus^acandalika (vicious Gandalika) (and touch)
the head, “//rtm sphem ha sa kha ka cha ia syllable om Bhairava**
(is the mantra to be said to touch) the tuft. Bhelak! ( for ) the
kaoaca (armour) and Duti and Raktacandika (for) the eyes.
4-5. (Then one should say) guhya Kubjika (and touch)
the weapon. One should worship (goddess Kubjika) in the
lotus at the centre and the seat at the south-east, the head at the
north-east, the tuft at the south-west, the armour at the west, the
eyes at the centre and the weapons in all directions of the
circle in the thirty-two petals. The principal mantra (for the
goddess Kubjika is) Aa, ja, k§a^ ma^ la^ na, va, vofa^.**
6. (The eight goddesses) Brahm^ni, Mahe^I, Kauman,

412 Agni Purdna
Vaisnavi, Varahi, Mahendri, Camunda and Candika (should
be worshipped) in the directions east onwards. ,
7-8. One has to (locate and) worship (the subtle letters)
ra, va, la, ka, sa, and ha at the (petals at the) north-east, east,
south-east, south, south-west and west. A garland of flowers
and the five mountains such as Uddiyana, Jalandhara, Purnagiri
and Kamarupa should be worshipped at the north-west, north¬
east, south-east and south-west and (goddess) Kubjika at the
centre.
9-10. The five Vimalas such as Anadivimala, Sarvajnavimala, Prasiddhavimala, Sarhyogavimala and Samayavimala
(should be worshipped at the tips (of the petals) at the north¬
west, north-cast, south-west, south-east and north.
11-14. Khinkhini, $astha, Sopama, Susthira and Ratnasundari (should be worshipped) in the north-east corner for
(the worship of) Kubjika. The eight Adinatlias — Mitra, Odisa,
$asthi, Varsa etc. (constituting) the jewels of heaven (should
be worshipped) in the south-east, west and north-west and the
kavacaratna (the excellent mantras serving as armour) in the west.
(The syllable) ^brum!’ (should be worshipped) in the north-west,
north-east and south-east together with the five basic letters.
The five gems (the divine mothers) (should be located and
worshipped) at the south and south-east. Among these, the three,
Jyestha, Raudri and Antika are very old. They and other god¬
desses and others (should be worshipped) with the five prariavas
(syllable om). The worship is of two kinds — twentyseven and
twentyeight.
15-17. Then (the god) Ganapati (lord of the attendant
gods on Siva and son of the latter) of the form of pranava and a
boy should be worshipped duly with (the mantra om em gUm.
Ganapati should be worshipped in a square diagram on the
south. TheVatuka (form of Ganapati) (should be worshipped)
on the left. The sixteen preceptors — niJiA<w(tantrik preceptors)
and eighteen ndthas should be worshipped in the north-west
and other (directions). Then the gods Brahma and others
(should be worshipped) around in the six angular points. At the
centre the nine gods (should be worshipped). This is always
the mode of worship of (goddesses) Kubjika, Kula(4 etc.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR
Mode of worship of goddess Kubjikd
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the worship of glorious Kubjika who
grants righteousness, wealth and victory. One should worship
her together with her attendants with the basic mantra : Om aim
hraum irim khaim hrem ha, sa, ksa, ma, la, va, ra, ya, um Goddess !
Mother ! Hrdth hrlm ksrim, ksaurh ksum krirh Kubjika ! Hrim om
na, ha, na, r^a, ma Aghoramukhi ! Vdm chram chim kili kili k^raum
vicce khyom Mm krom om hrorh airfi Vajrakubjini ! Strirh Trailoky^-
karsini (One who subjugates the three worlds) ! Hrim Kamahgadravini (one who melts away the god of love) ! Hrirh strim
Mahaksobhakarini (the great agitator) ! Aim hrirh ksraum aiih
hrirh Mm pherh ksaum obeisance. O Goddess ! Ksaum Kubjika !
hrirh krairh ha, ha, na, na, ma Aghoramukhi ! Chrdm chdm vicce om
kili kili.
2-4a. After locating the mantras on the hand and the body,
one should perform the worship of twilight (addressed to the
goddesses) Varna, Jyesfha and Raudri, (The following is the
mantra) — May we know you as Kulavagl^i. Let me contemplate
on (the goddess) Mahakali. May (goddess) Kaull impel us to
the same. There are five mantras such as pranava etc. (The
votary should say) “I am worshipping the sandals.” The name
(should be) at the middle, ending with (the term) obeisance
with eighteen bija (letters). Then (the name of the goddess)
in the sixth (declensional) case with (the term) ‘obeisance’ and
the end. I shall describe all of them to be known.
4b-12. Kaulisanatha, Sukala, Kubjika from the birth,
Srikanjhanatha, KauleiSa, Gagananandanatha, Catuladevi, Maitri^I, Karali, Turnanathaka, Ataladevi, SricandradevI arc their
names. (These should be invoked) as stupefying the attendants
of Siva and the sandals should be worshipped. Then the sandal
endowed with gents that excel the bliss in the world should be
worshipped. Brahmajhana, Kamala and Parama together with
Vidya (should also be worshipped) . I shall describe the three¬
fold purifications of oitfyd (knowledge), Devi (goddess) and guru
(preceptor). By means of the fo4dnydsa (six ways of touching^

Agni Purdna
the body with mystical letters) the following deities should be
located in the body — Gagana, Gafuli, Atma, Padmananda,
Mani, Kala, Kamala, Manikyakantha, Gagana, Kumuda,
Sri, Padma, Bhairava, Ananda, Deva, Kamala, Siva, Bhava,
Krsna, the nine and then sixteen siddhas — Candrapaura, Gulma,
Subha, Kama, Atimuktaka, Viraktaka, Prayoga, Ku^ala,
Devabhoga, Visvedeva, Khadgadeva, Rudra, Asidhanya,
Mudraspho^a, Varhsapura and Bhoja.
13-14. After having put flowers on the circle, the circles
(of the deities) should be worshipped. Then one should worship
Ananta, Mahananta, sandals of Siva, mahdvydpti (the great
pervading force), the void circle consisting of five principles,
sandals of Srikanthanatha and Sankara and Ananta.
15. One should worship within the circle Sadasiva, Pingala,
Bhrgvananda, Nathaka, Rangulananda and Saihvarta.
16-18. Srfmahakala, Pinak!, Mahendraka, Khadg^> BhuJanga, Bana, Aghasi, Sabdaka, Vala, Ajfiarupa and Nandarupa should be worshipped in the south-west after making the
offering (victim) (with the following mantra) — Hrorh kharh khatfi
hum saum (obeisance) to (god) Vatuka. Aru aru (you) accept,
■accept argha (water offered as token of respect), flower, incense,
lamp, perfumes and halt (offering). Obeisance to you. Orh
hrdrh hrirh hrurfi kfem (obeisance) to the guardian of the ground.
(You) descend, descend. One bearing the great grown matted
hair ! One having a face shining with the flames in the three
eyes ! (You) come. Come. Accept, accept worship with
perfumes, flowers and bali (offering). Kkah, khafi, orh kahy orh
lab om oblations to the lord of great ddmara (uproar). The
trikUfa (the three groups) should be worshipped with (the
syllables) hrirh hrUrh hath irim and the offering of the remnant of
bali in the left, right and middle. The sandals of Niianatha
(are worshipped) in the south, Tandrinatha on the right and
Kalanala in the front.
19-24. The mountains Uddiyapa, Jalandhara, Purpa and
K^arupa and the five gems Gagananandadeva, Svargananda,
Paramanandadeva, the sandals of Satyananda and Nagananda
(should be worshipp>ed) in the north. One should worsliip the
aix — the sandal of Suranatha (Indra), Sr!samayakot!ia, Vidyako(Iivara, Kojlia, Bindukotfifa and Siddhako{;isvara iifthe north-

east. The siddhacatufka (four siddhas) — ^Amariielvar'a, CakriSanatha, Kurahge^a, Vftresa and Gandranathaka should be
worshipped in the south-east with perfumes etc. The Vimala*
pahcaka (five Vimalas) — ^Anadivimala, Sarvajftavimala, YogiiSavimala, Siddha (vimala) and Samaya (vimala) (should be
worshipped) in the south.
25. One should worship the four gods Kandarpanatha
and others, all the female energies already described and the
sandals of (goddess) Kubjika.
26. (The votary) should always worship the thousand-eyed
and blemishless (god) Visnu and (god) iSiva with the mantra
of nine syllables or five pramva {mantras).
27-37. Brahma and other gods (should be worshipped)
from the east to the north-east, (The goddesses) Brahman!,
Mahesvari, Kaurnari, Vaisnavi, Varahi, Indran!, Gamunda
and Mahalaksrni should be worshipped from the east to the
north-east. (The goddesses) Dakini, Rakini, Kakini, Sakini
and Yakini should be worshipped in the six directions (commenc¬
ing) from the north-west. The goddess composed of thirtytwo letters should be worshipped with five pranavas or syllable
hrim. She should be contemplated upon as of dark complexion
like the petals of blue lotus, having six faces, of six kinds, as
eighteen kinds of cicchakti (faculties of the mind), possessing
twelve arms, seated comfortably on the throne, remaining on
the lotus of absolute dead (of primordial matter), and shining
with the splendour of multitudes of kulas. She should also be
contemplated as having Karkotaka (one of the eight princi¬
pal cobras) as the girdle, Taksaka (a cobra) above, Vasuki (a
cobra) as a garland on the neck, Kulika (a cobra) on the ears,
the tortoise as the ear-stud, (the serpents) Padma and Mahapadma forming the eye-brows, and having skull, a serpent,
rosary, a club with a skull at the top, a conch and a look in her
left (hand) and a trident, a mirror, a sword, a garland of gems,
dart and a bow in the right (hand). The upper front face of the
goddess (should be contemplated) as having a white complexion
and elevated, the eastern face pale, the southern one angry, the
western face of black colour, and the northern one of the colour
of snow and jasmine. Moreover, Brahm^ (should be imagined
to be) as remaining at the foot, Visiiu at the buttocks, Rudraat

Agni Purina
the heart, I^vara at the neck, Sada^iva at the forehead, Siva as
remaining above her. Kubjika should thus be contemplated as
whirling in all acts of worship.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE
Different kinds of mantras and the rites of locating them
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe different kinds of mantras preceded by
soihdnyasa (the six ways of touching the body with the mantras).
There are three kinds of sodhanydsa — the Sdkta, Sdmhhava and
ydmala devoted to the goddess, lord Siva and both).
2-3. In the Mmbhava (rite), the six terms would have six¬
teen knots. The three kinds of knowables are related to the
nydsa of this kind. It connotes the principles. The fourth (nydsa)
is of the vanamdld of twelve Slokas (letters). The fifth {nydsa) (is
known as) xhR Ratnapahcdtmd (comprising the five gems) and the
sixth one is said to be the Navdtmd (comprising nine).
4-17. In the case of Sdkta (nydsa), (the first one is) Malini
(nydsa) the second one (is) trividyd, the next one (third is the
nydsa of) the eight aghoris. The fourth one (is on) the twelve parts
(of the body). The fifth one is (of) six parts. (The sixth one) is
of the astracaniikd of the form of iakti (goddess). Krirh hraum
klirh Srirh krum phaf (are the mantras in the above) three, known
as the fourth accomplishing everything. The mdlini would be
from na to pha. The nddini is'known to be the tuft. The agrasani
would be on the head. (The letter) ia (should be) like a garland
around the head. (The letter) /a (representing) peace be (on)
the head. (Goddess) Camunda (be) on the three eyes. (The
letter) (denoting) pleasing look (should be) on the two eyes.
(The goddess) Guhya^aktini (should be) on the nostrils. (The
letter) na (standing for) (goddess) Narayani (should be) on the
two ears. (The letter) ta that stupefied (should be) on the right
ear. (The letter) ja (representing) wisdom (should) remain
on the left ear. (Goddess) Vajrini is known to be on the face.
(The letter) ka (representing) (the goddess) Karal! -(of horrible

features) (should be on) the right tooth. (The letter) kha (re¬
presenting) (the goddess) Kapalini (bedecked with human
skulls) (should be on) the left shoulder. (The letter) ga (re¬
presenting the goddess) l§iva be (on) the upper tooth. (The
letter) gha (representing the goddess) Ghora (should be on the
left tooth. (The letter) u (denoting the goddess) Sikha has her
place on the tooth. (The letter) i (representing the goddess)
Maya is represented by the tongue. (The letter) a should
be (located) as (the goddess) Nagesvari in the words.
(The letter) va (representing the goddess) Sikhivahini (having
peacock as the vehicle) (is located) in the throat. (The letter)
bha (representing the goddess) Bhisani (frightening) (is located)
on the right shoulder. The letter ma (representing the goddess)
Vayuvega (swift as the wind) (should be loeated) on the left
(shoulder). (The letter) (denoting) Namd (should be loca¬
ted) in the right arm, (The letter) (//to (representing the goddess)
Vinayaka (remover of obstacles) on the left arm. (The letter)
pa (denoting) Purnima (the full moon) (be located) on the two
hands. The syllable om etc. should be (located) on the ring
fingers. (The letter) am (be represented by) Darsani (one who
exhibits) on the finger of the left (hand). (The letter) ah be
(located) on the hand (representing) Sanjivani (the vitalising
force). (The letter) fa (be located on) the skull (representing)
Kapalini (the goddess wearing garland of skulls). (The letter)
ta (representing) Dipani (the goddess who illuminates) (be
located) on the staff of the spear. (The letter) ca (representing)
Jayanti (the goddess who is victorious) be (located) on the tri¬
dent. (The letter) ya is remembered to be Sadhani (one who
accomplishes) (as representing) the process of growth. (The
letter) sa known to be Parama (the Supreme goddess) be (lo¬
cated) in the soul. (The letter) ha remembered to be (repre¬
senting) Ambika (the mother goddess) be (located) in the vital
principle of life. (The letter) cha (representing) Sarira (the
goddess with a visible body) (be located) on the right breast.
(The letter) na (representing) Putana (the demoness) (be
located) on the left breast. (The letter) za (be looked upon as
permeating) the breast milk. (The letter) a (representing) the
crushing Lambodari (the big-bellied goddess) (be located) in
the belly. (The letter) kfa representing Samharika (the goddess
of destruction) may be (located) on the navel. Mahakali (the

Agni Purina
most ferocious goddess) (be located) at the buttocks. (The
letter) sa representing) Kusumamala (the goddess v?earing
garland of flowers) (be located) in the arms. (The letter) fa
(representing) Sukradevika (the goddess of fertility (be located)
in the semen. (The letter) ta (representing) Tara may be
(located) on the two thighs. (The letter) da (signifying) Jfiana
(the goddess of knowledge) (be located) on the right knee.
(The letter) au (representing) u Kriyasakti (the energy of acti¬
vity) may be (located) in the left (knee). The letter ro (deno¬
ting) Gayatri (the personification of the mantra of that name)
be located in the groins. (The letter) o (representing goddess)
Savitri (be located) on the left groin. (The letter) do (repre¬
senting) (goddess) Dohini (be located) on the right (groin).
18-31. (The letter) pha (representing the goddess) Phetkari (should be located) at the left foot. I shall describe the rite
relating) to the Aldl ini-mantra of nine parts. (It is as follows).
(The letter) a (denoting the god) Srikantha be (located) on the
tuft. (The letter) d (representing the god) Ananta be (located)
on the face. (The letter) i (standing for the god) Suksma be
(located) on the right eye. (The letter) i (signifying the lord)
Trimurti (of three forms) (be located) at the left (eye). (The
letter) u (representing) Amarisa (the lord of celestials)
(be located) at the right ear. (The letter ) u representing
Ardharasaka^ (one who has assumed half of the divine form)
(be located ) at the other ear (left ear) . (The letter) r (denoting)
Bhavabhuti (the lord of ensuing fortune) (be located) at the
tip of the nose. (The letter) r (denoting) Tithisa (the lord of
the day) (be located) on the left nostril. (The letter) 1 (repre¬
senting) Sthanu (of the form of a pillar) should be (located)
at the right cheek. (The letter) i (signifying lord) Hara (should
be located) at the left cheek. (The letter) o (standing for)
Katlsa (be located) at the rows of teeth. (The letter) ai (re¬
presenting) Bhuti^a (the lord of fortunes) (should be located)
at the upper (row of) teeth. (The letter) o (denoting) Sadyojata (one of the five forms of Siva) (should be located) on the
lower lip. (The letter) au (standing for) Anugrahila (one who
confers blessing) (should be located) at the upper lips. (The
1 . This may denote one half of either the combined fJarwfL of Siva and
Vif^u. or that of Siva and his consort.

letter) am (denoting) Krura (the cruel one) be (located) at
the back of the neck. (The letter) ah (signifying) Mahasena
(the lord of huge army) (be located) in the tongue. (The
letters) ka, kha, ga, gha, na, ca, cha,ja^jka, ha, fa, fha, ^a, 4ha, na,
ta, tha, da, dha, na, pa, pha, ha, bha, ma, ya, ra, la, va, ia, fa, sa, ha
and ksa respectively denoting Krodkiia (lord of wrath) , Candisa
(consort of Candi), Paficantaka (the destroyer of the five
elements), Sikhi (tufted), EkapMa (onefooted), Kurmaka
(manifest as the tortoise), Ekanetra (one-eyed), Gaturvaktra
(having four faces), Rajasa (possessing the quality of rajas —
passion) Sarvakamada (one who confers all desires), Somesa (lord of moon), Daksa (Able), Langali (wielder of
the plough), Daruka (lord of woods), Ardhajalesvara
(lord of half the watery region), Umakanta (consort
of Uma (Parvati)). Asad^i (holding a kind of wood), DandT
(holding a stick), Bhlda (one who breaks), Mina (of the form
of the fish), Mesa (of the form of the ram), Lohita (of red com¬
plexion), Sikhi (tufted), Galanda(?),Dvirandaka(?) Mahakala
(the great god of darkness at the time of deluge), Vanisa (the
god of speech), Bhujange^a (the lord of serpents), Pinaki (the
wielder of the bow pindka), Khadgeia (the lord of the sword),
Baka, Sveta (iSiva’s manifestation as the sage), Bhrgu (a sage),
Nakulisa (a manifestation of Siva) and Saihvarta (lord of
destruction). (may be respectively) (located) on the right shoul¬
der, arms, elbow, right wrist, fingers, left shoulder, arms, elbow,
wrist, fingers, buttocks, right thigh, right knee, leg from the
ankle to the knee, fingers, buttocks, left thigh, left knee, left leg
from the ankle to the knee, toes, right belly, left belly, the back
bone, navel, heart, memory, blood, flesh, one’s own self (soul),
bones, marrow, semen, life force and sheaths (of human
organism) . One would get all things by the worship of the energy
of Rudra with the syllable hrlm.

Agni Purdna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX
Names of different goddesses
"The lord said :
I. I shall describe the three parts (of mantras) relating to
(the gods) Brahma, Visnu and Maheivara. Om obeisance to
the lord Rudra. Obeisance. Obeisance to Gamunda. Obei¬
sance to the (divine) mothers in the ethereal region who accom¬
plish all the desired materials, who have unobstructed move¬
ment everywhere, who transform their forms, who are engaged
in doing all deeds of sattva, vaiikarana, utsadana and unmulana
(pacification, attraction, destruction and eradication) . The secret
{mantra) of all the divine mothers, the most accomplished one
which nullifies the incantations of others and accomplishes the
supreme (thing) ! (The following) one hundred and twentyone (terms) are in the section of Brahma. They are as follows :
Om obeisance. Gamunda (a terrific form of Durga) ! Brah¬
man! (consort of Brahma) ! Aghora (not terrific) ! Amogha
(infallible) ! Varada (conferer of boons) ! Vicca (one who
shines) ! Oblations. Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! Mahesvarl (consort of Lord Siva) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada !
Vicca ! Oblations. Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! (one
having a maiden-form ) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca !
Oblations. Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! Vaisnavi (relating
to Visnu) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca ! Oblations.
Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! Varahi (the sakti of Visnu in the
form of the boar) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca !
Oblations. Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! Indrani (the
consort of Indra) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada ! Vicca ! Ob¬
lations. Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! Gandi ! (name of
Durga) ! Aghora ! Amoglia ! Varada ! Vicca ! Oblations.
Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! Isani (related to the Isana form
of Siva) ! Aghora ! Amogha ! Varada) ! Vicca ! Oblations.
2. The second part relating to Visnu has equal number of
terms (as follows). Om obeisance. O Gamunda ! One who
lias erect hairs (on the head ) ! One who has flames on her
head ! One whose tongue is like lightning ! One whose eyes
are sparkling like stars ! One who has tawny brows ! One
who has uneven teeth ! The Angry one ! Om, One who is fond

of flesh, blood, wine and spirituous liquor ! (You) laugh, laugh.
Om dance, dance. Om yawn, yawn. Om bind, bind, Om to all
those thousands of sorceres who change the form of three
worlds by their incantations ! Om thrash, thrash. Om ciri ciri,
Om hiri hiri. Om bhiri bhiri. One who frightens and frightens.
One who whirls round and whirls round. One who makes
(something else) melt and melt. One who agitates and agitates.
One who kills and kills. One who revives and revives. Heri
heri geri geri gheri gheri om muri muri om obeisance to the mothers.
Obeisance. Obeisance. Vicca. (There are) thirtyone terms for
Sambhu (iSiva) and the syllables (are) one hundred and seventyone.
3-21. One should repeat trikhan^i {mantra) {mantra of
three parts) (with the syllables) he and ghaum preceded and
followed by the five pranavas {omkdras) and worship. The sacred
secret mantra he ghaum of (the goddess) Kubjika should be added
in between the terms. It should be in the middle of the three
akulddi, the three kulddi, the three madhyama and the pinda at the
foot. It must have one and a half vowels and pra^ava etc. (at
the) tuft of Siva. Om ksraurh obeisance to Sikhabhairava. Skhim
Skhim Skhem the three letters with the (basic) mantra.) . Hrdm
hrim hraim without the bija, the three waters and the supreme
thritytwo letters. The letters ksa, ka are the akula {mantras)
according to the order of Kula. (The goddesses of energy are)
Sa^ini (goddess in the moon), Bhanavi (the energy in the sun),
Pavani (the purifier), Siva, Gandhari (whose essence is the
letter) na, Pindaksi (of round eyes), Capala (fickle-minded),
Gajajihvika (tongue like that of an elephant). (The letter)
ma represents (the goddesses) Mfsa (untruth) and Bhayasara
(the essence of fear). (The letter) (represents) (goddesses)
Madhyama (the middle one), Ajara (without aging). (The
letter) na represents (goddesses) Kumar! (maiden), Kalaratr!
(dreadful night at the time of deluge). (The letters) da and dha
respectively represent (goddesses) Sahkata (diffiiculty) and
Kdlikd (of dark complexion). (The letter) pha (represents) Siva
(consort of Siva), r},a — Bhavaghora (the frightening god of the
cycle of existence), — Bibhatsa (disgusting one), to — ^Vidyuta
(the goddess in the form of the lightning), tha — ^Vilvambhara
(the sustainer of the universe). (The letter) dha (is the repre¬
sentation) of SamsinI (the goddess of doubt), JvalamMa (gju:-

Agni Purina
land of flames), Karali (ugliness), Durjaya (invincible), Rangi
(sportive), Varna (beautiful), Jyestha (the eldest) and Raudri
(terrible). (The letter) kha (represents) Kali (the goddess of
time), ka — Kulalambi (goddess regulating succession of events),
da — Anuloma (of descending order) and Pindini (regulating the
three primordial forces ) , a — ^Vedini (of the form of pain), i —
Santimurti (of the form of peace) and Kalakula (embodying the
arts), f — ^Khadgini (the sword-wiclding goddess), u — Balita
(strong), I — kula (belonging to the kula class), / — Subhaga
(fortunate), Vedana (pains), r — Karali (dreadful), arh —
Madhyama (middle one) and ah — ^Apetaraya (unimpetuous).
These goddesses of energy should be duly worshipped on the
altar. Skham skhim skhaum obeisance to the great Bhairava. (The
(goddesses) Aksodya (uncrushable ) , Aksakarni (eyes reaching
up to the* ear), Raksasi (demoness), Ksapanaksaya (indes¬
tructible), Pihgaksi (having tawny coloured eyes), Aksaya
(undecaying), Ksema (of the form of welfare), and Brahmani
(energy relating to Brahma) are the eight (belonging to the
group of Brahmani). (The goddesses) Ila (representing the
earth), rilavati (sportive), Nila (blue-coloured), Lanka, Lahke-
^vari, Lalasa (extreme desire), Vimala (spotless) constitute the
group of Mahesvari (relating to Siva). (The goddesses) Huta-
^ana (fire), Visalaksi (large-eyed), Hrunkari (of the form of
syllable hr urn) Vadavamukhi (having volkanic fires in the mouth)
Haharava (having wailing sound), Krura (cruel), Krodha
(angry), Bala (graceful) and Kharanana (having the face of
an ass) had their origin from’ the body of (the goddess )Kaumari
(virginity). (They are) accomplishers of all things when wor¬
shipped. (The goddesses) Sarvajna (omniscient), Tarala (tre¬
mulous), Tara (shining), Rgveda (the goddess of the Rgveda),
Hayahana (horse-faced), Sara (essence), Sarasvayarhgraha
(one who herself absorbs the essence) and Sasvati (eternal one)
(had their origin) in the family of (goddess) Vai^navi (rela¬
ting to Visnu). (The goddesses) Talujihva (of the form of a
crocodile), Raktak^i (red-eyed), Vidyujjihva (lightning like
tongue), Karankini (having the skull ) , Meghanada (sounding
like the cloud), Pracapdogra (terribly ferocious), KalakarnI
(representing misfortune) and Kalipriya (fond of strife) were
born of the family of (the goddess) Varahi (relating to the boar
form). They should be worshipped by those who ^eek victory.

(The goddesses) Campa, Campavati, Pracampa, Jvalitanana
(having darning face), Pisac! (of the form of a demoness),
Picuvaktra and Lolupa (ardently longing) are born of (the
goddess) Aindri (relating to Indra). (The goddesses) Pavani,
Yacani, Vamani, Damani, Binduvela, Brhatkuksi, Vidyutanana
Viivarupini born in the family of goddess Camunda should be
worshipped in the circle of victory. (The goddesses) Yamajihva (frightening tongue), Jayanti (victorious), Durjaya
(unconquerable), Yamantika (one who subdues the god of
death), Bidali (a female cat), Revatl, Jaya (victorious) and
Vijaya (victorious) were born in the class of (goddess) Mahalaksml. Thus the eight (goddesses) in the eight groups of (god¬
desses) have been explained.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN
Mode of worshipping the goddess Tvaritd and others
The Lord said :
1-2. Om Guhyakubjika (Goddess Kubjika of secret powers) !
Httm phap You destroy and destroy all my miseries and also
whatever incantations of the form oiyantra (written on a plate),
mantra (repetition of some syllables), tantra (use of mystic sylla¬
bles) and ciZrn<2 (powders) done or made to do by some one, or
being done, or would be done or would be made to do. O
One possessing frightening teeth ! Hraith hrith hum oblations to
Guhyakubjika. Hraurh orh khe vorh obeisance to Guhyakubjika.
Hrim. One who subjugates all people ! One who attracts the
people ! Om kherh khyarh. One who attracts all people be the
stupefier of the people. Om khyaurh. One who paralyses all
people ! airfi kharh khrdrfi. Agitator. Aim the basic syllable
comprising the three principles, that which is excellent in the
kula (system). The five-syllabled mantra. Pharh irirh ksim Srirh
hrith kfeth O Jacchd ! kse kse hrum phaf hrith obeisance. Oth
hrdth kse Vacci kse k^o hrith phaf. Thus the tvaritd mantras are
of nine kinds. They must be known and they confer victory if
propitiated.

Agni FufSna
3. The seat should be (offered) with (the mantra)* hraurh
to the lioness. (The mantra) hrirfi kse is said to be the heart.
Vaccha ! Oblations to the head. This {mantra) of Tvarita is
remembered in the tuft.
4. K^erh hrirh vausaf be (the mantra) for the tuft. Kferft hurk
would be for the armour. Hr Urn vausaf (be) for the three eyes
ending with hrim and phaf.
5. (The names of) the nine (goddesses of) energy (are)
Hriihkari, Khecari, Canda, Chedani, Ksobhani, Kriya, Ksemakari, Hriihkari and Phatkari.
6-8. Now, I shall describe the envoys (companions) of the
goddess Tvarita), to be worshipped in the directions east and
others. Hrirh Nala ! possessing thick lips and who moves in the
sky. Hrirh Khecara (one whose region of movement is the sky) !
Embodied as glowing flames ! Burn, kha khe cha che. Frighten¬
ing like the dead body ! Ca che O Canda (fierce) ! Chedani
(one who breaks) ! Karali (dreadful) ! kha khe che khe. One
whose physical constituents arc (the letters) kha, ra and ha.
Hrim kse va kse O Kapila (tawny-coloured) \ Ha kse hr urn kurh
Jejovati (resplendant) ! Raudri (one in rage) ! O Mother !
Hrirh uhe ve phe phe Vakra (crooked one) ! Vari phe pufi pufi
ghore (frightening one) ! Hrurh phaf Brahmavetali ! Middle
one ! I shall again describe the secret mantras and principles
relating to (the goddess) Tvarita. Hrairh hrarh hah are said to
be (located) at the heart. Harurh and ha are remembered to be
(for) the head. PhSrh sparkle sparkle (is for) the tuft. Vara
lid hrarh hurh krorh ksurh irirh is said (to be for) the eye. Ksaurh
(is) for the weapon. Or (the mantras) phaf hurh khe vacche kseh
hrirh kserh hurh phaf (is said) then. O //un% for the head must
be in the middle. Khe at the beginning. O Sadasiva (ever
benevolent one). Va (for) liah, che (for) Manonmani, ma and
kfe (for) the Garuda, hraurh for Madhava, kserh (for) Brahma,
hurh (for) Aditya. The (mantra) phaf hraurh is always remembered
as cruel.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT
Mode of worship for success in the battle
The Lord said :
1-7. Orh kha khydrh. Obeisance to Sun, the victorious in
the battle, hrdrhy hrirfi, hrurhy hrerhy hroin, hrah. These are the six
mantras for the Sun, who confers success in the battle. Ork harh
kham oblations to Khakholka. SphUrfi hrurh hum krurh irirh hath
krerh. The eight attributes (plenty), vimala (spotless),
sdra (essence), drddhya (to be worshipped), parama (supreme),
sukha (happiness), dharmajhdna (knowledge of righteousness)
and vairdgya (firm resolve) should be worshipped. Then the
seats anantdsana (having ananta,the serpent as the seat), simhd”
Sana (the lion seat), padmdsana (lotus seat) (should be worshipp¬
ed). Then the pericarps jV" (of the mystic diagram) consisting
of the spheres of sun, moon and fire such as Dipta (luminous),
Suksma (subtle), Jaya (victorious), Bhadra ! (conferring
safety), Vibhati (fortune), Vimala (spotless), Amogha (infal¬
lible), Vidyuta (lightning) and Sarvatomukhi (having face
every side), the ninth one, should be worshipped. Then one
should worship (the qualities) saliva, rajas and tamas, prakfti
(the source of the material world) and purusa (the soul), one’s
soul, one’s inner soul and the supreme soul. All the endowed with
the bindu and mdydnila. One should worship U§a (dawn), Prabha
(lustre), Sandhya (twilight), Sayam (evening), Maya (myste¬
rious), Bala (strong), Bindu (dot) and endowed with Vi§nu.
The eight attendant gods at the entrance such as Surya, Canda,
pracanda and others should be worshipped with perfumes etc#
One would be victorious in the battle etc. by the worship, medi¬
tation and oblation.
CHAPTER ONE HUPTORED AND FORTYNINE
Mode of performing laksa and kofihoma
The Lord said :
1. A homa (oblation) performed after having practised the

Agni Purd^a
prdndydma (control of breath) hundred times and purifyipg with
the rite of kfcchra, confers victory in battle, gets kingdom and
destroys obstacles.
2-5. After having repeated gdyatri {mantra) (remaining)
in the water, one should perform prdndydma sixteen times. Ob¬
lation of havis (clarified butter) should be made into fire in
the forenoon. One should eat only that which has been procured
after begging or eat only fruits and roots. One should take only
single morsel of food such as milk or flour or ghee. O Parvati !
as soon as the (rite of a) lakh of oblations concludes, one should
give cows, clothes and gold as fees. (The oblation should be
done) by fifteen brahmins in the case of all disasters that befall.
There is no disaster in the world that does not get warded off by
this oblation.
6-10. There is no such benevolent (rite) that could excel
this (rite). A king, whosoever, arranges to do the rite of kofi~
homa (making a crore oblations) as before (employing) the brah¬
mins, his enemies cannot face him in battle any time. There
cannot also be any disease in his country that would kill him.
(By its virtue) excessive rainfall, deficient rainfall, mice,crickcts,
parrots demons and others get controlled. So also the ene¬
mies (get controlled) in the battle. One should employ twenty
or a hundred or a thousand brahmins for the performance of
kofihoma. One would get fortunes as much as one desired.
A brahmin or a king or a tradesman, whoever may perform the
kofihoma, would get whatever was desired by him. (Moreover)
he would go to heaven with his mortal frame.
11.15. By the performance of this homa with the gdyatri
(man/m), or the of planets, or those used in the (rite
known as) kupndn4a or those addressed to the Fire God or the
gods of directions east, west, north-west, south and south¬
east or the mantras relating to (lord) Visnu or the goddesses or
l§ambhu (Siva) or Sun, one would get lesser benefits (if it is
done) for ten thousand times. One who does homa a lakh
times would be able to get rid of all distress. The all-yielding
kofihoma (is done) for the destruction of all aflictions. The
following materials should be used for oblations — barley,
paddy, sesamum, milk, ghee, ktiia^ prasdtikd (a variety of rice),
petals of lotus, uHra (the fragrant root of a plant*) and bilva.
In the kofihoma the fire-pit should measure eight cubits. Half

its measure is laid down in the oblation for a lakh times. Thus
the mode of performance of oblation ten thousand lakh and
crorc times have been explained.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
JSfames of different Mantis, different sages and others during their periods
The Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall describe the Manu periods. Svayambhuva is
(the name of) the first Manu. Agnidhra and others (were)
his sons. The celestials (were) known as Yama^. Indra (was a
performer of) hundred sacrifices. In the period of (the second
Manu) Svarocisa, the seven sages (were) Aurva and others.
Indra (was) Vipaicit. Paravatas and Tusitas (were) the celes¬
tials. Urja, Stambha and others (were) the brahmins. Caitra,
Kimpurusa and others (were) the sons. The third Manu (was)
Uttama. Indra (was) Susanti. Sudhama and others born in
the family of Vasistha (were) the seven sages. Aja and others
(were) their sons. Tamasa Manu was the fourth. Svarupa and
others (were) the celestials. Sikhi*, Jyotirddhama and others
(were) the sages and Navakhyati and others his sons.
6. In the (period of the fifth Manu) Raivata, Vitatha®
(was) the Indra, Amitabhas were the celestials, Hiranya^-
roma and others were the sages and Balabandha and others
were his sons.
7. In the (period of the sixth Manu), Caksusa, Manojava
(was) the India. Svati and others (were) the celestials, Sumedha and others (were) the sages and Puru and others (were)
the sons.
8-15. Sraddhadeva, son of Vivasvan (Sun) (was)
the next Manu. Adityas. Vasus and Rudras (were) the celes¬
tials. Purandara (was) the Indra. Vasi§fha, Kalyapa, Atri,
1. For their different names see ViJ*. I,vii. 7-21 and III. i-U,
2. Vi.P. III. i. 17 reads Sibi.
3. Vi.P. in.i. 20 reads Vibhu.
4. Vi.P. Ill.i. 23 reads Balabandhu.

Agnt Purina
Jamadagni, Gautama, Visvamitra and Bharadvaja j[were)
the seven sages. Iksvaku and others (were his sons). Lord Visnu
was manifest with a part (of his energy in each one of these
periods). He was born as Manasa in the (period of) Svayambhuva and Ajita in the next one (that of Svarocisa). Then (he
was born as) Satya, Hari, Devavara, Vaikuntha and Vamana
(in the respective Manu periods which followed). The eighth
Manu would be born as the son of Surya and Ghaya. As he would
be a cognate of his predecessor, this eighth Manu to come (would
be known as) Savarni. Sutapa and others (would be) the clans
of celestials. DIptiman Drauni (Asvatthama) and others (would
be) the sages. Bali (would be) the Indra. Viraja and others
(would be) the sons. The ninth (Manu would be) Daksasavarni. Para and others (would be) the celestials. Adbhuta
(would be) the Indra. Savana and others (would be) the sages.
Dhrtaketu and others (would be) (his) sons. The next (Manu
would be) Brahmasavarni. Sukha and others (would be)
celestials. Santi (would be) their Indra. Havisya and others
(would be) the sages. Suksetra and others (would be) the
sons of that (Manu).
16-19. (The eleventh Manu would be) Dharmasavarni.
Vihahga and others (would be) the celestials then. The Indra
(would be Vrsa)^. Niscara® and others (would be) the sages.
The sons of Manu (would be) Sarvatraga and others. Rudra
Savarni would be (the twelfth) Manu. Rtadhama (would be)
the Indra and Harita and others (would be) the celestials.
Tapas and others (would be) the seven sages. Devavan and
others (would be) the sons. The thirteenth Manu (would be)
Raucya. Sutramana and others (would be) the celestials.
Divaspati (would be) their Indra who routs the demons etc.
Nirmoha and others (would be) the seven sages. Gitrasenaand
others (would be) the sons.
20-22. The fourteenth Manu (would be) Bhautya. Suci
would be the Indra. Gaksusa and others (would be) the celes¬
tials. Agnibahu and others (would be) the sages. Uru and
others (would be) the sons of Bhautya, the fourteenth Manu.
The seven sages (would descend) to the world from the heavens
1. Cf. Kt.P. III. ii.29.
2. Vi.P. III.ii.30 reads Nissvara.

and propagate the Vedas. Then (the respective) celestials would
partake the oblations of sacrifices and the earth would be
protected by the sons (of Manus). O Brahmin 1 Fourteen
Manus (will reign) in the course of a day of Brahma.
23. Lord Hari ^Vi§nu), who preceded the Manus, divided
the Veda at the end of the dv&para^ (y^g^)- The first Veda had
four parts consisting of a lakh (of verses ) .
24-26. The Tajurveda originally a single work was divided
into four. The sage (arranged) the office of an adhvaryu^ priest
(to be done) with the Tajurveda)^ the hotrt^ with the ^s, the
audgdtra* with the Sdmans and brahmatva^ (relating to omissions
and antcdotes) with the Atharvan. Paila, the disciple of Vyasa
and proficient in the Ijigveda imparted the first {Veda) to Indrapramiti and the samhitd (part) to Baskala. He also (divided)
that sarfihitd into four parts and gave it to Bauddhya and others.
27-30. The great man of intellect Vai^ampayana, the dis¬
ciple of Vyasa, divided the tree of Tajurveda into seven branches.
The Kanvas, Vajasaneyas and others are known to be (the
branches founded) by Yajfiavalkya and others. Jaimini, the
disciple of Vyasa, divided the tree of Sdmaveda into branches and
Sumantu and Sukarma received one part of the sarnhitd. Sukarma
had received one thousand sarfihitd text. Sumantu, the disciple
of Vyasa, divided the tree of Atharvaveda. He imparted it to
thousands of Paippalada, his disciples. Suta made the Purd^asarfihitd by the grace of Vyasa.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE
Description of duties laid down for different castes
The Fire-god said ;
1. Pu§kara narrated to Para^urama the duties which the
1. The third among the four yuga periods of time, equal to 8,64,000
years of men.
2. The priest of the Tajurveda who attends to the needs of the sacrifice.
3. TTie priest of the ftgveda who does the oblation.
4. The priest of the Sdmaveda who sings the sdman melodies.
5. Ute priest of die Atharvaaeda.

430 Agni Pur&ifa
Manus practiced and had enjoyment and emancipation •as des¬
cribed by lord Varuna to him.
Pu§kara said :
2. I shall describe the laws of conduct relating to the castes,
stages of life etc. spoken by the Manus and others, that would
give all (benefits) and please (lord) Vasudeva (name ofVi?nu
in his manifestation as Krsna) and others.
3-9. O Excellent one among Bhrgus ! abstaining from
killing, truthfulness, compassion, kindness towards all beings,
visiting sacred places, munificence, celibacy, not jealous, doing
service to god, brahmins, preceptors and others, listening to all
laws of conduct, worship of the manes, veneration towards the
king, sustained interest in good scriptures, mercy, forbearance
and theism are the general good and bad conduct for all castes
and stages of life. The duties of a brahmin should be pointed
out as performing religious rites, officiating as priests at
the sacrifices, munificence, imparting vedic knowledge,
accepting gifts and engaging in the study. The duties of a
k^atriya (warrior class) and the vaiiya (tradesman) are said to
be munificence, engaging in the study and perform sacrificial
rites as laid down. Protection and suppression of the wicked
are special (duties enjoined) on a k^atriya. Agriculture, protec¬
ting the cows and trade are spoken to be (the duties) of a vaUya.
(The duties) of a §udra (the fourth class of men) (are) to serve
the brahmins or (to practise) handicrafts,
10. Since the binding of the girdie of the munja grass (at
the time of investiture of the sacred thread), the brahmins
and others (are supposed to) take a second birth. One’s caste is
decided from that of the mother in the natural order of castes.
1 1 . Contrary to the natural order the son of a brahmin
woman through a iudra (is known as) Can^dla, Grom ai. ksatriya
(as) suta and from a vaiiya (as) devala.
12. A son born to a ksatriya woman and a SUdra contrary to
the natural order would be (known as) pukkasa. Similarly (a
son born to a ksatriya woman) and a vaiiya would be magadha
and from a iudra as dyogava.
13. There are thousands of pratilomas (born tOk^higher caste
woman and lower caste man) among the vaiiyas from the order
contrary to natural one. Therefore a marriage (should be done)

only between (members of) the same class and (should not be)
with (members of) either the higher or the lower class.
14. The killing of those condemned to death by law and
living by means of women are laid down as the duty of a can^dla.
(The duty) of a vaidehaka is said to be their protection.
15-18. To be a charioteer (is the duty) of the sutciSy and
hunting (is the duty) of the pukkasas. (The duty) of the mdgadhas is singing panegyrics. (The duty) of an dyogava is said to
be the profession of an actor and living by handicrafts. It is
laid down that a canddla should live outside the village, wear
the clothes of the dead and should not be touched by others.
One, who belongs to any one of the other community, discards
his life for the sake of a brahmin or a cow or a woman or child
in distress, gets accomplished. The mixed castes should be known
from the work done by the father or mother.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTWO
Duties of a householder
Puskara said :
1 . A brahmin should live following the code of conduct laid
down for him or those of the ksatriya or vaiSya or iudra. But he
should never live by doing such acts exclusively (laid down)
for a iudra.
2. A brahmin may engage himself in agriculture, trade,
keeping cows and usury. But he should abstain from taking milk,
jaggery, salt and meat and using red-dye.
3. One gets purified from the sin accruing from ploughing
the earth and cutting the plants and killing insects and ants by
doing a sacrifice. The cultivator (gets free from the sin) by
worshipping the god.
4. A virtuous man (should yoke) eight bullocks, one who
lives by any means six bullocks, wicked men four bullocks and
those who have transgressed rightful living two bullocks.
5. One should live by picking grains in the field and on alms
got without solicitation. (One may live) on alms got by solici-

Agni Purd^a
tation or got without solicitation a second time. Otherwise (one
may live) by truth and false (i.e., trade). But (one should never
(live) on servitude.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTHREE
Duties of a Student
Puskara said :
1-6. Listen ! I shall describe the righteous (way of living
for those in (different) stages (of life), which yields enjoy¬
ment and emancipation. The mensus flow for women lasts for
sixteen nights. Among these the first three are censured. One
who desires for a male child should cohabit on even (nights).
When the conception is explicitly known, the rite favouring con¬
ception is prescribed. The rite to be performed with the inten¬
tion to get a male child is done even before the embryo (in the
womb) begins to move. The (rite of) parting of the hair
(should be done) in the sixth or eighth (month). The asterism
relating to the name should be such that it confers a child (good)
and is auspicious. (The rite known as) the j&takarma (per¬
formed soon after the birth of a child) should be done by wise
men before the separation of the umbilical cord. The rite of
naming the child should be done after the period of pollution
is over. The name of the child of a brahmin is said to end with
(the word) Sarmd, of the warrior class to end with (the word)
varmd, of the tradesmen and Sudra with (the words) gupta and
ddsa respectively. (After the birth of a child) the child should
be brought to the father (of the child by the other) with (the
words) “This is your son”.
7-10. The tonsure ceremony (is laid down) according to
one’s family (custom). Upanayma (the rite of investiture of
sacred thread) should be done in the eighth year from that of the
conception or in the eighth year of the child for a brahmin.
(The same is to be done) in the eleventh year from that of preg¬
nancy for the warrior class and in the twelfth year from that of

pregnancy for a tradesman. It should never be done after the
sixteenth year (for any one) . The mauhjya (the girdle to be worn
after the above rite) is known to be (made) of munja (grass)
or bark. The hides of deer, tiger or goat (should be worn) by
those in the student life. The sticks are said to be from xht^parna
(paldSa), pippala (fig) and bilva tree. They should be (long
enough to reach) upto the hair, forehead and face respecti¬
vely (for the three classes). All the sticks should be having the
barks and should not be having bends or be burnt ones.
11-12. The sacred tluread (should be made of) cotton, silk
or wool respectively (for the three classes). The three classes
arc indicated by the (repetition of the word) bhavati (address
to the housewife) at the beginning, middle or end while begging
food. One should seek food first at such a place where one would
be certain about getting food. The above rites are performed
without (the repetition of) mantra in the case of female ^ildren.
But the marriage (should be done) with (the repetition of)
mantra.
13. After investiture of the sacred thread, the preceptor
should instruct his pupil first with cleanliness and then with
codes of conduct, the worship of fire and the worship of
twilight.
14. Eating facing the eastern direction is conducive to
(one’s) longevity, the southern direction brings fame. Eating
facing the western direction gives wealth. Eating facing the
northern direction gets rightful living.
15. Offering to fire should be made in the morning and in
the evening. (One should) not (offer) impure things or with
separated hands. One should abstain from (drinking) intoxi¬
cants, (eating) flesh, singing and dancing with men.
16. (One should also eschew) violence, spreading scandal
abo.ii (tthers and especially speaking unpleasant words. (The
student), whose stick (and other things) get damaged, should
throw them in water and have another.
17. (He) should learn the scripture (from the preceptor),
pay fees to the preceptor and perform the bathing (ceremony
marking the completion of one’s study). But the nai^pika
brakmaedri (one who has taken a vow of life-long abstinence)
should remain with the preceptor till his (own) death.

Agni Purina
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFOUR
Rules of Marriage
Puskara said :
1 . The brahmin should marry four wives, the warrior class
three wives, the tradesmen two wives as they desire. The last
class should marry only one wife.
2-3. All the righteous acts should not be done in the com¬
pany of women not belonging to one’s own community. One
should marry only from his own community. (At the time of
marriage) the warrior class should hold the arrow, the trades¬
men should bear the toad and then the last community the
fringe of a garment. A girl should be given (in marriage) only
once. One who abducts such a girl deserves the same punish¬
ment as for a thief.
4-7. No atonement is laid down for one who sells his children.
Marriage is said to consist of four kinds of acts such as kanydddna
(giving the girl as a gift), iaciydga (rite relating to the wife of
Indra), marriage and caturthikd (the fourth one). Women are
allowed to have another husband in the following five adversi¬
ties — if (the first husband is) lost, dead, has become an ascetic,
impotent or fallen morally. If (the husband) is dead, (she)
should be given to the brother (of the deceased). In the absence
(of a brother) (she should be given) as one wished. The three
purvas {purvd, piirvdsddhd, purvaprostapadi) , dgneya {krttikd),
vdyavya {svdti)y the three utlards {ultard^ uttardsdikd^ uttardprostapadi) and rohini are the asterisms always commended for copu¬
lation.
8-11. O Bhargava (Parasurama) ! One should not choose
(the bride) from the same goira or born in the line of same sage.
(One may choose) from (descendants of) more titan seven
(generations) on the paternal side and more than five (genera¬
tions) on the maternal side. Having invited a person endowed
with good conduct and belonging to a good family and giving a
girl as a gift is known as brdhma (type of marriage). The lustre
due to the offering of a girl as a gift always elevates men.
Then the marriage accompanied by , the offer of the gift
of a pair of cows is spoken to be the dr^a (variety of marriage).
The offer made to one after solicitation (is known to be) prdjd-

patya (variety of marriage) for the purpose of righteousness. It is
dsura (type of marriage in which the girl is offered) along with
the purchase money. (It is considered as) the lowest. The
marriage by mutual consent (is known as) gSndharva. (Marri¬
age) by abduction after a battle (is known as) rdkfosa (variety
of marriage). (It is known as) the paiSSca (variety) if the girl
is married after deceiving her.
12. An image of Indrani (wife of Indra) should be made
with potter’s earth on the marriage day. She (that image)
should be worshipped at a p>ond and (then) the bride should
be taken inside the house accompanied by music.
13-14. The marriage should not be done when lord KeiSava
(Visnu) sleeps^ and also in (the months of) Pau^a (DecemberJanuary) and Caitra (April-May), on Tuesday and on the days
of rikta^ and viffi.* (The marriage should abo) never (be done)
when Venus and Jupiter are not to be visible and the Moon has
been eclipsed. (So also it should not be done) in asterbms ruled
by (the planets Sun, Saturn and Mars and days afflicted by
vyatipdta*
15. The aster isms (suitable) for (the performance of) a
marriage (are) Mrga^irsa, Maghdy SvSti, Hasta, Rohini, the three
Uttaras {Uttaray UttarSsd4ltS&ndUttaraprosfapadi)y M&la, Anurddhd
and Revati.
16-19. The ascendant and the arfiSa (subdivision of the
stellar house) relating to a mortal are auspicious. (The planets)
Sun, Saturn and Mercury in the third, sixth, tenth, eleventh
and eighth (houses) are commendable. Mars in the eighth (b)
not (commendable). All the other planets are commendable in
the seventh, twelfth and eighth (houses). Even among them,
Venus in the sixth from the sixth house is not commendable.
(Just as the worship of Indram is done) in the asterbm on the
marriage day, the caturthikd (the rite on the fourth day of the
marriage) should also be done in the asterbm of the marriage.
The marri^ should not be performed if four planets are in the
1 . The four month period commencing with the eleventh day of die
bright half of the month <ii AyS^a (JuneJuIy).
2. The fourth, ninth and fourteenth days of a lunar fortni|^t.
3. An adverse period.
4. The day of die new Moon occurrmg on a Sunday and when the
Moon b in a particular asteriam.

Agni Purina
same house. One should cohabit his wife only on days other
than the parva fdays) (the eighth and fourteenth days as well
as the full-moon and newmoon days). When a truthful (girl)
is given in marriage (there would be) pleasure always.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFIVE
The code of conduct
Puskara said :
1-12. After getting up in the brdhma muh&rta (about 48
minutes prior to sunrise), one should contemplate on the gods
Visnu and others. One should pass both urine and stools facing
the north during the day time, facing the south during the night
and as in the day during the two twilight periods. One should
not do on the roads, water, streets and on the grassy surface.
After having purified oneself with earth, one should sip water three
times and then cleanse the teeth. Bathing is said to be six kinds
such as daily, casual, performed with some desire, part of a puri¬
ficatory rite, removing the bodily dirt and at the time of
obsequies. The religious act done without bathing yields no
result. Hence one should bathe in the morning. Among the
waters of a sacred place, a river, a tank, flowing water, water
present in the well and water drawn (from the well), the preced¬
ing one is more meritorious than the succeeding one in order.
The waters of (the river) Ganges are always meritorious. After
having cleansed the impurities (on the body), one should remain
submerged in (the waters of) the tank. After having touched
waters one should sprinkle them (on his body) three
times with the (repetition of the mantra) hira^avar^^^ then with
(the mantra) ianno devi^y three times with dpo hi ffhd^, and then with
idam dp<A. Then one should remain in the water of the tank and
mutter (sacred syllables) (remaining) in the water. One should
2. SrtsUkta. 10.9.4a.

cither recite the aghamor^andS hymn or the drupadd^ or ywijati
manafl or the purufos&kta^. The gayatri {mcmtra) should be recited
especially. Bhdvavrtta is the deity, Aghamarsana is the sage
and anustubk is the metre for the aghamarsana hymn. Lord Hari
(Visnu) is remembered to be Bhavavrtta. After squeezing the
garment (one should) offer (respectful) waters of oblation to
the gods and manes. One should offer waters of homage with
thepalms with the recitation of the Then one should
offer oblation to fire and make gifts befitting one’s capacity.
13-14. Then one should worship lord (Siva) for the sake
of one’s prosperity. One’s seat, bed, vehicle, wife, children and
water-vessel are pure for one’s self. (But they) are not pure for
others. Even preceptors should leave way for pregnant women
afl’licted by the weight.
15. One should not look at the rising or setting Sun or in
the waters. One should not look at naked woman. One should
not peep into the well and look at a dog, or drinking house and
a sinner.
16. One should not tread on cotton, bones, ashes and that
which is despised. (One should not enter) the apartments of
women or treasury. One should not go as an emissary of another
person.
17. One should not board an uneven boat, or (climb) a
tree or a mountain. One should then be interested in sciences
relating to acquisition of wealth.
18. One who tramples on clod of earth, one who cuts the
grass and one who eats the nail would perish. One should not
desire to raise sounds with the mouth. One should not stir out in
the night without a lamp.
19. One should not enter a house not having a door. One
should not change the colour of the face. One should not inter¬
rupt in the midst of a conversation. One should not wear other’s
garments.
20. One should always say good. One should never utter
that which does not please others. Seat made of paldSa (wood)
is prohibited. One should move in the shade of gods etc.

Agni Purdifa
21. One should not go in between revered people. One
should not look at the broken (and falling) asterism. Oi^ should
not utter the name of another river (while standing) in one river.
One should not gargle with two hands.
22. One should not cross the river without propitiating the
forefathers and gods. One should not throw impurities like feces
in the waters. One should not bathe remaining naked.
23. Then one should worship lord I^vara (Siva) for the
sake of welfare and prosperity. One should not remove one’s
garland oneself. One should avoid the dust of an ass and other
animals.
24. One should not ridicule mean (people). One should
not go (with them) and live with them. One should not also
reside at a place devoid of a physician, a king and a river, a
place ruled by other races, women and many men.
25. One should not converse with women in their monthly
menstrual courses or otherwise fallen. One should contemplate
on lord KeSava(Visnu) (if happened to converse with the above)*
One should not laugh, yawn and sneeze without covering the
mouth.
26. A wiseman should avoid disrespect shown to his
master and his own self. One should guard the words of one’s
self and his master. One should not yield to (the dictates of)
his organs. One should not control the natural impulses of the
body.
27. O Bhargava ! One should not ignore a disease like
an insignificant enemy. One should always sip waters (for
purification) whenever one goes in the street. One should not
carry water and fire.
28. One should not utter hum to a good and venerable
person. One should not tread over one foot with the other. One
should not speak something unpleasant to someone either in his
presence or his absence.
29. One should refrain from abusing the scriptures, king,
sages and gods. One; should not envy women and one should
avoid having faith in them.
30. One should hear righteous things, have devotion to
gods and adhere to righteous path. One should worship
Soma (moon) ai;( well as gods and brahmim in the natal
star. *i>

31. One should avoid bathing with the application of oil
on the sixth, eighth and fourteenth (days of the fortnight).
(One should pass) urine and stools far away from the house.
One should not have enmity with great men.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSIX
Purification of things
Pufkara said :
1-2. I shall describe the (mode of) purification of things.
Earthen vessel made impure by contact with urine or feces would
become pure by heating again. A copper and gold vessel simi¬
larly made impure (may be made pure ) by melting or the copper
one by water or acid. (The vessels made) of bell-metal and
copper (may be purified) with acid. (Those made) of pearls
(get purified) by washing.
3-5. Lotuses, vessels made of iron, vegetables, ropes,
roots, fruits and cane (could be made pure by washing). The
sacrificial vessels (are made pure) by sprinkling (water) with
hand at the. sacrificial work. Those made of oily things (such as
wax) could be purified with hot water being sprinkled in the
house. Muddy water may be purified by straining it through a
cloth, or by sprinkling on many cloth. Wooden (things) get
purified that moment (by sprinkling with water).
6-7. Liquid materials which have become solidified (would
become pure) by sprinkling or by leaping up. A bed, seat,
vehicle, winnowing basket and cart would become purified by
sprinkling (water), as also in the case of straw and fuel. (Things
made) of the horn and tusk (may be purified) by a paste of
white mustard.
8. A vessel (containing) flesh (may be purified) with cow’s
tail. Bones have to be (purified) as in the case of horns. Molasses
of jaggery and solution of salt (may be purified) by drying.
9. Safflower, flowers, wool and cotton (may be puri¬
fied) in. the same manner. The flowing water of a river is pure.
So also the water that remains spreads out.

Agni PurO^
10-15. A cow is pure except in its mouth. The mouths of
a horse and goat are impure. The mouths of women, calves
of cows, birds and of dogs (are pure). While hunting a dog
dripping water from its mouth is always pure. One should sip
(water thrice for purification) after eating, sneezing, sleeping,
drinking (water), having had a dip in the water, walking on the
street and having changed the dress worn. The cat is pure be¬
cause it moves (here and there). A women in her menstrual
courses (becomes pure) after bathing on the fourth day. She
becomes eligible (to take part) in rites relating to gods and
manes. (In impurity) due to the ap&na (one of the airs in the
body) five parts of mud (should be used), fifteen parts in purifi¬
cation after urine and seventeen parts in impurity due to feces.
One should apply one part of mud to the penis and three times
two parts (of mud) on both hands. For the brahmacdrins
(students), the foresters and ascetics (it is laid) as four times.
Silken cloth (are purified) with sriphala (emblic myrabolan),
white cloth with white mustard. It is said that the hairs of ani¬
mals would be purified by sprinkling water. Flowers, fruits etc.
would get purified by sprinkling water.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSEVEN
Pollution and Purification
Pu§kara said ;
1 . I shall describe purification after death and after the
birth (of a child). The pollution due to the death of a sapinda^
is prescribed for ten days.
2-7. O Excellent among Bhrgus (descendants of
Bhrgu) ! So also purification (from pollution) is after birth in
the case of brahmins, after twelve days for the warrior class,
after fifteen days for the tradesmen, and after a month for
Sudra (fourth class). If the dead belongs to the higher class,
the pollution for the servant (of the lower class) would be as for
1. A kinsman connected by offering the funeral rice-ball to the manes
of certain relatives. ^

the master. A brahmin or a person of the warrior class who had
his bii th through the warrior, tradesman or SSdra gets purified
after six or three or one day in order. O ParaSurdma ! if born
of a tradesman and iOdra purification would be after six or three
nights (respectively) and if born of a Sudra and tradesman
purification would be) after six (nights). (If one’s child dies)
before the formation of teeth, one become pure at once, (if it
dies) before tonsure, (the parent) has pollution for a night, if
before the vratabandha (vow relating to investiture of thread)
pollution lasts for three nights, and ten nights if afterwards. If
a Sudra dies at less than three years of age, the purification should
be after five days. If aged more than three, purification would
be after twelve days, if aged six years, the purification would
be after a month.
8-9. If a female (child) (dies) before tonsure, the puri¬
fication would be after a night. Similarly, the relatives of
female children dying after tonsure get purified in three days.
No pollution is laid down for the parental side if (a female dies
after marriage. If a woman delivers a child in her parent’s
house, the relatives get purified after a night.
10-14. A woman after childbirth gets purified after ten days)
and not otherwise. There is no doubt that if a married girl dies
in her father’s house, the relatives get purified after three nights.
If two pollutions take place and the second one is equal or infe¬
rior to the first one, the pollution ends with the first one, and
ends with the second one if the second is not equal. These are
the words of DharmarajV. One who lives abroad happening to
hear (the news about) the death of his kinsmen would be impure
only for the remaining part of the ten days (of impurity). (If
it is known) after ten days, impurity would last for three days.
Then if one year had elapsed, one would become pure after
bathing. (One has to do as before) if either the maternal grand¬
father or the preceptor dies.
15-16. One gets purified after abortion after the same num¬
ber of nights proportionate to the months (period) of pregnancy.
O Bhargava (son of Bhrgu)* whoever of a of a brah¬
min caste may die the pollution ends after ten days for all with1 . The lord of righteous living; may mean any upholder of a code.
2. Denotes Par^ur&ma.

Agni PutS^
out any distinction. So also for a warrior (class) (it would end)
after twelve days, the tradesmen after fifteen days and ihcJUdras
after a month.
1 7. A ball should be made and offered from the remnants
of the ceremony and placed in front. One who does the deed
should then declare the name and clan of tha: person (dead).
18-24. After the excellent brahmins had partaken food,
were well honoured with gifts and had blessed with unbroken
rice and water with the recitation of the name and clan (of the
doer), one should dug up three pits of four cubits breadth and
depth and of twelve cubits length. Near the pits one should
kindle three fires. O Rama (Paralurama) one should offer
oblations to Soma, Agni (Fire god) and Yama four (handfuls)
three times each. Balls of rice should be offered separately (in
each one of these) as before. One should fill (pits) wich cooked
rice, curd, honey and flesh. If an inter-calary month occurs
this should be done in addition. Or (this ceremony) should be
completed in twelve days. If an inter-calary month occurs in
the middle of the year, then there would be extra rites at (the
time of doing) the twelfth ceremony. After the completion of
one year the ceremony should be done as the annual ceremony.
25. If one dies balls of rice should be offered to the ancestors
of the three past generations. Likewise the fourth is brought
together.
26. O Bhargava ! After having worshipped and offering
(ball of rice) with (the recitation of syllables) pfthvi samdn^,
the ball of rice (intended) for the dead should be united with
those (intended) for the other (ancestors).
27. So also the vessel for the dead should be united with the
vessels (for the ancestors). This rite of uniting the vessels should
be done one by one.
28. This rite is laid down without (the recitation of)
syllables for the SUdra. The rite of saphs^ddkarana* should be done
in the same way- for women.
29-30. If one dies, a potful of cooked rice should be offered
for a year and the ceremony should be done every year. One
1. (ff. pfdwf samA HG. 2-11-4.
2. The rite of unidog the ball of rice for the dead vdth those for the
aaoestori» ^

may be able to count the sand particles in the Ganges or the rain
■drops as Indra rains. But one may not be able to count in this
world the past ancestors. In the ever-moving time there is no
permanence. Hence, one should do the deeds.
31-32. The dead would get the results of ceremony whether
(they are) in heaven (or) in hell. No benefit would
accrue to the dead if one is only mourning (the death). There
is no pollution due to the death of a person by (falling from)
a cliff, (burnt) by fire, in a trap, by (drowning in) the water or
by suicide. (There is no pollution on account of the death) of
those fallen (from their caste) and those killed by lightning and
weapons.
33. Ascetics, those who have undertaken vows, studentcelibates, kings, sculptors and those initiated for religious cere¬
monies and those under the command of the king should bathe,
if they had followed the dead body.
34. Immediate bathing is laid down after copulation and
(coming across) smoke from (a burning) dead body. A Sudra
should never carry the dead body of a brahmin.
35. So alsp a brahmin should not carry (the dead body)
of a sudra. Therd would arise sin from these. One would reach
heaven by carrying the dead body of a destitute brahmin.
36-41 . One who gifts fuel for burning the (dead body of a)
destitute person would get victory in battle. (One who performs
the cremation of the dead) should solemnly vow that he is a
relative and then circumambulate the funeral pyre in the anti¬
clock direction. (After the completion of cremation rite) all
should get out and bathe with their clothes. Then handful
of water should be offered thrice for the dead. After that one
should enter the house after placing the foot on a stone at the
entrance (to the house). Unbroken rice should be offered to the
fire and margosa leaves should be eaten. All should sleep sepa¬
rately on the floor. One should eat light fodd that has been
bought. The learned one who offered the ball of rice becomes
pure after shaving, bathing with white mustard and sesamum and
wearing different clothes on the tenth day. Neither cremation
with fire, nor the rites of offerirg^ waters should be done in the
case of the death of children who had not grown teeth and in the
case of abortion. The gathering of the bones (of the cremated)
should be dime cm the fourth day. It is laid down that one may

444 Agni PurU^
touch (the polluted person) after (the rites of) gathering of
bones have been done.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYEIGHT
Kinds of pollution
Pufkara said :
1-4. I shall describe the pollution due to abortion accepted,
by Manu and others. In the case of abortion (pollution lasts)
so many nights proportionate to the period of preg¬
nancy (for the mother). If the abortion is after four months
(the pollution lasts ) for three days, after five months for ten days.
It lasts for four nights in the case of royal people, and Tor five
days in the case of tradesmen. It lasts for eight days in the case
of Judra and for twelve days in the case of others. Purification has
been prescribed for women. But the father (of the abortive)
(becomes pure) by bathing alone. No bathing has been laid
down for those who are sapindas. (If the abortion) occurs in
the seventh or eighth (month), (pollution lasts) for three nights.
In the case of the death of a child after the appearance of the
teeth, the sapinias become purified immediately.
5-7. (If the death of a child occurs) before the tonsure,
the pollution is for a night, qnd before the undertaking of the
vow (for the investiture of sacred thread) (it lasts) for three
nights (for sapii}4^). For the mother and father (the pollution)
lasts for ten nights. (For those who are not sapinias) y if the child
dies before the appearance of the teeth, or afier the tonsure,
(the pollution ) lasts for three nights. If the child dies before it is
three years old, one becomes pure after a night. In the case of a
warrior class purity is after two days, and three days in that of the
tradesman. A fUdra becomes pure after five days. (If the death
occurs) before marriage, (the pollution lasts) for twelve days.
8. In the circumstances in which the pollution for brah>
mins is noted as three nights, in such cases a SUdra (vf*ould have)

for twelve days and the warrior class and tradesmen (would
have) for six and nine (days respectively).
9. If (a child) dies (when) two years old no cremation
(be done). It should be buried in the ground. No water of liba¬
tion need be given even if it had been named. Or it should be
done if the child had grown teeth. (If death occurs) after the
investiture of sacred thread (one has pollution) for ten (days).
A brahmin who propitiates the fire and is well versed in the
scriptures becomes pure after a day.
10. (The pollution) lasts for three or four days if one isinferior or still less inferior in his (learning).
1 1 . One who has neglected the worship of fire (would be¬
come pure) after five days. One who has neglected the duties
of a brahmin (would become pure) after ten days.
12. A warrior gets pure after nine days and a brahmin
possessing qualities after seven days. A tradesman possessing
qualities (becomes pure) after ten days. A Sudra (gets pure)
after twenty days.
13. (The normal period of pollution) would be ten days
for a brahmin, twelve days for the warrior class, fifteen days for
the tradesman 'and one month for the Sudra.
14. If there be excellent qualities (the normal pollution)
for ten days would become three days, for three days would
become a day, for one day would become immediate purity.
One has to infer in this way in all the cases.
15. The pollution for the servant, pupil, hired servant and
disciple, residents of same place will be as that of their masters.
But the pollution for the death would be separate.
16. In the case of pollution due to' the death of a person who
performs sacrifices etc., the obsequial rites should be commen¬
ced after doing purification before the cremation is done.
17. One may touch a person (polluted) after one-third (of
the period of pollution) is over in the case of all the castes. (The
period after which) one may touch (the polluted) is three,
four, five and ten days for the (four) castes respectively.
18. The gathering (and immersion) of the bones should be
done on the fourth, fifth, seventh and ninth day (after the death)
for the (four) castes in the successive order.
19. (Pollution) would be for a day in (the death of) girls
not given in marriage and three days in (the death of) girls.

Agni Pwrlbaa
after marriage. A night and two days enclosing it has been laid
down (as the period of pollution) in the (death of) married sisters
and others.
20. The gotra for the unmarried girls would be that of the
father, and for the married girls that of their husbands. The
water of libation (should be offered) to the father on both
sides in the case of the married.
21. (The pollution) for the parents (would be) for three
days after ten days in (the case of) the death of the daughter.
O Brahmin ! the sapi^^as would become pure immediately
in (the death of the boy) before the tonsure is done.
22. (The pollution would be) for one day in (the death of
a girl) before the marriage (had been done) and three days
after the girl had been given in marriage. (The pollution lasts)
for a night and two days enclosing it in (the death of) the bro-
•" ther’s son and immediately for the sapin^as.
23. A brahmin becomes pure after ten days in the death
or birth through the brahmin woman. So also (a brahmin be¬
comes pure in the death or birth) through the warrior, trades¬
man and Sudra respectively after six or three days or one day.
24-27. This should be known as (applicable) to the sapindas.
I shall describe (the pollution) in (the case of the death of)
illegitimate (children). It is said that there would be purity
after three days in (the case of the death of) the illegitimate
children adulterous wives and women who had former husbands.
No water of libation (need be given) for those born in the mixed
castes and, those gone abroad and those committing suicide.
Pollution for those having one mother and two fathers and bro¬
thers having illegitimate wivesj would be one day for birth and
two days in (the case of) death. (I have described) the pollu¬
tion for sapii}d<is. I shall describe (the pollution) for those having
relationship by the libation of waters.
28. One becomes pure after bathing with the dress worn
at the death of a person who is not a sapii^da, whether the dead
be a boy or has died abroad.
29. But sapindas would become pure only after ten days in
the case of both birth and death. The members of the same
family (distant relatives) (would become pure )after three nights.
Those belonging to the same clan would become pui^ after bath*

30. The relationship of sapiif^ would cease after the seventh
(generation) in the case of males. The status of being eligible
for waters of libation would cease after the fourteenth generation.
31-33. If details about one’s birth are not remembered he
is said to belong to another clan. One who hears about the death
of a person abroad within ten days after the death, pollution
would last only for the remaining period of the days. (If it
is heard) ten days after (the death) pollution would be for three
days. (If one hears) after one year had elapsed, one becomes
pure after touching waters. (The pollution lasts) for a night
enclosed by two days (in case of death) of the maternal uncle,
a night (in case of death) of the pupil, priest and relatives.
34. Only bathing is laid down in (case of) the death
of son-in-law, daughter’s son, nephew (sister’s son), brotherin-law and the son of the latter.
35-38. (The pollution would last) for three days in
(case of) the death of maternal grand-mother, preceptor and
maternal grand-father. It is laid down that one becomes pure
(in the following cases) : (Death at the time of) a famine, the
decadence of kingdom, a calamity has befallen, in case
of death due to misfortune (or at the time of eclipse), in the
death of) knower of brahman by means of fire, (in case of
the death of) one who constantly performs sacrifice, one who
observes a vow, a celibate, in (case of death at) battle and
national calamity, while gift is being made, a sacrifice is being
performed and the marriage is being conducted. An atonement
in the form (of discarding life) by entering fire or water has been
laid for those who kill a brahmin, a cow, and the king as also
those who (attempt to) commit suicide, and one who has an
incurable disease and one who is incapable of doing sviMiy&ydy.
39-41. If a woman or a man dies by hanging one’s self on
account of disgrace, anger, affection and insult, somehow he
(or she) would live for aiakh (of years) in an impure hell. If
an old man who has neglected the ritual enjoined by the scrip¬
tures and code books, discards his life, (the period of) pollution
is for three days. The collection of bones (after cremation) is
done on the second day. Water of libation is to be done on the
1. Study of one’s ovm braodi oS die Vtda.

448 Agni PurSna
third day. The irUddha (annual ceremony for the dead) should
be done on the fourth day. ^
42. In the death of people struck by lightning or by fire,
pollution lasts for three days for the sapin^as. Women who had
taken to heretic path and those who had killed their husbands
are not eligible for water of libation.
43. If one’s father or mother had died (in the above des¬
cribed manner), one should wear wet clothes, and fast. After
one year had gone, the obsequies should be done as laid down.
44. If one, who is an asapinda^, carried the dead body, he
becomes pure after bathing with the dress, touching the fire and
taking ghee.
45. If one eats food from them, he becomes pure only after
ten days. If not eaten food there, he becomes pure that day itself.
Then one should not stay in that house.
46. The brahmins who carry the dead body of a destitute
brahmin, get the benefits of a sacrifice at their each step and
would become pure after bathing alone.
47-49. A brahmin who accompanies the dead body of a
Jliidra becomes pure after three days. After having mourned
the death of a person along with the relatives, one should avoid
making any gifts or doing Sraddha etc. will-fully for a day. If a
S&dra woman delivers (a child) or dies in one’s house, the vessels
should be discarded and one becomes pure after three days by
sweeping the floor (of the house with water). The dead brahmin
should not be made to be carried by a Sudra when the same
(caste men) are available.
50. After bathing the dead body, it should be cremated after
being worshipped with flowers. Never should the (dead) body
be cremated naked. A part (of the body) should be left (un¬
covered).
51-53. One who is born in the same clan should lift and
place (the dead body)on the funeral pyre. A brahmin who had
consecrated the sacred fire should be appropriately cremated
with the three fires®. One who has not consecrated the sacred
1 . Not a
2. Sacrificial fire of three kinds gSrh^atya, Ohaotmlya and dakfVfa — the
fire peipetually maintained in the house, a consecrated fire taken from the
previous, the sacred fire lit on the south. ^

fire (should be cremated) with one (among these three fires).
The others (should be cremated) with the ordinary (fire).
The son should place the fire at the face with the words, “You
were born from this. May this be born from you again. This is
for the heaven”. The relatives (should utter) the name and
clan (of the dead) and sprinkle water once.
54. The water of libation (should be done) in this way in
the death of the maternal grand-father, and the preceptor.The
water of libation is optional in (the case of) the death of the girl
friend, sister’s son, father-in-law and priest.
55-56. The son should offer the water of libation for ten
days (with the syllable) apo nah Soiucad?- Ten balls of rice
should be offered (at the death) of a brahmin. Twelve (balls
of rice) are remembered (to be offered) for a warrior. Fifteen
(balls) are spoken to be for a tradesman. It is said that thirty
(balls) (should be offered) for a Sudra. A son or daughter or
anybody else may offer the balls of rice like the son.
57-59. After biting the margosa leaves, becoming selfcontrolled and sipping water at the entrance to the house, all
should touch fire, water, cowdung, white mustard and place foot
slowly on a stone and enter (the house). Till the pollution goes
pungeant and saline food should not be taken. Flesh should
not be eaten and all should sleep on the floor. After bathing, food
bought from outside should be eaten. The same person, who did
the first day rite, should do rites for ten days. In the absence
(of that person), a brahmacari may offer the balls of rice and
waters of libation
60. Just as the pollution for the sapindas at the death (of
their relatives) has been laid down, so also it would be in regard
to birth for those who desire for purification.
61 . The pollution due to death is applicable to all. But the
pollution due to birth is only for the father and mother. Pollu¬
tion would be for the mother only and the father would become
pure affer touching water.
62. If it had been decided that SrUddha should be done on
theday of birth of the (dead) son, cow, gold and dress should
be given as gift on that day.
63. The pollution due to death (goes) with (another)

Agni Purd^
pollution. The pollution due to birth (goes) with (another)
pollution. Even between them one gets pure with that which
occurs first.
64. If a pollution due to death occurs while there is pollu¬
tion due to birth and vice-versa, the pollution is based on that
of death only and not on that of birth.
65. If one pollution occurs when there is already another
pollution, if the two are equal or the latter is less equal then the
pollution should be completed with the former. If the two are
unequal, it should be completed with the second according to the
words of Dharmaraja.
66. If death occurs at the end of another death, there is
purification after the end of first pollution. The greater one
always affects the lighter one. But the lighter one never affects
the greater one.
67. If the pollution due to death or birth occurs in the mid¬
night when there is already a pollution due to death or birth,
all would become pure with the remaining part of pollution.
That is that part of the night added to two days.
68. If the pollution occurs in the morning, one becomes pure
after three days. In both cases one should not eat food from
that family.
69. One should refrain from making any gifts. If one hap¬
pened to die, he should do riies of atonement. There is no sin if it
is done unknowingly in the former. Otherwise, it would be for a
day for the one who dines.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND FIFTYNINE
The merits of the offer of libation and the performance of good deeds
Pufkara said :
1. One would reach heaven whether the cremation is done
or not done if Lord Vif^u is remembered. The dead gets
redemption if the bones are immersed in the waters of the
Ganges.

2-4. One remains in heaven till (the period) his bones
remain in the waters of the Ganges. No cremation (is laid down)
for those committing suicide and those fallen (from righteous
living). Even for them it is beneficial to drop their bones in the
waters of the Ganges. The waters and food offered for them
would be absorbed in the sky. The (rite of) Ndrayanabali} should
be done with great compassion for the dead fallen (from righte¬
ousness). Hence, that person would enjoy favour.
5. The lotus-eyed (Visnu) is without decay. That which
is offered there will not perish. Lord Janardana (Visnu) is the
vessel because that protects from falling.
6. It is certain that (Lord) Hari (Visnu) is the only (god)
who confers enjoyment, emancipation etc. for the fallen. Seeing
the people dying one should do the helpful righteous deeds.
7. Even after the death (of a person), the relatives would
not be able to follow the dead person, The path of death is differ¬
ent for all others except the wife.
8-15, Only the deeds accompany one wherever one may go.
One should do today the work of tomorrow and in the forenoon
that of the afternoon. The death does not wait to see whether
(the work) has been done or not done. One who is attached to
the plot, market and house and has his mind drawn towards
something else, death takes him and goes away like the
she-wolf seizes the ram. No one is dear, nor one is an enemy
of time. When the life (period) and one’s work are over,
(it) endures and takes away the people. Even if pierced
with hundred arrows one does not die at the inopportune time.
One does not live if the destined time has come even if he has
been touched only by the tip of kuia (grass). Medicines and sac¬
red syllables and others cannot save one who is destined to die.
Certainly one’s past actions find the doer like (the cow finding
its) calf. That which precedes one’s birth and that which
succeeds one’s death is not explicit. Only that which is in between
is explicit in this world. Just as we have the boyhood etc. for the
body, so also another body is got. Just as the body wears another
new dress, so also the soul (gets another body). (The soul)
is always indestructible. Hence one should discard grief.
1. A particular fuaerat ceremony.

Agni Purd^
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
Duties of a brahmin leading life in the forest
Pufkara said :
1-2. Listen to me ! I shall describe the duties of an ancho¬
rite leading life in the forest. He should have matted hair, wor¬
ship fire, sleep on the ground and wear the hide of an antelope.
He should live in the forest. He should maintain his life with
milk, roots, nivdra (rice growing uncultivated) and fruits. He
should not take alms. He should bathe thrice a day. He should
observe celibacy.
3. The duty of an anchorite is to worship gods and
guests. A householder after having seen the grandchild should
resort to the forest.
4-5. The third part of one’s life (should be spent in the fo¬
rest) either alone or with the wife. One should do severe penance
in the midst of five fires in the summer, under the clouds as
the shelter in the rainy season, with wet dress in the winter. One
should resort to a life of not expecting (any thing from anybody)
and go on straight in (different) directions.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYONE
Duties of an ascetic
Pufkara said :
1. I shall describe the duties of an ascetic which confer
knowledge and release (from cycles of birth and death). When
one reaches the fourth part of his life, he should renounce
contact (with men).
2-3. One should renounce on that very day when he gets
disinterested (in worldly activities). A brahmin should
leave the house after performing the Prdjdpatya^ rite, worship of
1. Giving away the whole of one's property before entering the life
•of an ascetic.

all gods along with the (appropriate) fee and invoking fires
in one’s own self. One should move alone daily. One should
resort (to the village) only for a morsel of food.
4-5. The ascetic should be indifferent and should not ac¬
quire wealth. A bowl, roots of a tree, tattered clothes and
equanimity towards everything are the characteristics of a libe¬
rated soul. One should neither welcome death nor life.
6-8. One should await only the time just like a servant
(waiting for) the command. One should set his foot (at a place)
purified by his look, drink water purified with a cloth, utter
words purified by truth, do (things) (that are considered to be)
purified by the mind. A vessel made of gourd or wood or earth
or burnt ashes (are the symbols) of an ascetic. An ascetic should
seek alms daily (from the house) when the smoke has ceased,
the pestle has been set aside, the charcoal has been put out, the
inmates have eaten, the food vessel has been kept inverted after
eating.
9. Begging is of five kinds — collected from different places
like a bee, unintended (not already fixed), that has already been
fixed, temporary (arranged just when the ascetics seek alms)
and (food) made ready and brought (to him).
10. (The alms) may be (received) in the vessel in the hand
or transferred from the vessel to the vessel. He has to examine
the state of men (from whom alms are received) due to their
discreditable conduct.
11. One should pursue righteousness entertaining purity
of thought in whichever order of life he may be interested. He
should treat all beings equally. The cause of righteousness does
not lie in the symbol (associated with the different orders of life) .
12. Although the fruit of the kataka tree purifies the water,
the water cannot become pure by the mere mention of its name.
13. An honest person, eunuch, lame, blind and deaf person
associated with the wicked on account of ignorance get liberated
by pious men.
14. If an ascetic kills any being unknowingly during the
day or night he should bathe for purification and do the prd»
ndyOma six time
15-16. (The ascetic) should discard his body having
bones as the pillar, united with sinews, besmeared with
flesh and blood, covered with skin, full of foul smell of

Agni PurS^a
urine and feces, subject to old age and grief. (It is also) the
abode of diseases and afflictions, emotional and non-eternal.
1 7. Firmness, forgiveness, self-restraint, not-stealing, purity,
control of senses, modesty, learning, truthfulness and absence
of anger are the ten characteristics of righteousness.
18. The ascetics are of four types — kuficaka, bahudaka^
harhsa and paramaharhsa. Each succeeding one is superior.
19-26. An ascetic would be liberated, whether he is an
ekadan^in (holder of one stave) or tridandin (holder of three long
staves tied (together). Abstaining from killing, truthfulness,
not stealing, celibate life, and non-possession of things are the
five moral observances for an ascetic. Purity, gratifying, penance,
study of vedic texts of one’s school and worship of the deity
are the (five) self-imposed moral observances. The padmaka^
and others are the postures. The prdndyama (the controlled brea¬
thing) is of two types — sagarbha and agarbha. T!h.€^garbha type is
that associated with the repetition and contemplation (of a
sacred syllable) and agarbha is the opposite. Each one of these is
again of three kinds — inhalation (filling), retention and exhala¬
tion (emptying). The breath is said to be filling as it fills up,
retention as there is no movement, and emptying on account of
emptying. It is also of three kinds on account of difference
in the (period of) measure, such as twelve, twenty-four and
thirtysix matrd respectively. One mdtra is the time (taken) for
(pronouncing) a short vowel. One should repeat syllables
like the pranava {orh) slowly. The pratydhdra (restraining the
organs) is (only) for those who repeat (sacred syllable).
Dhydna is the contemplation on god. The firmness of mind is
the dharand. Samddhi is the state of continuous existence in brah-^
man. This self is the supreme brahman (of the form of) truth,
knowledge and bliss. I am that supreme brahman^ effulgent
self, the (lord) V^adeva (Siva) liberated orh.
27-28. (I am) devoid of a body, sense organs, mind, intel¬
lect, life and ego. (I am) free fi-om (the states of) waking, dream¬
ing and deep sleep, (and I am) the brahman of the fourth (state) .
(I am) eternally pure, realised, liberated, truth, bliss and without
1. The posture of sitting erect with crossed legs, the right foot resting
on the left loin and the left foot on the right loin.

a second. I am the brahman^ the supreme effulgence, undecaying
(and) all-pervading lord Hari (Visnu).
29. That person who (is in the) Sun, that I am, the un¬
divided, orh. (I am) one who is devoid of all beginnings, equal
towards grief and pleasure and having forbearance.
30-31. A person would become brahman being pure in one’s
thought and after having pierced the primordial egg. One should
perform the vow of cdturmdsya^ on the full moon day of d§3.4ha
(June-July). Then one should move out on the ninth day etc.
One should have the shave at the junction of two seasons.
The atonement for ascetics are contemplation, {doing) prdn&ydma
and (the practice of) yama^ (moral observances).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTWO
The code of laws
Puskara said :
1-2. I shall describe concisely the code of laws as narrated
by Manu, Visnu, Yajfiavalkya, Harita, Atri, Yama, Ahgiras,
Vasistha, Daksa, Sarhvarta, Satatapa, Parasara, Apastamba,
UiSanas, Vyasa, Katyayana, Brhaspati, Gautama, Sahkha and
Likhita.You listen to that which would yield you enjoyment and
emancipation. The path of action adhering to the Vedas is of
two kinds — taking active part in worldly \\Sc{pravTtta) and abs¬
taining from worldly acts (nivjrtta).
3-5. An act performed for (getting) particular object would
be taking active part in worldly life. Abstaining from worldly
acts is preceded by true knowledge. The study of the Vedas,
penance, knowledge, control of senses, non-injury and service
to the preceptor all confer extreme pleasure. But the knowledge
of one’s own self is the most superior to all.
6-7. It is the leading one among all knowledge. One gets
ambrosia from that. A learned man who studies his own self
1. A period of four months during which an ascetic has to stay at the
same place.

Agni Purd^
and sees equally his own self in all beings and all beings
in his own self attains identification of his own self with the
brahman. One should maJce equal efforts in (the acquisition of)
knowledge about self and in the study of Veda.
8-10. This is the same for all the twice-borns and it is spe¬
cially (laid down) for brahmins. One who knows the scrip¬
tures and sciences and their import is set for becoming identical
with brahman even as he is living in this world and remaining
in different stages of life. The commencement of vedic
study of one’s own school should be in the month of Srdvana (JulyAugust) in the (asterism) iravana. (It can also be done) in the
(aster ism) hasta or Monday or fifth day (of the lunar fortnight)
in the (month) o^irdvana^ or in the (asterism) rohini in the month
pausa (January-February), or in the aslakd (the three days 7th
to 9th).
11-18. The study of Veda should be commenced as laid
down outside on the banks of a tank. There would be cessation
of vedic study for three days at the death of the pupil or the
officiating priest or the preceptor or the relative. So also (there
would be cessation of vedic study) at the beginning and conclu¬
sion of the vedic study if a person well-versed in one’s own branch
of Vedas (dies). If there is thunder at the (time of) twilight or a
hurricane or earthquake or fall of meteor (cessation of study is
laid down). Even if the study has been completed and the cease¬
less study has been made in the forest (there would be cessation
of study). So also (there would be cessation of study) on the
fifteenth, fourteenth and eighth days of a lunar fortnight, at the
time of eclipse (of the sun or moon), at the junctions of seasons,
after having dined at a srdddha and after having received a gift.
(There would be cessation of study)for aday and night if a hare
or frog or mongoose or dog or serpent or cat or pig goes in bet¬
ween (the preceptor and the pupil). It is the same if there is
lightning or rising of planets. If the sounds of a dog or a jackal
or ass or owl (are heard) once, five times or six times or at a
place impure, or associated with a corpse, iudra, or an antya
(the fifth caste), cremation ground or a person fallen from righ¬
teous living, (there is cessation of study). (So also there is cessa¬
tion of study) in evil asterism, and when there is lightning,
thunder and floods. (So also there is no studyQ after eating,
with wet hands, remaining in waters, at midnight, (and on

the days when there is) excess of wind, dust storm, morbid heat,
the fall of snow and at the time of twilight and while havingother fears. (So also there is no study) while running or being
disturbed by animals or when a great person has come home or
while climbing a mule, camel, vehicle, elephant, horse, boat
and tree. These are known to be the thirtyseven temporary
(instances) of cessation of the vedic study.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTHREE
Mode of performance of a Srdddha
Puskara said :
1 -2. Listen to me. I shall describe the procedure for (the
performance of) annual ceremony that yields enjoyment and
liberation. After having invited brahmins the previous day,
they should be welcomed in the afternoon, worshipped and
seated on the seat. Two (brahmins are invited) in the cere¬
mony intended for gods and one by one in the ceremony intend¬
ed for departed forefathers. They (are made to sit) facing the
east in the ceremony for the gods. There may be three or one
(brahmin) in the ceremony for forefathers.
3-7. The same (procedure is followed) in regard to the
ceremonies) of the maternal forefathers also. (I shall describe
the procedure for) the vaiivadeva}. After having given (waters)
for washing hands and kuia (grass) for the sake of seat
and having obtained permission (from brahmins) (all
gods) should be invoked with the syllables, viioedevasafy'^.
After having spread the barley then, and pouring water in the
vessel containing pavitraka (the purifying kuSa) with (the syllables)
ianno devi^ and then the barley with (the syllables) the
1 . An offering made to gods.

Agni Purdna
libation is placed on the hand with the sacred syllables ^<2 divyd}-.
Then, after having offered waters, fragrance, flowers, incepse and
lamp, and shifted the sacred thread to (rest on) the right (shoul¬
der), the forefathers should be circumambulated. The fore¬
fathers should be invoked with the syllables uiantastvd^ extending
two kuSa (grass). After having been permitted by them, one
should recite (the syllable) dyantu nah^.
8-15. Sesamum should be used in the place of barley.
Respectful offering of water should be made as before. After
having done it, the remains of libation should be collected
in a vessel as laid down and the vessel is turned upside down
with the (syllable) pitfbhyah sthanamasi*. Then the cooked rice
covered with ghee should be taken (in hand) and asked, “shall
I offer it to the fire ?”. Being permitted (to do so saying)
“Do it”, one should offer it to the fire as in the ceremony (done)
for the manes. The remnants of offering should be given with
devotion in vessels secured according to one’s status or especially
in silver (vessels). After having offered food the vessel should
be consecrated with (the sacred syllable) pfthivipatram^ . Then
the thumb of the brahmin should be placed therein with (the
recitation of the sacred syllable) idam visnubfl. After reciting
gdyatri’ together with the vydhrtis^ and the hymn madhuvata^ it
should be stated “(eat) comfortably”. They should also eat
controlling their speech. They should be served the cooked rice
and the clarified butter after the repetition of (sacred sylla¬
ble) of purification. Then cooked rice should be taken (and
shown and enquired) : “Are you satisfied ?”. The remaining
cooked rice should be scattered on the ground and water should
be sprinkled one by one. The cooked rice (that was scattered)
should be gathered together with sesamum and as in the case of
the ceremony for the manes the balls of rice should be offered
3. cf. d jiantu na^ V. Sam. 19.58 a.
7. Orh bhdrblmvassuva^ tatsaviturvarepyarh etc.
8. Orh bhSfy etc.

remaining facing the south in the proximity of the place where
the food was eaten (by the brahmins).
16-20. (It is done) in the same way for the maternal fore¬
fathers also. Then water for sipping is offered. Then the words
of benediction should be uttered. So also the undecaying
waters (should be offered). After having paid fees befitting
one’s capacity, the syllable svadhd should be pronounced. After¬
having been permitted to say, (the words) svapitfbhyafy svadhd^
{svadhd to my forefathers) should be said. When (the brahmin)
says let svadhd be (repeated), it should be done so. Then water
should be sprinkled on the ground. Water should be offered
with the (repetition of the syllables) prxyantdih^ or viivs devah.^
After having said “Let our donors, the Vedas and the progeny
flourish. Let not our earnestness dwindle. Let us have plenty to
give”* and uttering sweet words (the brahmins) should be allow¬
ed to go. The satisfied manes should be bade adieu after (re¬
peating the syllable) vdje vdje^ .
21-23. The vessel in which the remnants of libation had
been poured earlier, that vessel of the manes should be made
upright and the brahmins should be bade adieu after following
them in such a 'way as circumambulating. After having eaten
(remnants of) the food partaken by the forefathers, one should
observe continence that night in the company of brahmins.
After having done the circumambulation of the manes in the
ndndi^ in connection with the impurity caused by the birth of a
child, they should be worshipped with the balls of barley mixed
with curd and (fruit of) jujube.
24. The ekoddifPa^ (ceremony) (is done) without (the wor¬
ship of) (Vi^ve)devas. There would be only one libation and
one purificatory rite. The (offering should be made) in the
6. The ceremony performed in memory of the manes, preliminary to
any festive occasion such as marriage etc.
7. The rite performed for one individual deceased not including other
ancestors.

Agni Purd^a
dvdhana fire without the instrumental (syllable) with the sacred
thread lying on the right shoulder. *
25.. One should say ‘let you get up’ in place of ‘impe¬
rishable’ and ‘may you be satisfied’ in place of bidding adieu,
to the manes (in the former) . They should say “We are satisfied”
26-27. Four vessels containing fragrant waters and sesamum
should be kept apart, the vessel of the dead person should be
sprinkled with (waters), the waters of libation from the ves¬
sels of the forefathers with the two (sacred syllables) beginnings
With.) ye samdnd\. The remaining (acts) should be done as before.
When this ekoddisfa^ becomes the sapindikarana^(}X^hovL\6. be done
adding the (dead) woman also.
28. If the sapindikarana has to be performed for a (dead)
person within a year (after death), the food for him should be
given to a brahmin the whole year together with a vessel filled
with water.
29. The ceremony should be done on the day of death for
every month in a year and should be done for every year as the
food (offered) every month.
30-31. (The forefathers would be satisfied for) a month
with cooked rice and a year with payasa (sweet liquid made
with flour, rice, sago etc.). The forefathers get pleased by a
month more with (the offer of) flesh of the fish, deer, ram, bird,
sheep, spotted antelope, black antelope, ruru deer, boar and
hare in the succeeding order.
32-33. The offer of any one of the following — the flesh of
a buffalo, of a kind of sea crab, cooked rice with honey, the flesh
of the red goat, kdlaSdka, the flesh of a rhinoceros while at Gaya
would (please the manes) immensely. So also (the offer made)
on the thirteenth day in the asterism of maghd in the rainy season
(would) no doubt (please the manes).
34-35. One who does the (annual) ceremony always makes
grow the prosperity of his daughter, progeny, attendants, animals,
chief among the sons, ghee, agriculture, trade, animals-clovenfooted and not cloven-footed, sons possessing the lustre of brah3. The rite performed to merge the soul of the dead i|^son with theancestors.

marly gold, silver and the excellence of the relatives. He will also
get his desires fulfilled.
36. The ceremony is to be done on all days from the
first lunar day except the fourteenth day. (The ceremony)
is to be done on that day (fourteenth) for the sake of those who
were killed by weapons.
37-39. One who does the ceremony as laid down gets hea¬
ven, progeny, radiance, valour, land, strength, excellence of sons,
progeny with prosperity, importance, sons, unimpeded sover¬
eignty, trade, lordship, unimpaired health, fame, absence of
grief, excellent state, wealth, learning, the accomplishment of a
physician, silver, cows, small cattle, horses and long life.
40-41. (If the ceremony) is done in the asterisms com¬
mencing with Krittikd and ending with bharani one gets all these
desires fulfilled. The Vasus, R.udras, Adityas, the deities in
the form of manes get pleased with the men who satisfy the
manes with (the performance of) ceremony. The forefathers
being pleased confer on men long life, progeny, wealth, learning,
heaven, liberation and comforts.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFOUR
The propitiatory rite for the planets
Puskara said :
1 . One should commence the propitiatory rite for the pla¬
nets if one desires for prosperity or appeasement (of planets) or
rains, long life, or nourishment or exorcising for malevolent
purposes.
2-3. Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn,
Rahu and Ketu (the ascending and descending nodes of Moon
referred to as planets) are known to be planets. (The images
of) these planets should be made of copper, crystal, red sandal,
gold, silver, iron and lead respectively.
4-7. Otherwise (the images may be made) of gold and wor¬
shipped. Or their figures may be drawn in the circles drawn with

Agni Purdna
fragrant materials. The dress and flowers should be offered
matching their respective colours. Lines made of perfumes and
guggulu as the incense should be offered. CanP should be offered
to each god along with the sacred syllables (as follows) :d kfsnena*
imarh devc^, agnirmUrddha divah kakut^ and udbudhyasva^ are said
to be the syllables in order. Brhaspate atiyadaryatfl^ anndt parisrutah’j Sarh no devi^^ kdnidP and ketum krnvan^^ are the (syllables).
8-9. The arka^ khadiroy apdmdrga, pippala, udumbaray iamiy
durvd and kuSa are the twigs in order. Each one of these should
be offered to fire one hundred and eight times or twenty-eight
times together with honey, clarified butter and curd.
10-12. Rice boiled with coarse sugar, rice boiled with milk
or water, cooked food, dish of liquid rice and milk, curd rice,
ghee, small round cakes made of flour, flesh and rice mixed with
coconut and other things should be offered to the planets in the
respective order. A wiseman should feed the brahmins accord¬
ing to one’s capacity after having worshipped them as laid down
according to one’s knowledge. Cow, conch, ox, gold, dress,
horse, black cow, iron and goat are the things to be given as gifts
in order.
13-14. One should worship a planet with great effort if
that planet remains in a bad house at that time for that person.
They were blessed by lord Brahma (that they should be) wor¬
shipped (by the people). The rise and fall of the people are
subject to the planets. They are the existence and the non-exis¬
tence of the world. Hence the planets ought to be worshipped.
1 . An oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFIVE
Code of conduct
Fire~god said :
1. One should contemplate the soul, the lord that remains
in the heart like a lamp, having his mind, intellect, memory
and the senses not resting on any other object.
2. One should give things got from a cow, curd, ghee, and
milk. Saffron, mas Ur a (a kind of pulse), vdrtaku (egg-plant)
and kodrava (a species of grain) should not (be given).
3. When the son of Sirfthikd (Ketu) swallows the Sun (that
is, there is an eclipse of the Sun due to the descending node of
the Moon) at the junctions of the lunar fortnights, it is known
to be hasticchdyd. The ceremony and gift made then (yield)
undiminishing (benefits).
4. When the Moon is in (the asterism) paitrya {magkd)
and Sun in (the asterism) kara {hasta)^ the day is known as
Vaivasvati and the shadow is that of kunjara.
5. The remnant of that offered unto the fire should not be
given in the (rite of) vaiivadeva. The fees should be paid on the
hand of the brahmin in the absence of fire.
6-9. A woman is not defiled by a paramour and also a
brahmin (who has defaulted) from vedic rites. A woman en¬
joyed by employing force or fallen into the hands of an enemy
should be abandoned. She becomes pure after the menstrual
period. Earlier, women were enjoyed by the celestials such as
the Moon, Gandharoas and Fire. The men enjoy them later.
(Hence) they do not get defiled by any one. If a woman is
impregnated by one not belonging to the same caste, that
woman becomes impure till the extraneous matter is not dbcharged. When the extraneous matter had come out, she then
becomes pure by her menstrual flow.
10-12. Whoever does not see another as different from
his own self, becomes here the brahman itself. One who re¬
joices in his own self is (said to be) free fi-om impurity. Some
describe union as the union of objects and senses. Verily
unrighteousness has been taken as righteous view by those igno¬
rant (people). Others (say) that the union of the soul and mind
as the union.

Agni Purdifa
IS. After having restrained the mental activity and unifying one’s soul with the Supreme Being, one gets released from
bondage. This union (is said to be) the outstanding one.,
14. It is a collection of five family members. The sixth one
is extremely great. It cannot be conquered by the celestials or
demons or mortals.
15. All those (the senses) which look externally should be
made (to look) inward. The collection of senses (should lie)
in the mind. The mind should be united in the soul.
16. One’s soul that is free from all feelings should be
fixed in the brahman. This is the knowledge and meditation.
Everything else that remains would be elaborating the text.
17. That matter which (one thinks) as non-existent in all
the worlds is spoken to be as present. That which is spoken (as
being present) does not remain in the heart of another (other
than a yogi).
18. As a virgin (does not know) the happiness of a woman
so also that brahman is really unknowable. One who is not a
yogin never knows it just as a born-blind person (does not know)
the pot.
19. Having seen a renouncing brahmin, the Sun moves
from his position (thinking that) “This person would pierce my
orb and reach the Supreme Brahman”.
20. (One would get as) a fruit of that what one would get
by fasting, vow, bathing, sacred spots, the fruit of penance and
the gaining of a brahmin.
21. Supreme Brahman is the single letter. The control of
breath is the supreme penance. There is nothing more purifying
than the (sacred syllable) Savitrl (addressed to the Sun-god).
22. One who eats even from an outcaste would get pure
by contemplation. The meditator is the soul, the meditation
is the mind, the object of meditation is lord Visnu and the
fruit is lord Hari.
23-28. Just as the PaAktipSvand^ purifies in a ceremony so
also the ascetic (gets) imperishable worlds (for others). I do
not find an atonement that purifies a brahmin if he slips after
entering the state of abstinence. He is the killer of (his) soul.
1. One who purifies a party of diners by his presence. He would be a
learned person and follower of codes of conduct.

Those who are the progenitors through their wives after having
renounced, (their progeny) become outcastes known as
binduld. There is no doubt. An eagle dies after hundred (years).
A dog (lives) for twelve (years). A vulture (lives) for twenty
years. Then the pig (dies) after ten (years). A tree without
flowers becomes fruitless and is surrounded by thorns. Then
having been burnt by forest fire it becomes a dry trunk on a
peak. Then it remains a lifeless matter for eight hundred years.
After one thousand years are over it becomes a brahmardksasa
(spirit of a brahmin indulging in sinful deeds). One gets libe¬
ration from this either by deluge or the annihilation of the
family. One should always resort to (the practice of) yoga.
There is no other sacred syllable that removes sin.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSIX
Duties of different castes
Puskara said :
1-5. I shall describe the codes of conduct (laid down)
by the scriptures and codes of law. (The codes of conduct)
are of five kinds. That is known to be the codes of conduct
of the castes in which the authority rests on the caste alone. A
thing that is laid down resting on the stages of life is said to be
the code of conduct of the stages of life. The codes of (the
above) both which are made prevalent by a motive is known to
be naimittika (occasional or produced by a cause) like the codes
of atonement. O King ! the student, the householder, the
forester and an ascetic are said to be the codes of conduct of
stages of life. The fourth one is the practical code and the fifth
one is the metaphysical code. It is said to be the practical
code which has its say in the six qualities.
6. This is of three kinds. According to Manu mantra (mystic
syllable) and y&ga sacrifice (are) metaphysical codes. Those
which belong to the two classes are justice and administration
of justice.
7. Even for the same kind of things it is said that there would

466 Agni Purdiia
be option due to ydga (sacrifice). The same duty is laid down in
the codes also as in the scriptures. ^
8. Followers of Manu (declare) that the code brings forth
repetition for the purpose of the work undertaken. Otherwise
the repetition is specially for the quality of limitation.
9. Followers of Manu (state) that this (repetition) is only
a special practical code for the result. One would reach the
world of Brahma by doing the forty-eight purificatory rites.
10-19. (They are) the impregnation^, causing the birth
of a male child*, the parting of the hair*, rites done at the birth
of a child, naming the child, the first rice-feeding of the child*
the tonsure®, investiture of the sacred thread, the collection of
four vedic observances — the completion of one’s studies, marri¬
age, the collection of five devotional acts — towards the gods,
manes, mortals, beings and sages, seven simple domestic
sacrifices — the asfaka and pdrvamsraddha, irdvani, agrahdyani,
caitri, and divayuji, then the haviryajnas (such as) the agnyddheyOy
agnihotra, darSapaurnamdsay cdturmdsyay dgrahdyanyespi, nirudhapaSuhandhaka and the sautrdmani, the seven somasamsthds— commencing with agni^foma — atyagnisfoma, ukthdy vdjapeyaka,
atirdtra etc. and the eight basic human qualities — compassion,
forbearance, freedom from malice, absence of exertion, propitiation,charity and absence of desire. Whoever possesses these attains
the supreme. One should observe silence in the six (acts) —
evacuation of bowels, copulation, passing urine, cleaning the
teeth, bathing and eating. One should avoid making a
gift again (of an article received as a gift) drinking separately
the ghee and milk in the night, removal of teeth and hotness in
the seven (kinds of) flours. One should not gather flowers
without bathing. It is said to be unfit for the (worship of) gods.
20. If a person not belonging to the same gotra and not
related does the cremation of a dead person, he has to complete
ten day rites by offering balls of rice and water.
1. Is done when the conception is known.
2. Is done before the embryo begins to move.
3. Is done in the eighth month after pregnancy.
4. Is done in the six months after the birth of a child.
5. Is done in the third y ear of a child.

21 . If one has to dine with unequal persons there is no defi¬
ling of the row if (the two) are separated by water or grass or
ashes or door or pathway.
22. The five oblations to the (five breaths) (at the com¬
mencement of taking food) should be done with the union of
the ring-finger and the thumb.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSEVEN
Propitiatory rite for the planets
Fire-god said :
1. I shall again describe (the mode of performing) the
propitiation of the planets for the sake of prosperity, peace and
success. The propitiation of planets is of three kinds — oblations
ten thousand times, lakh times and crore times.
2-7. After having invoked planets in a circle at the
north-east of the fire-pit with the sacred syllables, Jupiter (should
be located) at the north (of that circle), Mercury at the north¬
east, Venus at the east, Moon at the south-east. Mars at the south
and the Sun in the middle. Saturn (should be located) at the
west, Rahu, the ascending node at the south-west and Ketu,
the descending node at the north-west. Ha (lord Siva), Umi,
Guha, Vi^nu, Brahma, Indra, Yama (god of death), Kalaka
and Gitragupta^ arc the presiding deities (of the places where
the planets have been located). The fire, water, earth, Hari
(lord Vis^u), Indra, the presiding deity of the east, PrajeSa
(the lord of men), Serpent (god) and Brahma are the subordi¬
nate deities respectively. Ganeia, Durg& (the consort of Siva),
wind, sky and Aivinl gods (arc also the gods). They should be
worshipped with their respective basic vedic syllables. The
twigs of arkat paldSa^ khadira, apdmdrga, pippala, udumbarOy Samlf
dUrvd and kuSa should duly be offered in the fire mixed with honey,
clarified butter and curd one hundred and eight times.
1. An imaate of the worid Yama recording the vices and virtues
mankind<

Agni PwSm
8. After having filled one, eight and four pitchers, the final
oblation (should be made). Then the should4>e offer¬
ed and the fees paid.
9-10. The sacrificer should be anointed with (the waters
of) the four (pitchers) along with sacred syllables. (The follow¬
ing benediction should be made) — “May the celestials — Brahma,
Vi§nu, Mahe^vara, Vasudeva, Jagannatha, lord Sankar^ana
Pradyumna and Aniruddha be for your victory.**
11-13. May Indra, Fire-god, Yama, Nairfta, Varuna,
Pavana (wind), Kubera (lord of wealth), Siva, Sesa (the lord
of serpents) along with Brahma and the gods of the directions
always protect you all. May the (divine) mothers, the chaste
wives Kirti, Laksmi, Dhrti, Mcdha, Pusti, Sraddha, Kriya,
Mati, Buddhi, Lajja, Vapus, Santi, Tusfi and Kanti who have
gathered here anoint you.
14. The planets Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus, Saturn, Rahu and Ketu, who have been appeased,
anoint you.
15-18. May the celestials, demons, gandharvas^ yak^as, rdkfasaSf serpents, sages, Manus, cows, the divine mothers, the wives
of gods, trees, serpents, progeny of Diti, heavenly nymphs,
attendant gods, weapons, scriptures, kings, vehicles, herbs,
gems, the constituents of time, rivers, oceans, mountains, holy
waters (places), clouds and the west-flowing rivers all these
anoint you for the attainment of all desires. After having
adorned, one should then give gold, cow, food, earth etc.
19. O Rohini ! The Tawny-coloured ! You are to be
worshipped by all gods and hence you are made up of all holy
spots and gods. Hence you give me tranquillity.
20. O Conch ! You are the meritorious among all merits,
auspicious among all auspiciousness. You are borne by lord
Vi^nu always. Hence (you) give me tranquillity.
21. O Righteousness ! You make the universe rejoice in
the form of the bull. You are the location of eight forms.*
Hence you give me tranquillity.
1. A profuse oblation of ghee oflered in the fire through a long bamboo
'or plough.
2. Relating to $iva, being the five elements/suq, moofif and die saerificer*

22. O Golden embryo of the Fire god or Sun that is lying
imbedded inside the golden egg ! You give me appeasement
that yields limitless meritorious fruits.
23. The pair of yellow cloth is the favourite of lord
Visudeva. Hence lord Visnu (would be pleased) by making
a gift of the same. Hence give me tranquillity.
24. You are lord Visnu in the form of Fish from which
the nectar has come. You have the moon and the sun as the
vehicle always. Hence you get me tranquillity.
25. O Cow of the colour of (lord) Kesava (Visnu), on
account of the fact that you are the entire earth that always
removes the sin, you give me tranquillity.
26. (O Iron) On account of (the fact that) all deeds
as well as weapons such as the plough are always subject to
your control, you get me tranquillity.
27. On account of (the fact that) you are always the origin
of fire and remain as a constituent of all sacrifices, you get me
tranquillity.
28. Because the fourteen worlds remain in the limbs of the
cow, let me have good in this world as well as in the next.
29. On account of the fact that the beds of Keiava and
Siva are not empty let my bed also be not empty in every birth
being given (now).
30. Just as the celestials are established in all gems so
also let the celestials get me tranquillity by my gift of gems.
31. Just as the other gifts are not equal to one-sixteenth
(of the merit) of making a gift of land, may I have peace by the
gift of the land.
32-41. (The performance of) sacrifice (to appease)
the planets with ten thousand oblations with the payment of
the fee (secures) victory in battle. At the time of marriage,
festivities, sacrifices, rites for the installation and for the fulfilment
of desires, it is said (that one should do) the two— the obla¬
tions a lakh times and crore times. In the (oblation) ten thou¬
sand times a pit of one cubit length and another pit having a
gprdle and hole (should be made ready) at (the exact spot for
building) the house and pavilion. (There should be) four
sacrificial priests. In the (oblation for ^) lakh times there may

Agni Purd^
be the self alone. These are ten times meritorious. (The pit may
be a square of) four cubits or two cubits (long). Here Tarksya
(the bird vehicle of lord Visnu) should be worshipped more.
(He should be addressed as) “You are the vehicle of highly
adorable god and your body is composed of the sound of s&man
(melodies). You are always the remover of things. Hence you
get me tranquillity. As before the sacrificial pit should be sancti¬
fied and the oblation lakh times performed. The vasordhard}
should be given then. (Then) bed, ornaments and other things
should be offered (as gift) . There may be ten or eight sacrificial
priests in the performance of oblations lakh times. (By the
performance of this) one would get sons, food, kingdom, con¬
quest, enjoyment and liberation. One who performs oblation
a crore times after making different gifts, would kill his enemy
as a result of it. The sacrificial pit (may be a square) of four or
eight cubits and there may be twelve sacrificial priests. (There
may be) twentyfive or sixteen (priests) and four (?)’* on a cloth
at the entrance. One who does oblation crore times gets the
desired things and reaches the world of lord Visnu. The
oblation (may be done) with the sacred syllables of planets,
or the gdyatri or those of Visnu, or those addressed to the fire
god or those of Siva or the well-known vedic (hymns). One
gets the benefit of (doing) aivamedha (sacrifice) by (making
oblations with) sesamum, barley, ghee and grains.
42-44. (In the oblations intended) to cause enmity or
sorcery the sacrificial pit should be a triangular one. The twigs
(should be offered) with the left hand together with bones
of the eagle and fire by (those) who contemplate evil for their
enemy and who have red dress and untied hair. “Let the person
who hates have enemies. Hum phaf\ This is the (sacred syllable).
The image (of the enemy) made of flour should be cut with
a knife and the enemy should be killed. Or one ball of rice should
be offered. One who does so would go to heaven.
2. The text is cryptic. The exact significance is not known.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYEIGHT
Kinds of major sins
Pu§kara said :
1. The king should punish the men who do not perform
atonement (for their own misdeeds). One should perform
atonement (irrespective of the fact that the misdeed was done)
with one’s wilful desire or not.
2. One should never eat (food) from intoxicated, angry
and sick men. (One should not eat food) touched by great sinners
and that touched by a woman in her courses.
3-9. (One should) also (not take) food (prepared) for a
group of persons, food from the courtezan, an usurer, a singer, a
cursed person, an eunuch, a (woman) having a paramour in the
house, a washerman, a noxious person, a panegyrist, a cheat, a false
ascetic, a thief, one who has undergone a punishment, one who
is born to an adulterine, one who is born to a widow, one who is
controlled by a woman, one who sells scriptures, an actor,
a weaver, and food from an ungrateful person. One should avoid
food from the blacksmith, hunter, washerman of sarees, falsely
renounced person, a harlot, an oilman, one who had ridden (on a
horse etc.) and fallen and one’s enemies. So also (one should
not eat food) from a brahmin, being not invited by that brah¬
min. So also a Sudra should not eat food from a brahmin even if
invited. If one happens to eat utiknowingly from the other
among these, one has to fast for three days. After having eatei>
knowingly one should observe the krcchra} One who had eaten
food from a Candala and svapaca and the semen, feces and urine,
should observe the cdndrdj>aifa.^
10-11. One should observe taptakfcchra after having eaten
food within ten days of pollution, food intended for the dead or
that is smelt by a cow or the remnant of that eaten by a iUdra
or a dog and the food from a fallen person. (When the food has
been taken) at the time of pollution one should observe kfcchra.
Whoever eats food from a person having pollution also becomes
impure.
1. A simple expiation of fasting etc.
2. Fast regulated according to the phases of the moon.

12. An excellent brahmin who had drunk water from a
well into which a five-nailed dead animal (had fallen) fir con¬
taining feces, should observe fast for three days.
13-21. In all the cases the iaJra, vaisya and bhumipa (the
ruling class) (would have fasting) one fourth, half and threefourth (of days prescribed for the brahmins). A brahmin who
has partaken the urine and excreta of a bird, boar, mule, camel,
jackal, monkey and crow should observe cdndrdyana.^ One gets
purified by (observing) taptakfcchra^ after having eaten dry flesh,
food (intended) for the dead, (flesh of) karaka (a species of
bird) (and also after eating the flesh) of a carnivorous animal,
boar, camel, jackal, monkey, crow, cow, man, horse (and)
camel and after having eaten mushroom, the village cock as
well as the flesh of an elephant. So also a brahmacdri having
eaten at the dmakdddhd^ and consumed honey or garlic or
onion etc. get purified by (doing) prdjdpaiya* etc. So also one
should do cdndrdyana^ after having eaten flesh made ready (cook¬
ed) by himself. So also pelugavyd^ and peyusa’ which cause
excess of phlegm and vftd-krsarasamydva^f pdyasa^j cakes, fried
eatables made of flour, flesh of animal not prepared for a sacri¬
fice, food intended lor the gods, oblations and all (kinds of)
milks except (those) of cows, she-bulfaloes and goats are prohi¬
bited as well as their waters ten days old. 'I’he hare, porcupine,
godha (a kind of an alligator), rhinoceros and tortoise are (those
among) the (animals having) five nails (wiiose flesh) could be
eaten. Ihe remaining ones are prohibited. One may eat fish
such as the pdfhina (a kind ol' sheat-fish), rohita and lion-faced
fish.
2. Drinking water with milk and ghee once in tliree days for twelve
days.
3. An ancestral rite in which uncooked food is ofTcrcd,
4. Aland of fast for 12 days, eating food in the morning for the first
three days, in the evening for the next three days, only if given as alms the next
three days and a plenary fast tiie rest of the days.
5. See note 2 on p. 471 above.
6. The exact meaning is not known.
7. The nulk of the cow within seven days after calving.
8. Food consisting of wheat flour, rice and sesamum not prepared for
any religious purpose.
9. Rice boiled with milk or sugar.

22-23. (Having eaten) all (eatables) made of barley and
wheat and (all) transformations of milk, odge^idgaoacakra (?)
and others, that which is oily and (the food) kept overnight, a
brahmin should do the agnihotra^y kindle the fire and as desired
observe cdndrdya^ for a month. The posture of vir&sana^ is said
to be conducive.
24-25. The killing of a brahmin, drinking of wine, stealing
and copulating with preceptor’s wife are said to be great sins.
The association with them, pleasure in untruth, miserliness in
a king, speaking ill of the preceptor are equivalent to the killing
of a brahmin.
26. Neglecting the VedaSy censuring the VedaSy bearing fake
witness, killing of a friend, eating forbidden food and clarified
butter are the six equivalents to the drinking of wine.
27. The stealing of the entrusted such as a man, horse,
silver, land, gems like diamond are remembered to be equiva¬
lent to the stealing of gold.
28. Cohabiting with consanguineous girls, (women) of low
caste, wife etc. of the son of a friend are known to be equivalent
to cohabiting with the wife of the preceptor.
29-40. Killing of a cow, doing a sacrihce for an outcaste,
adultery, selling oneself, forsaking the preceptor, mother, and
father as well as one’s vedic study, the fire-worship and the son,
marrying before the marriage of one’s elder brother, getting one’s
daughter married to a person whose elder brother is unmarried,
conducting a sacrifice for them,seducinga girl, practising usury,
breaking of a vow, selling a tank, garden, wife and son, becom¬
ing an outcaste by the non-performance of the religious rites,
forsaking the relatives, teaching the servant taking instruction
from a servant, selling of things prohibited for sale, exercising
control over all the mines, instituting a potent amulet, destroy¬
ing herbs, living by means of a woman, disregarding one’s work,
felling of unwither^ trees for fuel, taking many wives, associating
with those who despise women, commencing some action for the
benefit of one’s own self, eating of censured food, not invoking the
1. A dsily to the fire.
S. Fofture of squatting on the thighs, the lower leg being crossed ovSr
eadk other.

Agni Purd^
sacrificial fires^ indulging in stealing, not discharging the debts,
studying of false scriptures, bad conduct, (doing) deeds harmful
(to others), stealing grains^ metal and cow, cohabiting woman
fond of drinking, killing a woman, a Sudra^ a vatiya^ or a ksatriya
and atheism are all minor sins. Causing injury to a brahmin,
the act of smelling something that should not be smelt or the
wine, deceitfulness, and cohabiting with men are known to be
the acts to make one an outcaste. I’he killing of a dog, mule,
camel, lion, goat, ewe, fish, snake and mongoose are known to
be safikirnakarana (mixed acts). Getting money from the defa¬
med, doing trade, serving a iudra, and speaking untruth are
known to be apatrikarana (doing unworthy acts). The killing of
insects, worms and birds, taking food followed by drinking wine,
stealing fruits, fuel and flowers and cowardice are also defiling
(acts).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SIXTYNINE
Atonements for various offences
Pufkara said :
1-4. (I ) shall describe the atonements for the sins described
so far. A killer of a brahmin should live in a forest for twelve
years in a hut. For the sake of one’s purity one should seek alms
carrying the skull of the dead person on a staff. Or one should
throw oneself in the kindled fire thrice with head downwards.
Otherwise one should do the aivamedhaf svarjit or gosava. Or one
should recite one of the Vedas and walk one hundred
Otherwise one should give away all (his wealth) to a brahmin,
learned in the Vedas. The impurity due to the great sins gets
destroyed by these observances.
5-10. One who is possessed of minor sins (such as) killer
of the cow should drink (only water along with) barley. After
having had a shave he should live in the cowshed covering
hixn^elf with the hide of that (cow killed by him). He should
1. A is equal to eight or nine miles.

l6d.lM8
eat a little without alkaline things and salt in the fourth part
(of the day). He should bathe in cow*s urine for two months
controlling his senses. He should follow the cows during the day
and consume the dust rising (from their feet) standing with
raised (face). After having taken and observing a vow, he
should make a gift of eleven bulls and a cow. In the absence of
these one should make a gift of all his possessions to those learned
in the scriptures. Having caused obstruction to the movement
(of a cow) one should do a fourth (of the above atonements)
and two-fourth if (he had) kept (the animal) bound. It would
be a fourth less (i.e., three-fourth) if yoked and in full if (a cow)
has been killed. If some mishap has occurred (to the cow)
in the forests, mountains, inaccessible (terrain) and (due to)
sickness, one fourth (of the atonement) is laid, if it dies on acco¬
unt of the tying of the bell or ornament, half the above (atone¬
ment) should be prescribed.
11. A quarter less (of the above expiation) should be ob¬
served if (the cow or ox) dies on account of taming (goading)
or cliaining or conhning or yoking to a cart or (while being tied)
to the pillar, chain or rope.
12-15. When the horn or the bone (of a cow) has been
broken or the tail has been cut off, one has to drink barley (water)
till the cow becomes healthy. One should repeat the gomalividyS} and the hymn on the cow and contemplate on the gomati
(vidyd). If a herd of cows has been killed accidently, one fourth
(atonement) should be practised separately for every killing.
There will not be any sin if any mishap occurs when some help
is rendered (with good intention). Those subject to minor
sins except those who have violated the vow of continence should
observe this vow or the cdndraya^a.
16-18. One who has broken the vow of continence should
worship Nirrti in the night at the cross-road with the perform¬
ance of pdkayajha (a domestic sacrifice) with a black ass. After
having kindled the fire as laid down, a wiseman should offer
oblation to the Moon, Indra, Jupiter, Fire-god and others with
twigs, vedic hymns and clarified butter. Otherwise one should
wear the hide of an ass and roam about in the world. One should
1. A vedic hymn ^to be repeated while observing an expiation for hgvihg
killed a cow.

476 Agni Pur/t^
observe the vow for killing a brahmin after having killed an ass
unknowingly.
19. Having drunk wine, through ignorance, a brahmin
should drink wine of the colour of fire, or cow’s urine of the
colour of fire or water alone.
20-21. A brahmin, who has stolen gold should approach
the king and confess his act and say, “Let you punish me”.
The king should take the club and kill with one stroke the person
who had himself come. The expiation for the thief is by death.
A bralimin (gets purified) by doing penance.
22-24. Having violated one’s preceptor’s bed, one should
cut olF the penis and testicles himself, hold (them) in the folded
pahns and move towards the south-west until he does not fall
down. Then he should observe candrayana for three months con¬
trolling his senses. After having done wilfully one of the acts
making one an outcastc, one should practise the sdntapana^.
The expiation (known as) the prajdpatya (is laid down for the
same done) unwillingly. For acts causing mixture of castes,
the expiation of candrayana (should be observed ) for a month.
25-29. Foi acts which defile one (drinking of) boiled barley
(water) for three days would be (the expiation). A fourth part
(of the expiation) for the killing of a brahmin is prescribed for
killing of a warrior class, an eighth part (for killing) a trades¬
man and a sixteenth part (for killing) the fourth class. Having
killed a cat, a mongoose, a blue jay, a frog, a dog, godhd, (a kind of
allegator), an owl, and a crow one should practise the expiation
as for killing the ifidra. For having killed an unsteady woman
belonging to any one of the four castes and for having killed a
woman unintentionally one should observe the expiation as
for killing the fourth class. Doing breath-control is the expiation
for killing all (beings) not having bones. One should practise
the expiation sSntapana for having stolen things of little value from
another's house. One becomes pure after completing the vow.
30. The five products got from a cow are the purification
1. The expiation in which cow’s urine, co%vdung, milk, curd, clarified
butter or water with hUa is taken and fasting is observed for oi|^ ni|^t.

for the stealing of eatables, food, vehicle, bed, seat, flowers,
roots and fruits.
31. Fasting for three nights would be (the expiation) for
(having stolen) grass, log of wood, tree, rice in the husk, molas¬
ses, saree, hide and flesh.
32. One should be eating a small quantity of food for twelve
days (having stolen) gems, pearls, corals, copper and silver.
33. (One who had stolen) the cotton or silk or woollen rope
of cloven-hoofed or whole-hoofed (animal), a bird, perfume and
herb (shall take) only milk for three days.
34. One who had cohabited with a woman related by
blood or with the woman, or daughter of the son of a friend as
well as a woman belonging to the low caste should practise the
expiation for that of violating the bed of his preceptor.
35. One should practise candrdyana for having cohabited
father’s sister’s daughter, (one’s) sister, mother’s sister’s dau¬
ghter or (the daughter) of mother’s brother or a friend.
36. One should practise the kfcchra sdntapana for having
(emitted semen) in an unnatural way or (having gone) to a
menses woman or having emitted semen in the water.
37. A brahmin who had intercourse with a woman in the
bullock-cart or in the water or during the day should bathe
together with his dress.
38. A brahmin cohabiting a woman of the catiidla or the
low caste and having eaten (food therein) and having received
a gift (from them) unknowingly gets defiled. But (done) know¬
ingly becomes in par (with them).
39. The husband should keep the woman defiled by a brah¬
min confined in a room. That which a male should observe
for having cohabited other’s wives, the same vow should be
made to be practised by her.
40. If she is defiled again being advised by a person of the
same (character), only kfcshra cUndriyaifa is remembered to be
the purification for her.
41. That which a brahmin does in one night by resorting
to a low-caste woman, gets rid of it by eating only that collected

478 Agni Purib^a
as alms and by repeating (the sacred syllables) daily for three
years.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
The description of expiations for association with major sinners
Pufkara said :
1. I shall describe the expiations (to be practised)
by those who associate with major sinners. A man having asso¬
ciated with a degraded person for a year would himself be
degraded.
2-3. A person who officiates as a priest or teaches or has
marital relationship or travels in the same vehicle or eats together
or shares a seat and has thus association with a degraded person
should do that vow (relating to that act) for the purification
from such an association. The water of libation should be offer¬
ed (for that person) in the company o£sapindas^ and relatives.
4-9. On the day of degradation, a servant (of that person)
should throw around a pot with water in the presence of the
relatives, priest and preceptor at evening (time) as if he was
dead. One should fast the whole day and observe pollution along
with the relatives. (The relatives) should cease to talk with him
and seize the share (of the paternal property) as the eldest.
The share of the property as the eldest would be got by the youn¬
ger brother excelling him in moral qualities. After the expiation
h^s been done (the relatives) should bathe in the sacred waters
of a tank and fill a new pot with water and drink water along
with the degraded person. The same procedure has to be follow¬
ed in the case of degraded women also. They should be supp¬
lied with dress, food and drinks and they should live near the
houses (of their husbands). The hymn of Savitri* of those
brahmins (who officiate as priests for the degraded) become
degenerated. (A brahmin who) has officiated so should practise
1. Those eligible to have the same rice-ball offering.
2. The mantra is called so as it is addressed to the Sun god.

three krcchra^ (observances) and as laid down should be invest¬
ed with the brahminhood. (Those brahmins) who do not
practise the rites enjoined on them become outcastes and the
same procedure is to be prescribed also for them.
10. One gets free (from the sin) of accepting a gift from a
vile person by repeating the sSvitri {mantra) for three thousand
times and drinking milk at the cow-shed for a month.
11. For having forsaken a person who had sought refuge
and having violated the Veda^ a brahmin gets rid of that sin by
taking limited food for a month.
1 2. One who has been bitten by a dog, jackal, mule or carni¬
vorous village animals, or a man, camel or horse or pig gets pure
by doing prdn&yama.
13-19. In the (case of) breaking the vow of snStaka^ and
neglecting) his duty (one should) fast. Having uttered the
syllable of hurh to a brahmin and (having made) familiar address
to the elder, one should bathe and abstain from food the rest of
the day and appease (the offended person) after prostration.
One should practise krcchra and atik^cchra^ respectively for having
assaulted and assaulted fatally (a brahmin) . One should observe
krcchrdti-krcchrcd' for having caused blood to come out from a
brahmin. If a cdnddla and others Iiappen to stand at the house
(of a person) unknowingly, purification should be done from
the time it was known explicitly, Cdndrdyana or pardka^ are the
purificatory (rites) for a brahmin. Prdjdpatya is (laid down for
the fourth class of men. The rest follow this. If the jaggery or
flower (safflower) or salt or grains etc. (get polluted) they should
be kept in the house and at the entrance and they should be put
into the fire. It is laid down that (the polluted) earthen vessel
should be discarded.
1. Consists of taking urine or dung or milk or curd or butter of a cow
or the kuSa immersed water and fasting for a night.
2. The observance marking the completion of one’s study.
3. A kind of severe penance to be finished in 12 nights.
4. Eating for nine days the quantity of water one can hold in the band
and fasting for three days. But compare the e]q>lanation given in the next
ch^ter.
5. Fasting for twelve days.

Ag^i PurOifa
20-29. Purification of the materials is laid down in the case
of materials which are remnants. Those who have become pol¬
luted by drinking (water) from the same well and by touch get
pure by fasting or by the five things got from a cow. A brahmin
who eats as desired after having touched a canidla^ should do the
candrayana or the taptakrechra. One becomes pure after six nights
after having eaten or drunk from a vessel in a melee defiled by
cand&la and others of vile (caste). Those of the twice-born
communities after having eaten the remnants (of food) eaten
by the low-castes should do the vow of cdndrdyana and a iHdra
(should do it) for three nights. A brahmin who had unknow¬
ingly drunk water from a well or pot (used by) a canddla should
do the sdntapancd- and a Sudra should fast for a day. A brahmin
who drinks water afYer having been touched by a canddla (should
fast) for three days and a Sudra should fast for that day. A brah¬
min who has been touched by a dog, a SUdra or by the remnants
(of food) becomes pure after fasting a night and by taking
the five products obtained from a cow, and (if touched) by a
tradesman or a warrior should bathe (that) night. A brahmin
beginning a journey and discharging urine at a forest where
there is no water holding cooked food on his lap without placing
it anywhere should cleanse himself, sprinkle (water on the food)
and show it to the sun and fire.
30-32. I shall describe the mode of purification for travel¬
lers for having taken food both permitted and prohibited in a
place habited by aliens and robbers. After having returned to
one’s native place (one should do) in the natural order of the
castes. At (he end of the kfcchra a brahmin is again to be given
the sarfiskdra (purificatory rite),. A warrior (class) (gets purified)
after three-fourths (of the above rite), a tradesman after half
of it and the fourth class after doing a quarter and gets purified
after making a gift.
33. A woman in her courses touched by another woman in
her courses belonging to the same caste no doubt gets purified
by bathing that day itself.
34. A woman in her courses having been touched by a
1. Drinking milk, ghee or water heated once every dtree^days.

woman of the lower caste should not eat until she gets pure.
She gets pure by the purificatory bath.
35. A man having discharged urine passing through a road
and drinking water forgetfully becomes pure after fasting a day
and night and by taking the five products got from a cow.
36. A brahmin having discharged urine and eaten for¬
getfully without having cleansed himself becomes pure after
drinking barley (water) for three nights.
37-38. I shall now describe the mode of purification
for the brahmins who have renounced the life of a mendicant
and the life of detachment. They have to do three krcchras^
or edndrayana.^ Then they should be purified by purificatory rites
such as the jdiakarman^ and others.
39. One whose face comes into contact with the sandal or
impure thing, the means of purification for him are the earth,
cow-dung or the five things got from a cow.
40. A brahmin who had shaved or sold or wears blue colour¬
ed cloth etc. for the purpose of austerity becomes pure by
(doing) three krcchras.
41. A woman in her courses having been touched by a low
caste or a cantata becomes pure on the fourth day. She has to
observe (a vow for) three nights.
42. One who has touched a canddla or Svapaca or the dis¬
charge from a delivered woman or a dead body or a person who
has touched it (dead body) becomes pure immediately after
bathing.
43-45. A brahmin gets purified by bathing with oil after
touching the bone of a man. One who had a vomitting or
purging becomes pure after (smearing) with street mud
and water below the navel, bathing and taking ghee. One
who had done the shaving (gets pure) by bathing, One
who eats food at the time of an eclipse (gets purified) by doing
the kfcchra. One who has eaten food with an outcaste (becomes
pure) af\:er taking (the five) things got from a cow. One who
has been bitten by a dog, one who has been bitten by an insect
and one who commits suicide (gets purified) by {doing)kfC€hra,
1. A kind of simple expiation.
3. Rite performed immediately after the birth of a child.

482 Agni PurO^a
repetition (of mantras) and (offering) oblations. All sinners get
purified by repentance and by doing oblation etc.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYONE
Description of certain subtle expiations
Puskara said :
1. I shall describe certain subtle expiations which are
highly purificatory. One’s sins would get destroyed by the repe¬
tition of the purusasuktdS for a month.
2. By the repetition of the aghamarsana^ thrice one gets free
from all sins. The repetition of the vedic (mantras) such as the
(hymns of) vayti,yama and gdyatri and the observance of the vow
destroys all sins.
3-7. In all the (expiations called) kfcchras (there would be)
shaving, bathing, offering of oblations and worship of Hari
(Visnii). After getting up, one should stand during the day and
sit during the night (when practising the expiations). This is
said to be the virifjflna. One who does the ArrrAra in that (posture)
gets rid of sins. (Eating) eight morsels (of food) everyday is
known as yati-candrayana. (Eating) four (morsels) in the morn¬
ing and in the evening is known to be iihicdndr&yana. Eating two
hundred and forty balls (of food) in any manner in a month is
suracdndrdyana. One should drink hot water for three days and
hot milk for the (next) three days. (Then) drinking hot ghee
for three days, one should be consuming (only) wind for three
days. .This is said to be taptakfcchra. It is said to be Hta (kjrcchra)
by the (use of) cold (things).
8-10. Kfcchrdtikfcchra (is that of maintaining) with water
for twentyone days. (Drinking) cow’s urine, cow dung, milk,
curd, clarified butter and water with kuia (for a day) and fast¬
ing one night is known to be the expiation sdntapana. The same
if practised every day is known to be mdhdsdntapana. If each

one of these is taken for three days, it is known to be atisdntapana.
The expiation known a&pardka would be (the practice of) fasting
for twelve days.
11-14, Practising eating (food) once a day for three days
and (eating food obtained) unsolicited in the night (is known to
be) prdjdpatya. A quarter (of the kfcchra) is the pddakjrcchra,
(Maintaining) with fruits for a month (is known to be) phala
{krcchra) and with bilva, is said to be iri~kfcchra. (Similarly, one
may maintain) with lotus seeds and myrabolans, (Maintaining)
with flowers (is known to be) puspakr:chra. Patrakrcchra (would
be ) with leaves, toyakfcchra with water, &nd miilakrcchra with roots.
(So also one may maintain) with curd, milk and butter-milk.
It would be vdyavyakfcchra if one eats food (every day) for a
month that he can hold in the hand. The expiation (known as)
dgneyakrcchra (is) by (the eating of) sesamum for twelve nights.
It destroys one’s disease.
15-16. (Eating) a handful of fried grain (every day) for
fifteen days would be brahmakUrcca. One should fast on the four¬
teenth day and then eat the five things got from a cow on the
full-moon day and twice-cooked food thereafter. A person who
does so twice in a month gets free from all sins.
1 7. One who desires to be prosperous and wealthy and one
who wishes to attain heaven and to have all sins destroyed should
be intent on propitiating god. One who performs the expiations
would get all things.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTWO
The hymn which destroys sins
Pu^kara said :
1. When the minds of men indulge in (coveting) other’s
wives or other’s property or in doing harm (to others) the
expiation for that is the extollation (of the god).
2. Obeisance to that all-pervasive (four times repeated)
always. I salute the All-pervasive who resides in the mind, and
tliat lord Hari (Vi?^iu) who is the sense of my ego.

Agni PurO^a
3. (Obeisance to) that lord who remains in the mind and
who is unmanifest, endless and unconquered. (I salute) lord
Vi^nu (all-pervasive), the adorable by one and all, one with¬
out an origin, endless and lord of all.
4-5. Let my sin get destroyed by my contemplation on
that only lord Vi§nu, who remains in my mind, intellect and
ego and that lord Visnu, who is well-established in me and
who makes the immovable and movable beings as made of
their acts.
6. I (bow) to that Upendra^, (lord) Visnu and (lord)
Hari that removes the distress of the worshipper, and who re¬
moves the sin seen in one’s dream or due to imagination.
7. I salute that supreme lord Visnu who is the supporting
hand for one who is sinking down in the supportless dark world.
8. O Lord of all lords ! Lord of all ! Supreme soul !
One who has under him the thunderbolt ! O Lord of the sen¬
ses ! (repeated three times) (My) obeisance to you.
9. O Man-lion-formed ! Endless one ! Cow-herdsman !
An Efficient cause of all beings ! One having handsome hair !
(My) obeisance to you ! You subdue the sin, the wicked (words )
spoken, wicked (deeds) done and (wicked) thoughts.
10. O Kelava (one having handsome hair) ! You put
down the wicked thoughts of mine under the influence of the
mind and that very fierce and unworthy (act of mine).
11. The Sacred god ! Gowherdsman ! Devoted to the
sublime truth ! The Lord of the universe I The creator of the
world ! O Decay less one ! Subdue (my) sin.
12-13. Let my sins done in the forenoon, midday, after¬
noon and night with the body, mind or speech unknowingly or
knowingly or in dream get destroyed by the repetition of the three
Jinxes — O Hrsikesa (lord of the senses) ! Lotus-eyed ! Con¬
sort of Laksmi !
14. O Lord of the senses ! Lotus-eyed ! Consort of
Lak^m! ! You destroy my sins done by my body or speech.
O Consort of Lak^m! !
15-16. Whatever sin I have committed while eating, sleep¬
ing, stan^ng, going and remaining awake by my body, mind
1. Vif^u in his manifestation as the dwarf was known to be the brother
of Indra and was called as Upendra.

or speech, whether little or big which brings forth a wretched
birth or stay in hell, let all that be subdued by the pronunciation
of the word V^udeva^.
17. That which is the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme
Abode, the Holiest, the Supreme, when that Lord Vi§nu is
praised let my sin get destroyed.
18. Let that position of Visnu reaching which the learned
never return and which is devoid of smell, touch and other
(qualities), subdue all my sins.
19-21. Whoever either reads or hears this hymn, which
destroys the sins, would become free from sins done by the bodies,
minds and speeches. One reaches the supreme place of lord
Visnu (released) from all evil planets. Hence one should repeat
this hymn that destroys the sin when a sin has been done. This
hymn is an expiation for multitude of sins. This is the excellent
one for a person practising a vow. Sin gets destroyed by expia¬
tions, repetition of hymns and vows. Then one has to do them
for the sake of perfection and for enjoyment and emancipation.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTHREE
Different expiations for different sins
The Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the expiation as told by Brahma that
would alleviate the sin. That action which results in the separa¬
tion of the soul from the body (death) is known to be killing.
2. One who kills a brahmin on account of anger, hate or
by one’s own or other’s fault, would become a killer of a brahmin.
3. If one is a killer among many who are engaged in the
same act and who bear weapons, all of them are considered to
be killers.
4. If a brahmin dies on account of being censured or beaten
or is hurt by means of wealth that person (who caused death)
is said to be the killer of that person.
1. An appellation of Lord in his manifestation as lord Kffpa,
son of Vasudeva.

Agni Furihifa
5. When some help is rendered such as (tlie supply of)
medicine there is no sin if the recipient dies. There is no sin when
the son or pupil or wife dies when chastised.
6. One should examine carefully the place, time, age,
ability and sin and lay down expiation when no expiation
has been indicated.
7. One should give up his life at once for the sake of a cow
or a brahmin. One gets free from (the sin of) killing a brahmin
by throwing himself into the fire.
8. One who kills a brahmin should hold the skull on the
banner and seek alms proclaiming the act (done by him) for
twelve days, eating moderately. He would become pure.
9. A man who had killed a brahmin becomes pure by doing
good deeds for six years. Twofold (expiation) is laid down for
a motivated action as that of an unmotivated one.
10-12. The expiation would be for three years in the (case
of a brahmin) who has attempted to kill. If a warrior kills a
person (the expiation would be) twofold. A tradesman or the
person of the last class (doing that crime has to observe) thrice
that twofold (expiation). In the case of a brahmin (causing the
death) of a warrior (the expiation) would be a fourth less (of
that prescribed for the death of a brahmin), and half a quarter
in the case of (causing the death of) a tradesman. In the death
of a warrior caused by a warrior and (the death) of an old man,
woman, child and sick it would be one fourth of that for killing
a brahmin. In (the death of) a tradesman (it would be) oneeighth part (of that) and it would be known to be one-sixteenth
in commencing (to kill) the last caste.
13-20. One should practice the vow (prescribed) for kill¬
ing the last caste for having killed a woman not wicked. A killer
of a cow should drink five things got from a cow and have
(the senses) subdued for a month. (He) should lie down in a
cowshed, follow a cow and he becomes purified by giving a cow
as a gift. It will be a quarter less in the kfcckra or atikrcchra for
the kings and others. A brahmin who has killed a very old or
very emaciated or very young or sickly cow should practice half
the vow as mentioned above. He should feed the brahmins
according to his ability and should give away gold, sesamum
etc. It should be declared as killing a cow if the cow had been
struck with clenched fist or by the elbow, or the korn had been

broken or had been struck with the club or stick. In the event
of the death of a cow while being subdued or chained or yoked
to a cart etc. or (being tied) to a post, chain or rope, one should
do three-fourth (expiation of the above). One should practise
s&ntapana (ifthe death is due) to a log ofwood,^r4;5^fl(ya (if due)
to a lump of earth, taptakfcchra (if due) to a stone and atxkjcchra
(if due) to a weapon. One who has killed a cat or an alligator
or a mongoose or a frog or a dog or a bird should drink milk
for three days and practise expiation (called) cdndrayana. (If
the sin has been done) in secret, the expiation (should be done)
in secrecy and (if done) explicitly, (expiation should be done)
explicitly.
21-25. One should do hundred prdndydma}- for dispelling
all sins. Beverages, grape juice, date juice, palm juice, sugar¬
cane juice, spirituous liquor got from the flower of madhUka^
fankamddhvika (a kind of liquor), maireya (a kind of in¬
toxicating drink) and coconut juice are not (classified as) intoxi¬
cating drinks although (they are) intoxicating. Only those
which are mainly made of flours are known to be surd (wine).
Drinking (of wine) is prohibited for the three castes. After drink¬
ing so one should do penance and become pure (by drinking)
water. Then he may eat small quantity of food for a year or
oil-cake once in the night. For dispelling (the sin due to) drink¬
ing of wine one should wear woollen dress, have matted hair
and hold a staff. Having eaten unknowingly the excreta or
urine or something which has come into contact with wine, the
three castes of twice-bprns require to be purified again by the
performance of rites. One who has drunk water kept in the
vessel for wine should observe a vow for seven days.
26. One who has drunk water belonging to a canddla should
practise a vow for six days. One should practise sdntapana for
having drunk water from the well or vessel belonging to a cdn^dla.
27-28. A brahmin (becomes pure by eating) the five things
got from a cow for three nights for having drunk the water be¬
longing to the last caste. (One who has eaten) fish, t^orn, snail,
conch-shell, shell and a small shell and has drunk fresh water
becomes pure by (taking) five things got from a cow. One
1 . Breathing regulated by the repetition of gdyatrl mantra and the tyd/tiiis.

488 Agni PurSt^
gets pure after three nights after having drunk water from a well
having a dead body.
29. One should practise cindriyam for having eaten food
from a man belonging to the lowest caste. (If one had eaten
food) at the house of a SUdra at the time of distress, he becomes
pure by means of repentance.
30-31. A brahmin eating from the vessel of a SUdra (gets
purified) by (eating) the five things got from a cow and fasting.
That which is cooked in an oven, cooked in oil, oil, curd and
flour as well as jaggery, milk and juices from a Sudra are not
prohibited (items). One who eats without bathing gets pure
by fasting and repeating (sacred syllables) at the end of the day.
32-34. One who had eaten food after discharging urine
without getting purified becomes pure after three nights. One
who had eaten food into which hair or worm had fallen, know¬
ingly touched by the foot, seen by one who causes abortion, or
touched by a woman in her courses, licked by a crow and other
(birds ) , touched by a dog, and smelt by cow etc. should fast for
three days. One who eats the semen, excreta or urine should
practise the prdjapatya.
35-36. It is opined that cSndrdyana (should be done) at (the
time of) navaSraddhe^ y pardka at the mdsika (monthly rites for the
dead). Atikrcchra would be (in the ceremony) after three fort¬
nights and krcchra at the six-monthly (rite). Pddakicchra would
be (done) at the annual (ceremony) and one day (rite) at the
second annual (ceremony) . The annual ceremony will be on the
preceding day and the second annual ceremony on the next
day.
37. The expiation for having eaten the prohibited food is
fasting. One should do the Siiuka expiation (/iSucdndrdyana) for
having eaten bhustfna (a kind of fragrant grass) and garlic.
38. One who has eaten prohibited food and remnant of
food eaten by women and a iHdra and prohibited flesh
should drink milk for seven nights.
39. If a hrahmaedri (student) or an ascetic or one who has
undertaken a vow (drinks) wine and eats flesh while he is impure
due to the death (of a person) or birth (of a child), he should
do the expiation (known as) prdjspatya.
1. The first series of ceremonies collectively offered on the 1st, 3rd, 5th,
7th, 9th and 1 1 th days after the death of a person. »

40-41. Taking away another’s (belongings) by illegitimate
means is said to be stealing. One who has stolen gold gets puri'
fied if the king beats him to death with a club. Otherwise he
should lie down on the floor, bear matted hair, eat leaf, root
and fruit and eat well only once a day. He gets purified after
twelve years.
42. A person who had stolen gold or drunk wine or killed
a brahmin or cohabited the wife of the preceptor or committed
theft or drunk wine should practise kfcchra for a year.
43. (One who steals) gems, pearls and corals, copper,
silver, iron, bronze and stones should eat little quantity of food
for twelve days.
44. The expiation for abduction of men or women or taking
possession of lands or houses or wells or tanks is said to be edndri^
yarn.
45. The five things got from a cow are the purification for
the stealing of eatables, food, vehicle, bed, seat, flowers, roots
and fruits.
46. One should not take food for three nights (for having
stolen) the grass, wood, tree, dry food, jaggery, dress, hide and
flesh.
47-54. One who cohabits his mother, sister, the daughter
of his preceptor, the wife of the preceptor and his own daughter
should be deemed to have violated his teacher’s bed- He should
be declared as having violated his teacher’s bed and made to
embrace a heated and glowing iron image (of a woman) and he
becomes purified by death. Otherwise a person who has violat¬
ed the bed of his teacher should practise edndrayana for three
months. One should follow the same procedure for having coha¬
bited even fallen women. One should perform that vow for such
(women) which a person would perform for others* wives. It is
laid down that one should end his life for having cohabited
girls, catiddla women, daughters and wives of one’s sapinda.
(The sin) which a brahmin commits in a night by coha¬
biting a women of the lowest caste is got removed by him m
three years by eating (the food) got after seeking aims and daily
repetition (of sacred syllables). One has to practise cdndrdpt^
for having cohabited the wife of the paternal uncle, wife of one’s

Agni Pur&ffa
brother, woman of the lowest caste, a woman of the pukkasa^
caste, one’s daughter-in-law, sister, friend, sisters of the ^mother
and father, a woman who has been entrusted to one’s care, a
woman who has sought refuge, wife of [maternal uncle, one’s
sister, a woman belonging to the same clan, a woman who desires
another person, the wife of one’s pupil and the wife of one’s
teacher.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFOUR
Expiations for discontinuing the worship of gods
Fire- god said :
1 -3. (I shall describe) the expiation for omission in the wor¬
ship of gods and orders. One should repeat one hundred
and eight times and worship twice for omission in worship.
After having made oblations with the five upanisadic sacred
syllables brahmins should be fed. One should repeat hundred
times if (the idol of) the deity has been touched by a woman
who has delivered a child, a woman of the lowest caste and a
woman in her courses. (One should do) worship with the five
upanisadic (sacred syllables) and two times bathing. When
there is omission in the oblations brahmins should be fed, (Then
one should do) oblation, bathing and worship.
4-5. When the materials for the oblation have been
eaten by rats, etc., or abound with worms, that part alone
should be rejected, sprinkled (with water) and the deities
worshipped. When it is broken or damaged to the extent of a
sprout it should be rejected. When it has been touched by an
untouchable it should be transferred to another vessel.
6. If the sacred syllable or the materials get altered at the
time of worship or in destroying the impediments due to the
gods and mortals one should mutter the basic (syllable) and
repeat again.
7. (One should) repeat one hundred times if the pot is lost.
If (the image of) the deity has fallen from the hand and got
1. A kind of mixed caste.

broken or lost there will be welfare only after fasting and (doing)
oblations hundred times,
8. For a man who repents after doing a sin, the best expia¬
tion is to remember lord Hari.
9. The practice of cSndr&yatia or pardka or prdjipatya des¬
troys the sin. The repetition of the sacred syllables of the Sun,
I^a (lord Siva), Sakti (consort of lord Siva), Sri^a (lord Vi§nu)
and others would destroy the sin.
10-11. The repetition of gdyatri, pra^va {orh)^ hymns
and sacred syllables destroy sins. The sacred syllables of the Sun,
I^a, Sakti and Srisa beginning with the (letters) ‘Aa* etc. and
their basic syllables and ending with the respective letters are
separately more than a crore. (The sacred syllables) such as
orh, hrirh etc. and ending with (the name) in the fourth case and
(the word) ‘salutation’ are capable of yielding all desires.
12. The sacred syllables of (lord) Nrsirhha (man-lion form
of lord Visnu) consisting of twelve and eight letters etc. destroy
sin. The reading and hearing etc. of Agneyapurdna (would
also be expiation to remove all sins).
13-16. Lord Vi. snu is of two forms of Vidya^. He is praised
in the form of fire. The supreme lord is praised in all scrip¬
tures as the face of the celestials. He is worshipped as the conferer of enjoyment and emancipation in taking active part in
worldly life as well as in inactivity. The oblations, contempla¬
tion, worship, repetition (of sacred syllables), hymns and obei¬
sance made to lord Visnu of the form of Fire (god) would
destroy sins relating to one’s body. Making a gift of ten gold
(things), twelve (kinds) of grains, sixteen great gifts such as
making a gift of something equal to one’s own weight and
other great gifts such as giving food remove all sins.
17. Practising vows on the phases of the moon, weeks,
asterisms, movement (of planets from one constellation to ano¬
ther), good periods of the day and period of Manu for the Sun,
I^a, Sakti and others would destroy sins.
18-19. The sacred places such as Ganges, Gaya, Prayaga, Ka^f, Ayodhya, Avantika, Kuruksetra, Pu$kara, Naimi§a, Puru^ottama (Puri), Salagriuna, Prabhasa and others
1 . Vidyd, knowledge, is of two kinds : and par&^ standing respectively
for the vedas etc. and iot the knowledge about supreme Brahman.

492 Agni PurO^
also destroy sins. The contemplation that T am the brah¬
man, the supreme effulgence’ would destroy sins.
20-24. The Brakmapurd^ and the Agneyapurd^t '(lords)
Brahma, Visnu, Mahesvara, the manifestations (of the god),
all kinds of worship, the installation of the images (of deities)
etc. (also remove one’s sins). The science of astrology, Purdnas^
codes of law, penance, vow, the science of politics, sarga^ etc.,
the medical lore, the science of archery, phonetics, metrics,
grammar, etymology, lexicon, manual of rituals, logic, mimdrhsd
(the science investigating the vedic texts) and all other things
are the lord Hari (himself) . The sins of others get destroyed by
seeing one who has got the knowledge about the single lord
without the second from which (all are produced) and in which
(all repose) and who is everything. He is verily the lord Hari.
Lord Hari remains in the form of eighteen vidyds^. He is
subtle and gross. He is the most supreme. He is the effulgence
and the sentient, immutable, brahman, supreme, omni-present
and blemishless.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFIVE
Rules and regulations relating to the vows
Fire-god said :
1. Listen O Vasi§tha ! I shall describe the vows for
men and women (to be observed ) in order on the phases of the
moon, weeks, asterisms, particular day (of a week), month,
season, year and the entry of the Sun (from one constellation inta
another).
2. The vrata (vow) is a restraint as told in the scriptures.
It is known to be a penance. The special observances of dama
(subduing) etc. are for the vow.
1 . The primary and secondary creation, genealogy of gods and sages,
periods of Manus and accounts of royal genealogy.
2. The four Vedas, the six accenory texts, mMdthsdt f^iya^ dharmaiAstra, purdrui, dyurveda, tOuemveda, gindharvaoeda and orthaddstra.

3. A vow is designated as a penance because it causes morti¬
fication of the body for the doer. It is said to be a restraint as it
controls the collection of senses.
4-9. O brahmin ! Those brahmins who do not worship
fire get prosperity by vows, fasting, restraints and many kinds of
gifts. The gods etc. who confer enjoyment and emancipation
become pleased. One who has turned back from sins and lives
with qualities it is known as upavasa (fasting). It is devoid of all
enjoyments. One who is fasting should reject bcllmetal, flesh,
mas Ora (a kind of pulse), chick-pea, koradusaka (a species of
grain), vegetable, wine, food from others, (association with)
a woman, flowers, ornaments and dress, incense, perfume and
unguent. (People) do not commend the cleaning of teeth and
(use of) collyrium. The five things got from a cow should be
used in the place of the toothstick in the morning and the vow
commenced. Fasting gets vitiated by frequent drinking of water,
the chewing of betels, dreaming and having intercourse during
the day.
10-17. Forbearance, truth, compassion, charity, cleanli¬
ness, control of the senses, worship of gods, making oblation to
fire, happiness and not stealing are remembered to be the ten
general virtues (to be practised) in all vows. Befitting one’s
capacity one should repeat the sacred hymns and offer oblations
(to fire). One should bathe daily, eat moderately and worship
preceptors, gods and brahmins. One should avoid taking
alkaline substances, honey, salt, wine and meat. Among the
grains (all the grains) except sesamum and mudga (a kind of
kidney-bean) are commendable. Wheat, kodrava (a species of
grain), cinaka (a kind of paddy), divadhOnya^ leguminous grain,
sugar, iitadhdnya (barley or white paddy ?), roots from the mar¬
ket are deemed to be alkaline things. Rice, foffika (a kind of
rice), mudga (a kind of kidney bean), sesamum, barley, Sydmdka
(a kind of corn), rice grown without cultivation and wheat etc.
are conducive to vows. One should avoid taking pumpkin,
bottle-gourd, brinjal, udlaAki (?) and pUtikd (a kind of herb).
Sweet porridge, the flour of barley, pafa-herb, curd, ghee, milk,
SydmSka (a kind of corn), rice, rice growing without cultivation,
mUlataii^ula are conducive as havifya (fit to be offered as oblatiim)
at the time of vows (in general) and nakta (yraia) (eating food
only in the night) in the rites of offering made to fire. Except

494 Agni Purd^
wine and meat, the other things are said to be conferring good
in a vow. ,
18. A brahmin who observes the prdjdpatya should eat in
the morning for three days, in the evening for three days, without
seeking alms for three days, and should not eat the next three
days.
19. A brahmin who is practising the atikrcchra should eat
one morsel a day for three days three times as before and fast for
three days at the end.
20. The expiation sdntapana is known to be (that of taking)
cow’s urine, cowdung, milk, curd, clarified butter and water
with the kuSa and fasting for a night.
21. Maintaining with the (six) materials used in the sdnta¬
pana, each one for a day for six days together with fasting in seven
days is known to be mahdsdntapana, which removes the sin.
22. Pardka is fasting for twelve days and it destroys all
sins. If it is three-fold (of above) it is said to be mahdpardka.
23-30. Commencing with fifteen morsels (of food) on fullmoon day, reducing one morsel a day and no food on new-moon
day and then increasing a morsel a day is (known to be) candrdyana. Or one pala (a measure of weight) of urine of a tawny cow,
cowdung of half the volume of a thumb, seven polos of milk, two
palas of curd, ghee one pala, one pala of water (in which kula
has been dipped) should be collected. Among these, urine of
cow should be gathered with the syllable gdyatri^, cowdung with
gandhadvdra^, milk with dpydyasvc?, curd with dadhikrdvna^ clari¬
fied butter with tejo asi^, and water in which kuia has been dipped
with devasya^. It is brahmakOrca by doing as above. Then one
should repeat the hymn dpohiffhd'^. They all should be mixed
with the (repetition of the) hymn aghamarfana^ or the pranava
(syllable orh). After drinking (the mixture) one gets free from all
sins and reaches the world of Visnu after fasting. A person who
1 . TIic mantra addressed to the deity in the orb of the Sun.

fasts, eats only in the evening, an ascetic, and one who eats only
in the sixth part of the day, avoids (eating) meat, performs the
aivamedha (sacrifice) and speaks truth would reach heaven.
The maintenance of sacred fire, the installation (of images
of deities), (the performance of) sacrifices, (making) gifts and
(practice of) vows, observance of religious vow, the rite of letting
out a bull, tonsure, (the investiture with) the girdle and the
auspicious bathing should be avoided in the malamdsa (a solar
month in which two new moons occur).
31. The lunar (month) would be from the new moon to the
new moon. The sdvana (month) (would be of) thirty days.
The solar month (would be reckoned) from the movement (of
the sun from one constellation to another). An astral (month)
is from (one) revolution of an asterism.
32. Solar month (should be taken) for the marriage etc.,
and sdvana for sacrifices etc. Lunar month is recommended for
the annual ceremony and ancestral rites.
33. The fifth one would be that which concludes with the-
(month of) dfddha (July-August). One may perform the cere¬
mony (for the ancestors) at that time whether the Sun moves
into the constellation Virgo or not.
34. Whenever a lunar day occurs twice in a month in a year,
there the second one is known to be the excellent one and the
first one would be bad.
35. One should fast in an asterism when the Sun sets in that.
The lunar days are meritorious during the day. They are auspi¬
cious in the night in the rite observed in the night.
36-37. The combination of the lunar days — ^second and
third, fourth and fifth, sixth and seventh, eighth and ninth,
eleventh and twelfth, fourteenth and full moon, the first and the
new moon is of great consequence. This is individually very
bad and destroys the meritorious act done previously.
38. It has been stated that (there would be) immediate
purity for the kings, ministers and ascetics in (the case of) cala¬
mity at the time of marriage etc. as also in the forest path or
some danger or in the assembly.
39-41 . A king should not obstruct the vow of those who had
undertaken a prolonged penance or of a woman. If a pregnant
woman or a woman who has delivered a child or a girl who is in
her monthly course becomes impure after beginning a long

Agni PurltQa
vow she may arrange always to do the same by someone cbe.
If the vow is broken on account of anger or mistake or^ greed,
one should not eat for three days. Otherwise, one should shave
his head. If a person who practises a vow is unable to continue,
his wife or son may be made to continue it.
42. A worship that has been begun should not be disconti¬
nued when (a pollution is caused) by the birth (of a child) or
by the death (of some relative). A person observing a vow fall¬
ing into a swoon should be brought back to his senses by the
preceptor by (giving him) milk and other drinks.
43. Water, roots, fruits, milk, clarified butter, the desire
of a brahmin, the words of the preceptor and herb are the eight
(things) which do not vitiate a vow.
44-58. (One should resolve as follows) : “O Lord of
vows ! I am doing this vow for the furtherance of fame,
progeny, learning, prosperity, and health and for purity,
enjoyment and emancipation. I have taken this excellent
vow in your presence. O Lord of the Universe ! Let it come to
fruition without impediment by your grace. After taking this
excellent vow if I happen to die when it is not completed, let
all that be complete when you, the lord of beings, are pleased.
I invoke the embodied image of the vow, the prosperity of the
world for all accomplishments. My obeisance to you. O
Lord KeJava (one having beautiful hair) ! Be manifest.
I bathe you with the five nectars, the five things got from
a cow and good water mentally arranged with devotion.
You become the remover of my sin. O Lord of libation !
(Here is) the auspicious libation mixed with fragrance, flower
and water. Accept waters fo^ washing (the feet), for sipping.
Make me always fit to offer libation. O Lord of dress !
Accept the meritorious dress and O Good lord of vows !
Make me always covered by good dress, ornaments etc. O
Embodiment of fragrance ! Accept the spotless fragrant perfume.
You make me have good fragrance and (make me) free from
smell of sin. Accept the flower and make me always abundant
with flowers. The spotless fragrance of the flower is for the
furtherance of longevity and health. Accept the incense (stick)
made of ten (fragrant) ingredients, the guggulu and ghee.
O good lord of incense ! You make me fragrant with per¬
fumes. O Embodied form of the lamp 1 You accept the lamp

having upward flames and which makes everything shine.
(You) make (me) endowed with lustre and elevated movement
always. O Good Lord of food ! Accept the offerings such as
food etc. (You) make (me) abundant with food and as a giver of
food and all (things). O lord ! whatever my omission in the
sacred syllable, in the act and devotion, and the worship offered
to you may all that be complete for me. O lord of vows !
Give me virtue. Give me wealth, prosperity, continuous flow
of qualities and fame. Give me learning. Give me longevity,
heaven and emancipation. O Lord of vows ! Accepting this
worship you may go now only to come again, to confer boons,
O Lord !
59-62. In all the vows the embodied golden images of vows
should be worshipped by the person practising a vow after bath¬
ing (according) to his means. He should sleep on the floor.
(He should do) repetition (of sacred syllables), (offer) oblation
and (make) gifts at the end of a vow in general. Twentyfour
or twelve or five or three or one brahmin should be worshipped.
The preceptors should be fed. The fee (such as) cows, gold etc.,
sandals, shoe, water vessel, food vessel, earth, umbrella, seat,
bed, pair of dress and pots should be paid according to (one’s)
means to every one. The rules and regulations have thus been
described.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX
Vows observed on the first lunar day
Fire-god said :
1 . I shall describe the vows for the first lunar day which
would confer on you everything. The first lunar day of kdrttika
(November-December), dSvayuji (October-November) and
caitra (April-May) axe the days of (lord) Brahma.
2. After having had no food on the fifteenth (lunar) day,
one should worship (lord) Aja (Brahma, the unborn) on the
first lunar day (with the words) Orh tatsat obeisance to (lord)
BrahmA or with gdyatri for a year.

Agni Purdna
3. A golden (image of lord) Brahm& (carrying) a rosary
and ladle in the right (hand) and a kamanialu (a wooden or
earthen water-pot) and a small ladle in the left (hand) and
(having) a long beard and matted hair should be worshipped.
4. According to one’s means one should offer milk, (to
lord Brahma stating) that let (lord) Brahma be pleased. A
brahmin would become stainless, enjoyer of pleasures in heaven
as well as on earth and wealthy.
5-6. I shall describe an excellent vow (by practising which)
an unfortunate one would become fortunate. After having
fasted and offering oblations on the night of the first lunar day
of mSrgaiirsa (December-January), one would get all (things)
by worshipping fire (stating) ‘Obeisance to fire’. Eating food
once on the first lunar day and giving a tawny (cow) at the
conclusion one reaches the place of lord fire. This is known to
be Hkhivrata (vow dedicated to fire).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSEVEN
Vows observed on the second lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-8. I shall describe vows (performed) on the second
lunar day which would confer enjoyment, emancipation etc.
Eating flower one should worship Alvins the celestials. One
who practises vow for a year would get good fortune and
reach heaven. One should worship the god of Death on the
second day of the bright fortnight in (the month of) kdrttika
(November-December). A practiser of the vow fasting for a
year would reach heaven and (would) not (go to) hell. I shall
describe the vow (called) aSunyaSayana (the bed that has not
become empty) which would confer (the fruit of) not becoming
a widow. This should be practised on the second lunar day in
the dark fortnight in (the month of) Srdvaija (August-September). “O Bearer of hivatsa (a mark on the chest of lord
Vi^u) I Consort of Sri ! (Lak$mi) ! Abode of Sri (Lak^mi) !
Consort of Sri ! Immutable 1 May not my life (^f a householder

get destroyed. Let it be the conferer of virtue, materials and
desire. Let not the (sacred) fires be destroyed. Let not the deities
be destroyed. Let not my ancestors be destroyed on account
of my married life being shattered. Just as you the lord never
get separated from (Goddess) Lak|ml, so also O lord ! let
not my association with my wife get separated. O Conferer
of boons, O Lord ! Just as your bed does not become devoid
of (Goddess) Laksmi, O Slayer of (demon) Madhu ! let my bed
also be not empty. One should worship (Goddess) Laksm! and
(I..ord) Visnu for a year and bed and fruits should be given away
(as gift).
9-12. Libation should be offered to Soma (moon) every
month with the (recitation of) sacred syllables. One who lights
up the courtyard of the sky ! One who is born from the churning
of the milky ocean ! Enjoyer of the starry quarters of heaven !
Younger brother of Laksmi ! Obeisance to vou. Orh §rirh obeisance to the Sustainer of Sri ! One should worship lord Hari
of tlic form of the Moon. Dharh, ^ham, bhatii, ham obeisance to
Sri ! to the great soul of ten forms ! Oblation (should be made)
in the night with ghee. A bed may be given to a brahmin. A
pot with water and an image of the deity together with a lamp,
food vessel, umbrella, shoe, seat and a vessel (may be given)
then.
13-14. One who docs so in the company of his wife would
get enjoyment and emancipation. I shall describe the kdntivrata
(the vow that makes one shining) . It should be done in the white
(fortnight) of (the month of) karttika (November-Dccember).
Takingfoodonly inthenightonthesecondlunarday, one should
worship Bala(rama) (brother of Visnu in his manifestation as
Ki'sna) and Kesava for a yeai. One gets shining (body), long
life and health etc.
15-20. Then I shall describe the Visnuvrata which gets the
mentally desired (fruits), after doing it for four days in the second
lunar day in the white (fortnight) of (the month of) paufa
(January — February) etc. One should bathe on the first (day)
with white mastard, then with black sesamum the second
day) and with uacd (aconis calamus) on the third day and with
all herbs on the fourth (day). Murdmdifisi, Vacdykusfha^ u^fha
Sailtya (bitumen), the two (kinds of) rajaniy fa/i, campaka and
musta are remembered to be the collection of herbs. One should

Agni Purd^a
worship with (the repetition of) the names Kirsna, Acyuta
(unslipping), Ananta (endless), HrfikeSa (the lord of th5 senses)
with flowers duly at the foot, navel, eye and head. Libation
(should be made) to Moon with the (repetition of the) names
SaHf candra, Saiahka and indu. The person (who does the vow
should eat in the night before the moon sets. (By the practice of)
this purifying (vow) for a year and a half, the performer would
get all things. This vow was practised by the kings and
women in the past.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYEIGHT
Vows observed on the third lunar day
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the vows (to be practised) on the
third lunar day which would confer enjoyment and emancipa¬
tion. Listen to me. (I shall describe) the mulagaurivrata for the
(goddess) Lalita (a form of consort of Siva) (to be done) on
the third lunar day.
2-23. Goddess Gauri was married by Hara (Siva) on the
third day of the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) caitra
(April-May). (Then on that day) one should bathe with sesamum and worship Sambhu (Siva) in the company of Gauri
with golden fruits etc. “Obeisance to Patala” (saying so one
should worship) the feet of the goddess and Siva. One should
worship ankles for Jaya after saying “to Siva”. (One should
worship) the two shanks (by saying obeisance) to the destroyer
of the three cities, to Rudra, to Bhavani, the two knees (by
saying obeisance) to Siva, to Rudra, to Isvara (the lord) and to
Vijaya (the victorious), the hip (by saying obeisance) to
for the goddess and to Sankara for Sankara. The two bellys
(should be worshipped by saying obeisance) to Ko(avya and
the Sulin (lord Siva) (by saying obeisance) to the one having
trident in the hand. The stomach should be worshipped (by
saying) obeisance to you, Mahgala (the auspicious). Rudra
(should be worshipped by saying) obeisance to the soul of all

beings, the two breasts (by saying obeisance) to li$an!. Similarly
(lord) Siva should be worshipped (by saying) (obeisance) to
Hladini. Lord Siva (should be worshipped by the words obei¬
sance) to the great lord and the two hands (by saying obeisance)
to Ananta. (Lord) Hara (should be worshipped with the words
obeisance) to the three-eyed one and the arm (with the words
obeisance) to the consort of the destructive fire at the end. The
ornaments should be worshipped (by saying obeisance) to
Saubhagya (the fortunate) and the great lord. The lips (should
be worshipped by saying obeisance) to the (goddess) dwelling
in the honey oiaioka (flowers) and to the lord. The face (should
be worshipped) by saying obeisance to the consort of the four¬
faced one and to Hara and the immovable one. Obeisance to
lord Hara, the lord of the man-woman form and the nose (should
be worshipped) (by saying obeisance) to measured limbs. The
lord of the universe (should be worshipped by saying) obeisance
to the fierce one and then the two eyes (saying obeisance) to
Lalita. The destroyer of the cities (should be worshipped saying
obeisance) to Sarva (all) and the palate (with the words obei¬
sance) to Vasanti (the one belonging to the spring), Obeisance
to the consort of l^rikantha (one having the auspicious mark on
the throat) and the hair (saying obeisance) to l§itikan(ha (hav¬
ing black mark on the throat). (Obeisance) to fierce one
and (the goddess) of good form and (worship) the head (by
saying) obeisance to the soul of all beings. The (following)
flowers should be used in order in the respective months —
jasmine, aSokoy lotus, jasmine, tagardy mSlatly kadamba, karavirdy
bindy ml&ndy kunkumd and sindhuvSra After having worshipped
(goddess) Uma and (lord) MaheSvara, the (following)
eight auspicious things should be placed in front : ghee,
ni^p&vdy kusumbhdy kfirdjivdkdy tdrur&jayikpiyldva^ and kustumburu.
One should take SfAgoddkd in (the month of) Caitra (AprilMay) and sleep in front of the god and goddess. One
should bathe in the morning, worship (the god and goddess)
and worship the brahmin couple. The above (mentioned)
eight (things) should be given to the brahmin. (He should then
say) “Let (the goddess) /fl/t/a (consort of Siva) be pleased (by
tl^ gift of) mine. Sfi^odakd, cow-dung, manddray bilva leaf,
water with kuiOy curd and milk are the things and ghee mbced
with coagulated milk (are the things offered) in (the month of)

Agni Purd^a
karttika (November-December). Cow’s urine, clarified butter,
black sesamum and the five things got from a cow (are the)
food to be eaten duly. “(Goddesses) Lalita, Vijaya, Bhadra,
Bhavani, Kumuda, Siva, Vasudevi, Gauri, Maiigala, Kamala
and Sati be pleased.” Thus one should say at the time of mak¬
ing a gift in (the months of) Caitra (April-May) etc. He should
then offei one pala (a measure of weight) of the purifying clari¬
fied butter and a bed should be given at the end of the vow, A
golden (image of) Umamaheivara, (Siva and his consort), a
bull and a cow (should also be given). The performer would
get enjoyment and emancipation by (offering) clothes etc. and
worshipping the teacher couple. (One would get) fortune,
health, beauty and longevity from the (performance of the)
vow saubhdgyaSayana. One should perform the vow in the (month
of) nahhas {iravana — July-August) or vaUdkha (June-July ) or
mdrgaiira (December-January) on the third lunar day in the
bright fortnight. One should worship (saying) “Obeisance to
(goddess) Lalita”. After having worshipped in every fortnight
and having worshipped twentyfour couples at the end of the vow
by (giving) clothes etc , the performer gets enjoyment and eman¬
cipation.
24-28. Thus a second way (of performance of the vow) has
been told. I shall describe the saubhdgyavrata (the vow which
confers fortune). One should avoid salt on the third lunar day
in the {month oi) phdlguna (March- April). When (the vow) is
completed he should give a bed and a house with household
things after having worshipped a brahmin couple (by saying)
“Let (goddess) Bhavani be pleased”. The vow on the third
lunar day for the sake of (getting) fortune has been told. (God¬
dess) Gauri confers heaven etc. So also (one would get) by
doing the vow on the lunar day in (the months of) mdgha (Fcbruary-March), bhadra {pada) (September-October) and vaiSdkha
(May-June) A person who performs (the vow of) damanakatrtiyd
should worship with damanaka (fragrant leaf used for worship)
in (the month of) caitra (April-May). (The third lunar day)
in (the month of) mdrga (Hrsa) (December-January) (is k.nown
as) dtmatftiyd (the third lunar day relating to the soul). One
who worships by giving the goddesses) Gauri, Kali, Uma,
Bhadra, Durga, Kanti, Sarasvati, Vaijijavi, I^^ml, Prakfti,
Siva and Narayani duly commencing from the third lunar day

in (the month of) (December-January), (by giving)
the desired things, food etc would get fortune and gold.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYNINE
Vows observed on the fourth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall describe now the vows (to be performed) on
the fourth lunar day wliich would yield enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. On the fourth lunar day in the bright (fortnight) in
(the month of) mdgha (Fcbruary-March), one should fast and
worship ^<2;M/)flfi(the lord of attendants). One who gives sesamum rice on the fifth lunar day for a year will be happy without
obstacles. Gam oblations is the chief mystic syllable. (The syl¬
lables ) commencing with gdrh are the heart etc. (of the mystic
syllable). Having invoked (god) (saying), “come (obei¬
sance) to ulka (the fiery)”. The permission (for the deity) to go
(would be by saying) “Go away (obeisance) to ulka (the fiery)”.
One should worship commencing with ‘ga^ and ‘gam* and ending
with ulka by (offering) modaka (sweet ball) etc. (The sacred
syllable would be) — ''Orh we know the great fiery (god), we
meditate on the (god) with the curved trunk, let that god having
the tusk impel us”. One who performs the vow on the fourth
lunar day in the month of bhddrgpada (September-October)
would reach (lord) Siva. One would get (a 11 desired things) by
worshipping the lord of attendants on the fourth lunar day
on Tuesday. It is known to be avighnd calurthi (the fourth
lunar day without any obstacle) on the night of the fourth lunar
day in (the month of) phdlguna (March-April). One who wor¬
ships (the lord of) attendants on the fourth lunar day in (the
month of) caitra (April-May) with damana would be happy.

Agni Purina
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
Vows observed on the fifth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-2. I shall describe the vow (performed) on the fifth lunar
day which would confer health, heaven and emancipation. The
serpents Vasuki, Taksaka, Kaliya, Manibhadraka, Airavata,
Dhytarastra, Karkotaka and Dhanarijaya should be worshipped
(on the fifth lunar-day) in the bright fortnight in (the month of)
nabhas (August-September), nabhasya (September-October),
iSvina (October-November) and (November-December).
These would confer protection from fear, longevity, learning,
fame and wealth.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYONE
Vows observed on the sixth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-2. I shall describe vows (to be performed) on the
sixth lunar day. It should be done in (the monihs of) karttika
(November-December) etc. One who eats fruits and offers
libation etc. on the sixth lunar day gets enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. The skandasasti vow (done) on the sixth lunar day in
(the month of) bhddra{pada) (September-October) is said to
(confer) undiminishing (benefits). I shall describe the kffnasastivrata that should be done in (the month of {margaiirsa)
(December-January) remaining without food fora year. One
would get enjoyment and emancipation (by that).
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO
Vows observed on the seventh lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-4. I shall describe vows (performed) on the seventh
lunar day tliat would yield enjoyment and emancipation. One

would be free from grief by worshipping Sun in the white lotus
in the month of mdgha (Fcbruary-March). One would get
everything by the worship of Sun on the seventh lunar day in the
month of bhSdra{pada) (September-October). The worship of
Sun in the bright (fortnight) in the month of pau^a (JanuaryFcbruary) without taking food would destroy the sin. The
seventh lunar day in the dark fortnight (in the month) of
mdgha (February-March) would confer everything. The seventh
lunar day in the bright fortnight in (the month of) phdlgma
(March-April) (is known as) nanddsaptami. (It confers benefit)
by the worship of Sun. The seventh lunar day in the bright
(fortnight) in (the month of) mdrgaUrsa (December-January
(is known as) apardjita (unconqucred). (It would make one so)
by worshipping (Sun then). Women (who worship) on the
seventh lunar day in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of
mdrgaHrsa (December-January) and for a year would get female
children.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE
Vows observed on the eighth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-2. I shall describe the vows (to be performed) on the
eighth lunar day. Lord Kfsna (one of the ten manifestations
of lord Visnu) was born in (the asterism) to rohini on the eighth
lunar day in the month of bhddrapada (Septembcr-October) at
midnight. Hence the eighth lunar day would be victorious.
By fasting on that day one would become free from sins commit¬
ted in seven generations.
3. Fasting on the eighth lunar day in the dark fortnight in
(the month of) bhddrapada (September-October) marked by
(the asterism) one should worship lord Kfs^, the bestower of enjoyment and emancipation.
4-17. I invoke (the gods) Kr^na and Balabhadra (brother
of the former) and Devakf (mother of the former), Vasudeva
(father of the former) , YaSodS (the cowherdess who brought up

Agni Purdtm
Kfsna in his childhood) and the cows. I worship them.
“Obeisance to you. Obeisance (repeated) to the communion,
the master of the communion and the lord of the communion.
Obeisance (repeated) to the one who grazes the cows and the
one who is born of communion.” (Water for) bathing should
be given and the libation should be made with this (utterance).
Obeisance to the sacrifice, the lord of the sacrifice and the master
of sacrifices. O Lord ! Accept the fragrant flowers dear to you.
O Lord ! Saluted by the celestials ! Be the bestower of all my
desires. O Perfumed by the incense ! You being incensed
accept the incense (offered) by me. O Lord Hari ! You make
me always profusely perfumed. You accept the great lamp that
is lighted and offered by me and be always conferee of the light
of the lamp. Make me going upwards. Obeisance (repeated)
to the universe, master of the universe and lord of the universe.
It has been made known to the one born of the universe etc. and
the cowherdsman. Obeisance (repeated) to virtue, master of
virtue, lord of virtue and to the one born of virtue etc. O cowherdsman ! You lie down. Obeisance (repeated) to one who is
everything, to the master of everything, to the lord of everything
and to the one born of everything. And to the cowherdsman,
the purification. O The one born of the milky ocean ! The
one born of the eye of (the sage) Atri ! O One having the spots
resembling the hare ! Accept libations of mine in the company
of rohini (the asterism, referred to as the wife of the moon).
The lord should be established on the altar. Rohini together with
the moon should be worshipped. (In the same way) one should
worship Devaki, Vasudeva, YasWa, Nandaka (foster father of
Krsna) and Bala(bhadra). Showers of milk together with molas¬
ses and clarified butter should be made to fall (on the image )
in the midnight. Clothes, gold etc. should be given (to brahmins).
The person who practises the vow should feed the brahmins.
One who does the vow of janmdsfami (the eighth lunar day, the
birth-day of Krsna) would have children and attain the world
of Visnu. One who does it every year seeking progeny does not
know any fear. “Give me children. Give me riches, longevity,
health, progeny, virtue, desire, fortune, heaven and emancipa¬
tion.

CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFOUR
Vows observed on the eighth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1. Since (the gods) Brahma and others worshipped the
(divine) mothers one should repeat (their names) on the eighth,
lunar day of the group of (divine) mothers. One would get
wealth by the worship of (lord) Krsna on the dark fortnight in
the month of caitra (April-May) and for a year.
2-10. I shall describe the krsnd^fami vrata (the vow practised
on the eighth lunar day of the dark fortnight) . It should be per¬
formed in the month of margaHra (Dccembcr-January). Having
(fasted) in the night and becoming pure one should drink cow’s
urine in the night. The doer of the vow should lie on the (bare)
floor in the night and worship (lord) Sankara (Siva). (One
should worship) lord Sambhu (Siva) in (the month of) pausa
(January-Fcbruary) after taking ghee lord Mahesvara (the
great lord, Siva) in (the month of) nidgha (February-March)
(taking) milk and lord Mahadeva (the great god, Siva) in
(the month of) phdlguna (March-April) after fasting and taking
scsainum. One should worship lord Sthanu (firm as the pillar,
Siva) in (the month of) raiVra (April-May) taking barley and
lord Siva in (the month of) vaiMkha (May-June) taking water
with ku^a and lord Pasupati (lord of the flock) in (the month
of) (June-July) taking if One (should worship)
lord Ugra (the fierce, a form of Siva) in (the month of)
asddha (July-August) eating cow-dung, (lord) Sarva. (a form
of Siva) in (the month of) irdvana (August-September) eating
the arka (the sun-plant), lord Tryambaka (tlu-ee-eyed ) in
(the month of) bhddrapada (September-October) eating bilva
leaf in the night, lord Isa (a form of Siva) in (the month of)
dSvayuji (October-November) eating rice and lord Rudra in
(the month of) kdrttika (November-December) taking curd.
Oblations should be made and worship should be offered in a
circle at the end of the year. Cow, clothes and gold should be
given to the preceptor. After having requested the brahmins
thus and after feeding them one would get enjoyment and eman¬
cipation. One should eat only in the night on the eight lunar
days. One who gives a cow at the end of the year would get the

Agni PurSa^
place of Indra (the lord of celestials). Svargativrata (the
vow that conveys one to heaven) is described. When the eight
lunar day (falls) on a Wednesday in both fortnights, then
the vow should be practised. Otherwise one who eats (food)
with molasses and observes discipline on that (day) would
never have his fortune afifeciied.
11-12. Eight times fist full of rice less the quantity that would,
rest on two fingers should be cooked and kept on mango leaves
knit together and spread on the ku^a and (the goddess) Ambika
with her retinue and benevolent attendants should be worshipp¬
ed. (The food) should then be eaten while the anecdotes
(relating to the goddess) are being heard. Fees should be paid
according to one’s means. (One should also give) karkapi (a sort
of cucumber) together with rice.
13-23. (The following is the anecdote related to the vow) :
(There was) a brahmin (by name) Dhlra. His wife (was)
Rambha, son Kausika and daughter Vijaya. The bcstower of
wealth for that Dhira was a bull. Kausika took that and was
grazing it in the company of cowherds. When he was bathing
in the river Ganges, the bull was driven away by thieves.
After bathing and not finding the bull he started searching for
that in the company of his sister Vijaya. He then found a group
of divine damsels in a tank and asked them to give (him) food.
The group of damsels told him “You do the vow and hence (be)
our guest and cat”. (Accordingly) after performing the vow he
ate (the food) and got (the position of) the guardianship of the
forest. He then came to Dhira with the bull and Vijaya. Vijaya
was given by Dhira to the God of Death and the father died
(afterwards). On account of the merits of the vow Kausika
became the king of Ayodhya. Seeing the parents in hell
Vijaya (felt) grief-stricken. She went to the God of Death (and)
implored him to show them mercy). (Finding Dhira) come for
hunting (the next day) she asked him how he got freed from
hell. The God of Death said that it was after getting the two vows
which Kausika had given. The two parents reached heaven as a
fruit of the two eight lunar days on Wednesday. Vijaya rejoiced
and practised the vow for accomplishing enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. Those who drink eight buds of aioka in the (asterism)
punarvasu in the month of caitra (April-May) on the eighth lunar
day of a white (fortnight) would never get grief. (The following

is the prayer made to aSoka): “O Aiioka ! Dear to Lord
Kara (Siva) ! One produced in the month of madhu (JanuaryFcbruary) ! Being tormented by grief I am drinking you. You
always make me free from grief. One who worships (divine)
mothers in (the month of) cailra (April-May ) on the eighth
lunar day would conquer his enemies.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFIVE
Vows observed on the ninth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the vow (performed) on the ninth lunar
day which would accomplish enjoyment, emancipation etc.
The goddess should be worshipped in the bright (fortnight)
in (the month of) divina (October-November). It is known as
the gaurinavamivrata.
2-4. The ninth lunar day known as the pisfaka (cake made
of the flour of any grain) (is called so) on account of eating the
cake and worshipping the goddess. On the eighth lunar day in
the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) divina (October-November) when the sun is in the (constellation) Virgo in the asterisni miila is said to be the great navami (ninth lunar day) which
destroys the sin always. (Goddess) Durga (a form of the consort
of Siva) should be worshipped as housed in nine places or as
stationed in one place having eighteen hands. The rest (of the
images) (should have) sixteen hands. The collyrium and damaru
(little drum) (should be held in two hands).
5-10. (The forms of the goddess) to be worshipped (are)
Rudracanda, Pracan^a, Candogra, Candanayika, Canda,
Candavati, Candarupa, Aticandika and Ugracanda (other¬
wise known as) Durga, the killer of the buffalo (demon) in order
at the centre. The ten-syllabled mystic formula is Durga !
Durga ! The protector ! Oblations ! It begins with the long
letter a, has nine eyes and ends with ‘obeisance*. Obeisance,
soadhdy vasalkdra and kft etc. occupy six places. After having
assigned the limbs in the toes to the little finger, (goddess) Siva

Agni Purina
should be chanted. One who repeats thus the secret (syllable)
would not be affected by anybody. One should worship ( the
goddess) as holding human skull, khefaka (club), bell,
mirror, threatening posture, bow, banner, little drum and noose
in left hands. One should worship (her as holding) the wea¬
pons spear, club, pike, thunderbolt, sword, dart, conch, disc
and stick (in right hands).
11-15. After having repeated (the name) Kali (twice) (a
form of consort of Siva), the animal (that is to be offered to her)
should be killed with a sword. “O Kali ! Kali ! Vajrelvari
(the goddess with the thunderbolt) ! Obeisance to the one hav¬
ing the metal rod ! ” (is the formula). The blood and flesh
got from that (killing) (should be offered) to Putana (a demonness ) on the south-west, to Paparaksasi (the demoness represent¬
ing sin) on the north-west, to Caraki (a form of the goddess)
on the north-east, to Vidarika on the south-east and Mahakausika (should be worshipped) for the fire. The king should
bathe in front of that and kill the (form of the) enemy made of
the cake. Offerings should be made to Skanda and Visakha
(the progeny of Siva and Parvati). (The goddesses) Brahmi
and others should be worshipped in the night. Obeisance to you
O Jayanti (victorious) ! Mafigala (auspicious) ! Kali (dread¬
ful) ! Bhadrakali (Benevolent Kali) ! Kapalini (the bearer of
(the skull) ! Durga (difficult to reach) ! Siva (auspicious) !
Ksama (forbearance) ! Dhatri (supporter) ! Svaha and Svadha (the two syllables used at the time of oblations made into
fire) . After having bathed the goddess with the five sweet things,
she should be worshipped with veneration etc. One who carries
the goddess in a chariot with banner etc. and offers a victim would
get all benefits.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSIX
Vow observed on the tenth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the vow (to be performed) on the tenth
lunar day that would confer virtue, desire etor One should

cat once on the tenth lunar day and give ten cows as gift at
the end. Land and gold should be given. One would become a
lord of the brahmins.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSEVEN
Vows observed on the eleventh Lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-9. I shall describe the vow (to be performed on the)
eleventh (lunar) day that would yield enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. One should take restricted food, avoid (eating) flesh
and copulation. He should not take food on the eleventh day
in both the lunar fortnights. When there is a conjunction of the
eleventh and twelfth (lunar) days (lord) Hari (Visnu) is present
therein. One gets the merit of doing hundred sacrifices by
(such fasting and) taking food on the thirteenth (lunar) day.
When a pare of the eleventh day exists followed by the twelfth
day (if one fasts) and takes food on the thirteenth day one gets
the merit of (doing) hundred sacrifices. One should never eat
at the junction of tenth and eleventh (lunar) days. It would
confer hell. One should fast on the eleventh day and take food
the next day (and say) “O lotus-eyed ! I am eating. O
The unchanging one ! (You) become my refuge*’. When the
asterism pusya rules over the eleventh day of a bright fortnight
one is said to get undiminishing benefit. It is known to be des¬
troyer of sins. If the (asterism) havai}a marks the conjunction of
the eleventh and twelfth (lunar) days, it is said to be victorious.
It confers victory on the votaries. The same in the month of
ph&lguna (March-April) and endowed with the (asterism) pusya
it is said to be victorious by pious men. (It is said to be of) rores
and crores of virtues. One should worship lord Visnu on the
eleventh day. It confers all good, (makes one) wealthy and be¬
gets progeny in this world. It makes him honoured in the world
of lord Visnu.

Agni PurSna
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYEIGHT
Vows observed on the twelfth lunar day
The Fire-god said :
1-14. I shall describe the vows (to be observed) on the
twelfth (lunar) day that would confer enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. The person practising the vow should eat once in the
course of the day food that has been got without seeking alms,
or fast or eat food obtained after seeking alms. One who practises
the vow of Madanadvadaii should worship lord Hari and the
God of love on the twelfth day in the bright fortnight inthe month
of caitra (April-May), if he desires enjoyment and emancipa¬
tion. One who practises BhimadvadaH on the twelfth day in the
bright (fortnight) of (the month of) magha ^^February-March)
should worship (lord) Visnu (repeating) “Obeisance to lord
Narayana (attribute of Visnu)”. He gets all things. One who
practises GovindadvadaH (should worship) in the bright
fortnight of ph&lguna (March-April). One who performs the
ViSokadvddadi should worship lord Hari in the (month of)
divayuja (October-November ) . One who gives salt on the twelfth
day of a bright (fortnight) in the (month of) mdrgaSir^a (December-January) after worshipping lord Krsna, is deemed to
have given all niceties (of food). One who observes the vow of
GovatsadoddaH should worship a calf in the (month of) bhddra-
(j>ada) (September-October). When the (month of) mdgha
(February-March) is over and if the twelfth (lunar) day is
marked by the (asterism) havana in the dark (fortnight), it is
said to be Tiladvddaii. Bathing and oblation are done with
sesamum. Sesamum balls are the offering. A lamp (should be
lit) with the sesamum oil. Then water of libation should be given
together with sesamum. Sesamum should be given to brahmins.
One gets the fruit by doing oblation and fasting. One should
worship (with the sacred syllable) Oih. Obeisance to lord VSsudeva. One who practises the vow of TiladvddaSi reaches
heaven with his family. One who performs Manorathadvddaii should worship in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of)
phdlguna (March-April). One who practises the vow of Ndmadvddaii should worship lord Hari for a year with (the recita¬
tion of) names Keiava and others. That person would reach
neaven and not hell. One becomes the performer of the vow of

Sumatadv&daH by the worship (of the lord) in the bright (fort¬
night) in (the month of) phalguna (March-April ) and the per¬
former of the vow of AnantadvddaSi in the bright (fortnight) in
the month of hhadrapada (September-October). A person who
performs Tiladv&daH should do oblations with sesamum and
worship (the lord saying) “Obeisance to (lord) Kysna” in the
asterisms of dilesa or muld in (the month of) mSgha (FebruaryMarch). The performer (of the vow) of Sugatidvadaii should
worship (the lord) in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of)
phalguna (March-April). (One should worship the lord) for a
year (on the twelfth days) (saying) “O Victorious Krsna !
Obeisance to you” to get enjoyment and emancipation. One is
(known to be) the performer of Sampraptidvadaii (by the worship
of the lord) on the twelfth day in the bright (fortnight) o£ pau§a
( January-F ebruary ) .
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYNINE
Rules of observing Sravanadvadaii vrata
Fire-god said
1-2. I shall describe the (mode of performance of) iSrdvanadvadaii. Fasting (on the twelfth day) in the bright (fortnight)
in the month of (September-October) marked with
(the asterism) iravana is highly meritorious. One would get the
benefits of the Srdvanadvadaii by bathing at the confluence of
rivers. (The twelfth day) marked by (the asterism) Sravaiia
and a Wednesday is extremely meritorious for making gifts.
3-15. One should do even that which is prohibited. One
should eat after the fast on the thirteenth (lunar) day. One
should fast on the twelfth (lunar)day (saying) “I am worshipp¬
ing Vamana” and invoke the golden (image) (of Vamana)
in a water-pot (saying) “I am invoking Vamana, (a form, of)
Vi^nu bearing the conch and disc. I am bathing lord Visnu
with waters such as the five sweet things and others in the pitcher
covered by a pair of white cloth (and provided with) good
umbrella and sandals. (I worship lord) Vi^u holding an um¬
brella and staff. Obeisance to Vamana. O Lord of the celestials

Agni Purdna
I offer you libation. Being worshipped always with good liba¬
tion and others you make me endowed with enjoyment /emanci¬
pation, progeny, fame and all fortune. Obeisance to Vamana.”
With this (sacred syllable), perfume (is offered)and oblations
hundred (times are made). “Om, Obeisance to Vasudeva.”
The head of lord Hari is worshipped. Similarly the face
(is worshipped with the syllable obeisance) to Sridhara, and on
the neck (with) “Obeisance to Krsna”, the chest (with) “Obei¬
sance to the consort of Sri (Laksmi, the arms (with obeisance)*’
to the wielder of all weapons’^ the navel (with) “Obeisance to
the omnipresent”, the hip (with) “Obeisance to Vamana, the
male organ with (obeisance) “to the Creator of the three worlds”.
The shank of lord Hari should be worshipped (with Obei¬
sance)” to the lord of everything”. The feet of Visnu (are wor¬
shipped with) “Obeisance to the lord of all beings” . Offering
prepared in ghee as well as pitchers with curd rice should be
made. After having remained awake in the night and bathed
in the morning at the confluence (of rivers) and worshipped
with perfumes, flowers and other things, one should say “This
handful of flowers (is offered)” “Obeisance to you, O Govinda ! One who is named as (the planet) Mercury and
(asterism) iravana ! You destroy the floods of sins and become
the conferer of all happiness. O Lord ! Lord of celestials !
Be pleased with me always O Janardana !” Vamana is the
bestower of wisdom. Vamana himself is stationed in the mate¬
rials. Vamana accepts the gift and Vamana also confers on me.
Vamana is always stationed in the materials. Obeisance to
Vamana”. After having given fees to the brahmins and fed
them, (the performer) himself should take food.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETY
Mode of practising Akhandadvadaii vrata
Fire-god said :
1-6. I shall describe the (mode of performing) Akhandadvddaii yrate (unbroken twelfth day), that is complementary to all

vows. The performer should worship lord Visnu on the twelfth
day in the bright (fortnight) in the (month of) mSrgaJirfa (Dccember-January) after fasting and bathing in water mixed with
five things got from a cow and drinking the same. He should
give to a brahmin a vessel with barley and rice on the twelfth
day. “O Lord ! that vow which has been broken by me in the
(past) seven births let it now get complete for me by your grace.
O Excellent Being ! Just as you are the unbroken entire world,
in the same way let all my vows get completed.” It is laid down
for every month in the same way for four months. Otherwise
(it may be practised) in the months of caitra (April-May) etc.
Vessel (filled) with flour should be given as a gift. If the vow
is begun in the (months of) irdvana (August-September) etc.,
one should break it at the end ofkdrttika (November-December).
The deficiency in the vows (practised) in the seven (past) births
gets fruitful by the performance (of this). One would get long
life, health, fortune, kingdom and pleasures.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYONE
Mode of practising vows on the thirteenth lunar day
Fire-god said :
1-10. I shall describe vows (to be practised) on the
thirteenth day that gives all (things). I shall describe AnaAgatrayodaii (the thirteenth day of God of love) that was done at
first by the God of love. Lord Kara (Siva) (of the form of)
God of love should be worshipped on the thirteenth day in the
bright (fortnight) in (the month of) m&rgaiir§a (DecemberJanuary). One should take honey in the night and do oblation
with ghee, sesamum and unbroken rice. One who worships
Yogeiivara (Lord of Togas) (on the thirteenth day of the bright
*brtnight) in (the month of) pau$a (January-February) after
using sandal and offering oblations and one who worships Mahesvara (the great lord Siva) in (the month of) mdgha (FebruaryMarch) (on a similar day) after using pearls would reach heaven.
One who practises the vow should take water and raven and

Agni Purd^a
worship (on a similar day) in (the month of) ph&lgma (MarchApril) and consume camphor and worship (lord Siva) of his
own form in (the month of) caitra (April-May). (!l|y those)
one would become fortunate. One should worship Maharupa
(the lord of the great form) in (the month of) vaiidkha (MayJune) eating fruits of nutmeg. One who practises vow should
worship (lord) Pradyumna (one of the five forms of Visnu) on
(a similar) day in (the month of) jyaisfha (June-July) eating
cloves. One should worship the consort of Uma (Siva) in (the
month of) dsdiha (July-August) taking sesamum water. One
should worship the bearer of trident in the hand (Siva) in (the
month of) ir&vana (August-September) consuming fragrant
water. (The practiser of vow) should worship Sadyojata
(one of the five forms of Siva) in (the month of) bhadrapada
(September-October) consuming agallochum. One should wor¬
ship Indra (the lord of thirty-three celestials) in (the month
of) Sivina (October-November ) taking gold (immersed) water.
The person practising vow should worship Vighnesvara
(lord of obstacles, son of Siva) in (the month of) kdrttika (November-December) eating madana. The golden (image of) Siva
should be covered with mango leaves and a cow (covered and)
worshipped and bed, umbrella, pitcher, sandals and vessel for
edibles should be given to a brahmin at the end of the year.
One should contemplate on (lord Siva) causing delight to Rati
(wife of God of love ) on the thirteenth day in the bright (fort¬
night) in (the month of) caiira (April-May) and should draw
a^oka tree with red-lead and turmeric. One who seeks plea¬
sure should worship for a year and practice the vow of Kdmatrayodaii.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED ANDNINETYTWO
Vows to be observed on the fourteenth day
Fire-god said :
1-10. I shall describe the vow (to be practised) on the four¬
teenth (lunar) day that would confer enjoyment and emanci-

pation. One should fast on the fourteenth day in (the month of)
k&rttika (November-December) and worship (lord) Siva. One
who p^-rforms (the worship of) Siva (on) the fourteenth day
would get all pleasures through the year, wealth and long
life. One should take the vow of an ascetic on the eighth or
third or twelfth or fourteenth day in the bright (fortnight) in
(the month, oi) m&rgaSirsa (December-January), eat fruit (only)
and worship the lord. Then one should leave (taking fruits)
and give fruits as gifts practising the vow of PhalacaturdaH. One
should worship (lord) Sambhu (Siva) on the eighth and four¬
teenth days in both the dark and bright fortnights without eat¬
ing. (One who practises the vow) on both the fortnights would
reach heaven. One who eats food only in the night on the eighth
and fourteenth days of the dark (fortnight) would get all
pleasures in this world and good position in the other
(world). One who bathes on the fourteenth day in the dark
(fortnight) in (the month of) kdrttika (November-December)
(would be) happy, when he worships Mahendra in flagstaffs
in the form of the banner. One should worship Ananta
(endless), (a form of) Hari on fourteenth day of the bright
(fortnight). After having made a water-vessel out of darbhaj
one should prepare cakes from the flour of a prastha (a measure)
of rice. He should give one half (of that) to a brahmin and
enjoy the other half himself. (This vow) should be done near
the river and after the narration of the anecdotes of (lord)
Hari. “O (lord) Vasudeva ! Lift us drowned in the great
ocean of endless mundane existence and put in the limitless
form. Obeisance to you of the limitless form”. After having
worshipped with these (words) and bound the consecrated thread
on his own hand or the neck, the performer of the Anantctvrata
becomes happy.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYTHREE
Description of Sivardtrivrata
Fire-god said :
1-6. Listen ! I shall describe the vow of Siva’s night that
confers enjoyment and emancipation. The fourteenth day in the

Agni PurS^a
dark (fortnight) in between (the months of) mdgha (FcbruaryMarch) and phdlguna (Maixh-April) is endowed wuh kSma
(pleasure). One who practises the vow should fast, keep awake
(and resolve) **I shall do Sivardtrivrata fasting on the four¬
teenth day and worship lord Siva after remaining awake and
undertaking the vow. I invoke lord Sambhu (Siva), the
conferer of enjoyment and emancipation and the boat that
rescues from the ocean of hell. Obeisance to you. Obeisance to
lord Siva, the tranquil person, the bestower of progeny and
kingdom, the giver of fortune, health, knowledge, material pros¬
perity and the pathway to heaven. Give me righteousness.
Give me riches. Give me fulfilment of desires and enjoyment.
Give me the happiness of good quality and fame. Get me also
heaven and emancipation. (By the practice of this vow) the
greedy sinner Sundarasena acquired merit.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYFOUR
Details relating to the vows of ASoka-purnimd
Fire-god said :
1-7. I shall describe the (vow of) One should
worship Bhudhara(the supporter of the universe) and the earth
on the bright fortnight in (the month of) phdlguna (MarchApril). One would get the whole year enjoyment and emancipa¬
tion, After having set free a bull in (the month of) kdrttika
(November-December ) one should do the nakta {vrata) (eating
food only in the night). One would reach the place of lord
Siva. This Vffa vrata (vow of letting lose the bull) is an excel¬
lent one. The offering made to the fore-fathers on the ntw-moon
day relating to the forefathers has undiminishing (benefits).
After fasting the whole year and worshipping the forefathers one
becomes free from sin and reaches heaven. One who worships
the birthless deity (Brahma) on the fifteenth (lunar day) (new
moon) in (the' month of) mdgha (February-March), would get
all (things). I shall describe the new-moon da>fc (known as)

the Savitri, that is auspicious and bestows enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. A woman should practise vow on the fifteenth day
(new moon) in (the month of) jye^pha (Jime-July) and worship
the great chaste woman (Savitri) at the foot of the banyan tree
with seven (kinds of) grains after fasting three nights. Women
should deeply embrace the banyan tree (besmearing) with saff¬
ron etc. doing dancing and singing in the night and worship
(Satyavan and Savitri) in the morning (saying) “Obeisance to
Savitri and Satyavan”. The offering should be gifted to a brah¬
min. After reaching the house one should feed brahmins and
eat oneself and request them to go (saying) “May the goddess
Savitri be pleased and let (me) get fortune etc.”
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED NINETYFIVE
Vows relating to the week-days
Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall describe vows relating to the week-days
that would confer enjoyment and emancipation. (The asterism)
punarvasu on the Sunday is the hand (of Sun). Bathing with
all herbs is auspicious (on that day). One who performs ihe
ancestral rite on a Sunday would be free from disease for seven
births. A Sunday (occurring) on the sahkrdnti (Sun’s entry
from one constellation into another) is the auspicious heart
of the Sim. One who eats in the night on a Sunday (occurring)
in (the asterism hasta) for a year would get everything. One
who practises a vow on Mondays (occurring) in (the aste¬
rism) citrd seven times would be happy. One who undertakes to
do the vow of eating only in the night on a Tuesday (occur¬
ring) in (the asterism) sodti seven times would be free from diffi¬
culties. One who takes the vow of eating only in the night on
Wednesday (occurring) in (the asterism) viiSkhd seven times
would get rid of afflictions due to planets. One who eats only
in the night on Thursday in (the asterism) anurddhd seven times
would destroy all afflictions due to planets. One who under¬
takes to practise eating only on Friday in (the asterism jyefPhS

Agni Purina
for seven nights would get rid of all afTliclions due to planets.
One who resolves to practise eating only seven nights on Satur¬
day in (the asterism mula would destroy all afflictions due to
planets.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYSIX
Vows relating to different asterisms
Fire~god said :
1-7. I shall describe (the practice) of vows in (different)
asterisms, Lord Hari worshipped in the asterism gives mate¬
rial prosperity. Lord Hari in the form of asterisms should
be first worshipped in the month of caitra (April-May). The
legs should be worshipped in (the asterism) miila. The shanks of
lord Hari should be worshipped in (the asterism) rohint, the
knee in the combination of aSvini, the two thighs in the dsa^ha,
the male organ in the purva and uttara, the hip in the kfttikd,
the two sides in the bhadrapada, the belly in the revati, breasts in
the anuradha, the backside in the dhanisfhd. The arms should be
worshipped in the viMkhd, the fingers in the punarvasu. Having
worshipped nails in the dilesd^ the neck should be worshipped
in the jyes^hd. The two ears of lord Visnu should be wor¬
shipped in the iravana and the face in the pu^a. The tip of the
tooth should be worshipped in the svdti, the face in the Satabhifaky the nose in the maghd, the eyes in the mrgaHrfay the
forehead in the citrd and the hair in the Ardra. A golden image of
lord Hari should be worshipped in a pot filled with molasses
at the end of a year and bed, cow and materials (should be given )
as fees.
8-22. Lord Visnu should be worshipped in the
form of the asterisms and in the form of lord Siva. One who
practises the vow (known as), Sdmbhavdyaniya should worship
lord Hari in the asterisms of every month, in the kfttikds in
the (month of) kdrttikay in the mjrgaiirfa in the mrgdsyaka {mdgha),
with the names, such as Kesava etc. or (with the w%rds) “Obeis¬
ance to Acyuta (one without a loss)’*. One should worship

lord Hari of the form of the asterisms on the day of (the asterism) kfttikd in the (month of) kdrttika. (One should resolve
that) ‘*1 shall do the vow (known as the) S&mbhavdj/miyaf that
confers enjoyment and emancipation. I am invoking the lord of
great forms such as Ke^ava etc., that bestows everything and
furthers longevity and health”. Food together with a pool
(should be offered) for four months commencing with kdrttika.
Rice and pulse boiled with spices (should be offered for four
months) beginning with phdlguna and sweet gruel from dfdiha.
Offering should be made to the lord and brahmins in the night.
One becomes pure after battling in water (mixed with) the five
things got from a cow and drinking the same. Whichever mate¬
rial is offered before allowing the invoked deity to go is told as
offering. When lord Jagannatha (the lord of the world) is
allowed to go it becomes the remains of the offering in a moment.
“O Acyuta (one without a loss) ! Obeisance to you. Let my
sin get destroyed and (my) merits grow. Let all my fortune,
wealth etc. be without decay. Let not my progeny get destroy¬
ed. Just as you are decayless, greater than the greatest, that
Supreme soul who has become the Braliman, in the same way,
you make that desired by me as without a loss. O Immeasur¬
able one ! You take away the sin done by me. One without
a loss ! Liniitless 1 One who protects the cows ! You grace me
with the desired things. O Immeasurable being ! You make
me without a loss, O Excellent among beings !” After having
worshipped for seven years one would get enjoyment and emanci¬
pation. 1 shall describe the vow (known as) Ananta, (endless)
among the vows relating to asterisms, that would yield wealth.
One should worship lord Hari in the (asterism) mjgaiira in
(the month of) mdrgasirfa drinking cow’s urine. Lord Ananta
(the limitless) confers endless fruits for all desires and also the
same endless (fruits) in the next birth. This g^eat vow makes
one acquire a limitli^ss acquisition of merits. It would make one
get the desired objects without loss. After having worshipped
the feet etc., one should eat without oil in the night. Oblation
should be made for four nionths for the sake of Ananta with
ghee. Oblation (should be made) with rice (for four months)
commencing with eaiira aind with milk in (the foiur months)
b<^inning with h&oa$a. Mkndhktk was bmn as the son of
Yuvai^vaasa result of (doing) Anantamata,

Agni Purlh^a
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYSE VEN
Vows performed on certain days
Fire-god said :
1-6. 1 shall describe the vows to be performed on certain
days. I shall first explain the Dhenuorata (vow of giving a cow
as a gift) . One who gives as a gift a cow delivering a calf together
with plenty of gold and observes the payovrata (drinking milk
oozing from the udders of a cow), reaches the exalted position.
After practising payovrata for three days and giving a golden
(replica of) kalpapddapa (the celestial tree that yields the
desired ooject), one reaches the place of lord Brahma. This is
known as the kalpavfkfavrata. One should give as gift golden
(replica of) eartii (weigumg) more tnau twenty palas and prac¬
tise payovrata that day. X'hat person would reacii (tiie world of)
Rudra. One who eats food only once a day for tliree days in
every fortnight would get enormous wealth. One who observes
the trirdtravrata (vow for three nigiits) every day in every month
eating only once (in the nights) ibr tliree nigiits in every month
would get the place of Ga^esa. One who practises tne trirdtra¬
vrata intended for lord Janardana (a form of Vi^jgiu) would
reach the abode of lord Hari takmg with him hundreds of his
own family.
7-11. One who practises the vow called trirdtravrata should
begin it on the ninth day in the bright fortnight in (the month
oi) mdrgaiirfa. One should repeat, “Om, obeisance to Vasudeva”,
a thousand or hundred times. One should eat once on tlie eighth,
day, last for three days worship lord Vi^ijiu on the twelfth
day and practise the vow in kdrttika. After having fed the brah¬
mins, one should give clothes, beds, seats, umbrellas, sacred
threads and vessels. He should then request brahmins “What¬
ever has become incomplete for me in this difficult vow, let it
become complete being permitted by you”. One who practises
the trirdtravrata would attain lord Vi^^u after having enjoyed
all comforts.
12-16. 1 shall describe the kdrttikavrata that would confer
enjoyment and emancipation. One who partakes five things
got from a cow on the tenth day, fasts on-the eleventh day and
worships lord Vi$nu in tne bright fortnight in kdr'Uika would

reach him by the celestial vehicle. One who eats for three
nights in eaitra and gives five goats would be happy. Drinking
milk for three nights and fastir^ for three days on the sixth day
etc. of the bright fortnight in kdrttika is said to be the expiation
mdhendra. After having drunk milk for five nights, fasting,
taking only curd, on the eleventh day in kdrttika is (known to
be) the expiation Bh^kara, that confers wealth. Taking gruel
made of barley and rice, curd, milk, ghee and water on the fifth
day etc. in the bright fortnight is known to be expiation
sdntapana.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYEIGHT
Vaws performed in different months
Fire-god said :
1-2. I sliall describe vows (to be performed) in dififcrent months, that would yield enjoyment and emancipation. A
wise man should avoid bathing with oil for four months com¬
mencing with d^ddha. One who abstains (from using) flower
and salt and gives a cow (ais a gift ) in vaiidkha would become a
king. One who gives a cow and lasts a month is said to practise
a terrible vow and is deemed to be lord Hari.
J-4. One wiio batiies (daily) early m the morning for four
montns commencing with dfddha would reach lord Vi§nu.
One who gives molasses and cow in the month oimdgha or caitra
on the third day would be the great performer of the gudavrata
(vow of giving away molasses) and he would get (an identical
form of) consort of Gauri. One who eats food only in the night
in the months of mdrgaiir^a etc. would attain the world of lord
Vi§riu.
5-7. So also one who eats only once a day and observes the
twelfth day vow would do. One who rejects iruit for four months
commencing with irdva^ and gives (the fruits) as gift would get
everything. One should last on the eleventh day in the bright
fortnight in dfddha and prepare to do the vows lasting for four
months. One should worship lord Hari in the dfddha at the
entry of the Sun (into a constellation) in karkata.

Agni Purdiifa
8-10. “O lord ! This vow has been undertaken by ^me in
your presence. O Keiiava ! When you are pleased let it be
accomplished without impediment. O lord ! If 1 die after
taking this vow and the vow becomes incomplete, let it become
completed by your grace, O Janardana !” One should avoid
eating flesh and a brahmin should refrain from (the use of) oil
and worship lord Hari. One who fasts on alternate days and
for three nights would reach the world of lord Visnu,
1 1 . One who practises tnc candrayana would reach the world
ofVi§nu, the vow of silence would be fit for liberation, the vow
of prajapalya eating the flour of barley would reach heaven.
12-15. One who takes milk etc. and one who takes five
things got from a cow would reach heaven. A person eating
vegetables, roots and fruits would reach the world of Vi§nu.
One who avoids flesh and tasty food and takes barley would
reach lord Hari. 1 shall describe the Kaumudavrata. Having
observed a fast on the twelfth day in kdrUika one should besmear
lord Visnu (with sandal) and worship (him) with lotuses
and blue lotuses and offer a lamp lit by ghee and sesamum oil.
“Oot obeisance to Vasudeva.” One should worship him with
a garland of mdlati (flowers). One who practises the kaumuda¬
vrata would get piety, pleasure, wealth and liberation. One who
practises the vow of fasting in the months (specified) and worships
lord Hari would get everything.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED AND NINETYNINE
Vows relating to Afferent seasons
Fire-god said :
1-3. I shall describe the vows relating to the seasons
that would bestow enjoyment and emancipaticHK A brahmin
who gives away fuel in the four seasons beginning with the rainy
season and gives ghee and cow at the end would become agnxvrati. Maintaining silence at the twilight and giving a pitcher
with ghee at the end of the month as well as sesamum, bell and
clothes one would be happy. (He is known to ba). the peiibrmer

of S&rasvatavrata. One who bathes with the five sweet things for
a year and gives away a cow would become a king.
4-5. Eating only in the night on the eleventh day in caitra
food should be offered to (lord Visnu). That person who prac¬
tises the Visnu-madvrata would reach the golden feet of lord
Visnu at the end of the month. One who eats sweet gruel and
offers a pair of cows as a gift would get fortune. He would be
(known as) the performer of Devivrata. One who offers to the
pitfdevas (the dead ancestors) and eats (the food) would be¬
come a king,
6-8. I have described the Varsavratas (the vows relating to
rainy season) . I sliall describe the vows relating to the movement
(of the Sun) . A person who keeps awake in the night at the time
of the movement (of the Sun from one constellation into another)
would go to heaven. Similarly worship of Siva in the form of
the Sun at the time of the new -moon and Sun’s movement
(would get the same result). Bathing (the image of) Ke^ava
with a prastha (a kind of measure) of clarified butter of thirtytwo pala measures one gets free from all sins. One who bathes
(the lord) with ghee, milk etc. at the time of the equinox etc.
(would get the 'same fruits).
9-10. The Umavrata done on the third day and the eighth
days confers fortune on women. One who worships (goddess)
Gauri and lord Mahesvara would get all fortunes. After
worshipping Umamahe^vara one gets non-separation. The main
performer of the vow in the Ume^avrata is the woman. A woman
who is devoted to the Sun would certainly become a male.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED
Vow of giving a gijl of lamp
Fire~god said :
1 -5. 1 shall describe the vow of making a gift of a lamp that
would yield enjoyment and emancipation. One who gives a
lamp to the abode of a deity or a house of a brahmin is rewarded
with everything for a year. (One who does so) for four mondis

Agtti Purd^a
would reach the world of Vi^inu, and (giving) in would
reach heaven. There is nothing greater than the gift of
a lamp, neither there was, nor there would be. One gets longe¬
vity, eyesight, fortune and progeny etc. by giving a lamp.
One who gives a lamp enjoys in heaven after getting fortune.
Lalita, the daughter of the king of Vidarbha, the beautiful and
faithful spouse of a king became the foremost among hundreds of
wives (of the king) by giving a lamp. Tiiat chaste lady used to
give thousand lamps to the temple of Vi§r^u. When enquired
about the greatness ol the lamp she said to her co-wives as follows :
Lalita said :
6-18. In olden days Maitreya was the priest of the king of
Sauvira. He caused a temple to be built for lord Vi^nu on the
banks of Devika. He gave a lamp (ibr that temple) in kdrttika. (I'he lamp) whicii was about to be extinguished was kindl¬
ed witli the wick by me as a mouse with my mouth (taking
shelter there) on account of being alraid of a cat. After the death
1 was born as the daughter of a king and became a queen
among the hundred (of the king’s wives). The fruit of that act
of kindling tiie lamp of the temple of Vi^nu, even though not
resolved, is enjoyed by me. Because I remember my past birth.
1 give lamps day and night. One who gives a lamp on the ele¬
venth day rejoices in heaven in a vehicle. One who steals a
lamp would become dumb or dull or fall into the dark hell diffi¬
cult to be crossed. Seeing the crying men, the servant of the Grod
of Death said to them :
“Enough of your wailing. What use of your wailing- over
misdeeds wantonly done by you before ? One is born as a man
after a cycle of thousand births. O Extremely stupid fellow 1
Why do you run after pleasures even in that (life) ? The result
of enjoying according to one’s desire is that of coming here and
wailing. You are enjoying the fruits of your past deed. Why
have you not thought about it ? The embrace of the breasts of
other women for your pleasure h^ given you grief. The worldly
enjoyment for a while causes grief many crores of years. O
Seducer of other’s wives ! Why do you cry “O Mother 1 ?
What would be very heavy (to bear) when the n^oe of Hari
is repeated with the tongue ? Fire can be had always with a wick
and oil at low cost. The lamp has been stolen by you not showing

inclination for giving. That is the cause of your grief. What
use in wailing now ? You bear that which has happened.
Fire^god said :
19. After hearing what was told by Lalita, (the other wives)
reached heaven after giving a lamp. Hence there would be great
benefit by the gift of a lamp.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ONE
Mode of worshipping Vi^nu in a figure of nine compartments
Fire-god said :
1-6. I shall describe the navavyuharcana (worship in nine
compartments) that was narrated by Hari to Narada. The
letter ‘a* with Vasudeva should be worshipped at the centre of a
lotus figure and the letter a with Sahkarsana and Pradyumna
at the south, the letter ah and Aniniddha at the south-west,
the letter orh and Narayana at the west, (the words) tat sat
and Brahma at the north-west, (the letter) hurh and Visnu and
(the letter) kfauth and Nrsiihha at the north, and (the letter)
bkSh and Varaha at the north-east. (The letters) katfif faifi,
tarn, Sath and Garutmat (vehicle of Visnu) (should be worshipp¬
ed) at the western entrance (of that figure), (the letters) kharh^
charily varhy hurh, phaf and the eastern face at the south, (the letters)
kharii, fharn, pharh, Sath and the mace at the north. (The letters)
bothy narhy marhy k^aurh and I^ana should be worshipped at the
north-east, (the letters) dharhy darh, bharhy hath and l§ri (Laki^mi)
at the south and (the letters) garh, doth, varhy iath and Pu^fi.
(The letters) tUiarhy varh (should be worshipped) and the gar¬
land of wild flowers at the west of the pedestal, the Mvatsa
(the mark on the chest of lord Vi?nu) and (the letters) sathy
hath, lath at the west and (the letters) charhy tarhy yarh and the
kaustubha (the crest-jewel) to the west of it.
7-10. (After having worshipped with) “Obeisance to
Ananta”, worship should be made below in the order of the ten
(forms) of Vifi^u and the four pitchers representing Msdiendra

Agni PurS^a
and others in the east and other directions in the above order of
the ten forms (of Visnu). The arches and canopy (should also
be worshipped in tlie same way). After having contdhiplated
the orbs of fire, wind and moon with (their respective) letters in
order, one should worship the body and then bathe it. One should
then contemplate on the subtle form of the self in the sky,
submerged in the white nectar that flows from the disc of the
moon. That is the eternal seed of one’s self that has been conse¬
crated by the flood. One should thus resolve the spirit that is
being produced in the self.
11-16. Then one should do the location of twelve letters
(after saying) “I am verily Visnu produced (again)”. The
heart, head, tuft, armour and weapons should be located (res¬
pectively) on the chest, head, tuft, back and eyes. Then the
weapons should be located on the two hands. Then one would
have a divine body. One should do this location on the body of
the disciple in the similar way (as it Kas been done) on one’s
self as well as the deity. The worship done for Hari on the heart
is known to be anirmalyd (without remnant) and that done in a
circle as sanirmalya (together with remnant). The disciples with
their eyes covered should throw the flower (on the images)
(at the commencement of the worship). On which images the
flower falls that name should be given to them. Then the discip¬
les should be seated on the left and sesamum,rice and ghee should
be offered (as oblation). After having made one hundred aud
eight oblations, (one should do) thousand (oblations) for the
purification of the body. One should do more than hundred
(oblations) for the limbs of the images of the nine compart¬
ments. After having made the final (oblation) the preceptor
should initiate them (the disciples). He has to be respected by
them with riches etc.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWO
Different flowers used in Worship
Fire~god said :
1-2. Lord Hari gets pleased with flowers, perfumes, in¬
cense, lamps and offerings. I shall describe you fleers which

arc fit and unfit for the god. Malati is the excellent flower.
Tamdla (flower) confers enjoyment and emancipation. Mallikd
(jasmine) destroys all sins. (The flower) yuthikd gets the world
of Visnu.
3. Atimukta will also get the same fruit. The pdfald (flower)
conveys one to the world of Visnu. One gets the world of Visnu
with the karavlra (flowers). One becomes fortunate with japd
(flowers).
4. One would reach the world of Visnu with the pdvanti,
kubjaka and tagara (flowers). (One would reach) the world of
Visnu with the karnikara. There would be destruction of sin with
kurmfha.
5-6. One will have an excellent position with lotuses, ketaki
and jasmine. One would reach the world of Hari with bdna
flowers, barbara and krsnd. Similar result would be got by aSoka,
tilaka and atarusabhava. The leaves of bilva would confer libera¬
tion. One will have the supreme position with the leaves of
iami.
7-11. One would reach the world of Visnu with the bhrngaraja. One would have same fruits with the leaves of tamdla.
The black and white basil, white lotus, blue lotuses, lotus, red
lotus are meritorious. Lord Hari (gets pleased) with a gar¬
land of hundred lotuses. One would gel enjoyment and emanci¬
pation and destruction of sin with nipa, arjvna, kadamba, vakula,
fragrant kirhiuka^ munipuspa, gokarna, ndgakarm, sandhyd flower,
bilva^ rafijani, ketaki, kusmanja, timira, kuia, kdJa, Sara, dyuta etc.,
maruvaka leaves and other fragrant (leaves and flowers). The
god would get pleased with all (that is offered) with devotion.
A flower is more meritorious than a lakh of gold and a garland,
more than a crore times.
12-15. It would be three times more meritorious with the
forest flowers than with the flowers from one’s own garden or
another’s garden. One should not worship lord Vi§nu with
withered or broken (flowers) or (flowers) having more than the
usual parts. (One would reach) hell (by worshipping)
with kdRcandra, mmatta, girikar^ikd, kufaja idlmaliyd and Hrifa,
Lord Hari (is pleased) with sugandha, brahma, lotuses and blue
lotuses. Lord Hara is worshipped with arka manddra (and)
elhustUra flovyers. jOne should uot offer Kufaja, karkafi flowers

530 Agni PurSija
and ketakf for Siva. (One should not use) kSmdn^a, ntmba
and wild flowers without fragrance (in worship).
16-18. One would get enjoyment and emancipation by
worshipping gods with the eight flowers of gestures such as
non-violence, conquest of senses, forbearance, knowledge, com¬
passion and learning. Non-violence is the first flower. (The
second) flower is the control of senses. Compassion for the
beings is (said to be) all flowers. The flower of tranquility
excells. Quictitude is a flower and penance is a flower. Medi¬
tation is the seventh flower. Truth is the eighth flower. Lord
Ke^ava is pleased with these flowers.
1 9-23. When lord Hari is worshipped with these flowers,
he certainly gets pleased. O Excellent among men ! There are
other external flowers. When lord Visnu is worshipped with
devotion together with compassion, he gets pleased. Water is
the flower for Varuna. Ghee, milk and curd (are the flowers)
for Soma. Food etc. (are the flowers) for Prajapati (Brahma)
and incense and lamp for Fire (god) . The fifth flower is the fruits
and flowers of the forest. The kuSa, roots etc. are the flowers of
the earth. Fragrant sandal is that of the Wind (god). Earnest¬
ness is the flower for lord Visnu. These are always the eight
flowers. The seat, the form, the five limbs (such as the heart
etc. ) and Visnu are the eight flowers. (Worship should be made
with the names) Vasudeva and others for Visnu and Isana and
others for l§iva.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THREE
The nature of hell
Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall describe hells. One does not go to them if
he worships lord Visnu with flowers and other things. A man
gets released from his life forces at the end of his life even though
he does not wish for it. A man gets released from his life on acco¬
unt of some case such as water, fire, poison, weapon, hunger,
illness and fall from a mountain. One takes another body to be

experienced as a result of one’s own acts. One who has committ¬
ed a sin would experience grief and one who does good (deeds)
would experience happiness. One is led to the God of Death by
the dreadful messengers of God of Death through the southern
gate if one has taken evil path. Pious men (would be taken) by
the western and other (doors). (They are) cast into hells by the
servants being ordered by the God of Death. On account of
piety one is led to heaven according to the words of Vasistha.
6-9. The killer of a cow is tormented for a lakh of years in
the mahavici (one of the hells). The killer of a brahmin (would
be tormented) in a well-heated copper pot (for the same period).
One who steals the land would be slowly tormented in the
raurava (hell ) till the great deluge. One who kills a woman,
child or the old (is tormented) in the dreadful mahUrnurava
(hell) till (the period of) fourteen Indras. One who
sets fire to the house, ground etc. is burnt for a kalpa (432 million
years of mortals). Thieves would fall into the tdmisraka
hell. They would be pierced by the attendants of the God
of Death with spears etc. for many kalpa periods. Then they
would be tormented in the mahatamisraka hell by serpents,
leeches etc.
10-1 1 . One who kills his mother would be struck by swords
in the asipatravana (forest where the trees have leaves as sharp
as swords) for many kalpa periods as long as the earth (remains).
One who has burnt men would be burnt in muddy region with
gravel etc. One who has eaten sweet food alone will suffer
in kdkola (hell) eating the excreta of insects.
12. One who has discontinued (doing) five sacrifices'
(would suffer) in kutfala hell eating urine and blood. One
who has eaten the forbidden food would take blood in the
filthy hell.
13. One who afflicts others would be tormented in the
hell tailapdka like sesamum. One who kills a person who has
sought refuge would be cooked in the tailapdka.
14. One who withholds gifts at the sacrifice and who sells
wine would be thrown into the hell nirucchvdsa. Similarly,
1. To be performed by a householder — brahmayajfta, pitryajtla, daivapitryajHa,, bhSlayajfla and nryajha respectively denoting teaching, libation
to manes, oblation to gods, offering made to spirits and feeding guests.

Agni Purdna
one who lies (would be thrown) into the great hell vajrakavdfa.
15. Evil-minded persons (would suffer) in (the hell)
mahdjvdla; one who has cohabited the forbidden woman (would
suffer) in (the hell) krakaca, the doer of mixed sins in (the hell) ;
one who strikes at other’s weakness would suffer in hells
gu^apdka and pratoda.
16. The killer of an animal (would be thrown) into an
alkaline lake. One who steals the land (would be placed) under
a current as sharp as a razor. One who steals a cow or gold
(would be thrown) into (the hell) ambarisa. One who cuts a
tree (would be put) in (the hell) vajraSastraka.
17. One who steals wine would be put into (hell)
and one who steals other’s wealth into (hell). One
who eats flesh in excess (would be thrown) into (hell).
One who does not offer the rice-balls (for the manes) (would
be put) into ugragandha hell,
18. One who receives a bribe (would be tormented) in
(the hell) durdhara. One who cohabits women taken captive
(would suffer) in the hell (called) manjusa. One who censures
scriptures (would be thrown) in the unstable hell loha.
19-20. One who bears false witness (would be put) in (the
hell) putivaktra. One who steals wealth and one who kills a child,
woman or the old and one who afflicts a brahmin would suffer
in (the hell) kardla. A brahmin who drinks wine (would suffer)
in (the hell) vilepa. Those who have caused breach (of friend¬
ship) (would be put) into (the hell) mahdtdmra.
21. One who cohabits others’ wives (would enter) (the
hell) idlmala (and embrace) glowing iron or stone. Similarly, a
woman cohabiting many men would do.
22-23, Those who cohabit their mothers and daughters,
those who have cut the +ongue (of others), those who have
looked (at others’ wives) with lustful eyes and those who have
plucked the eyes would be thrown into a heap of charcoal.
Thieves would be pierced with razors. One who eats flesh (would
be made) to cat his own flesh. One who practises fasting for
(the stipulated) months would not go to hell. So also one who
practises the vow on the eleventh day and the bhipnapaHcakavrata-
(would not go to hell).

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOUR
Mode of practising the vow of fasting for stipulated months
Fire-god said :
1-2. I shall describe the vow (known as) fasting for a month,
that is the most excellent among (the vows). After having
done the sacrifice relating to (lord) Vi§nu and got the command
of the preceptor and knowing one’s own strength with (the
practice of) etc., O Sage ! a forester or an ascetic or a
woman or a widow should fast for a month.
3-5. One should undertake to observe this vow for thirtytwo days after having fasted on the eleventh day of the dark
fortnight of (the month of) aivina (October-November). “O
lord Visnu ! Commencing from this day until you get up
(from sleep) I shall worship you without taking food for thirty
days. O Visnu ! (this vow would be) till you get up in the
(months of) aSvina and karttika. Let not my vow be incomplete
if I happen to die in the middle.”.
6-9. (Lord Visnu should be worshipped thi'ice with fragrant
flowers after bathing thrice. The person practising the vow should
repeat the songs of lord Vi§nu and contemplate (on him).
He should avoid vain discussion and should avoid desire for
wealth. He should not touch someone who is not practising
the vow. He should not enter into conversation with those
addicted to vices. He should dwell in temple for thirty days.
The observer of the vow should worship the brahmins on the
twelfth day and feed them. After completing vow and paying
fees, he should break the fast. One would get enjoyment and
emancipation for thirteen kalpas (a kalpa is equal to 432 million
years) by practising thus.
10-12. He should do the sacrifice relating to Visnu and
worship thirteen brahmins. He should give them as many pairs
of clothes, vessels, seats, umbrellas, metal rings, pairs of sandals,
upper cloth and sacred threads. All these things should also
be given to another brahmin being permitted by them. After
having worshipped golden lord Visnu on the bed, he should
worship his own form with clothes and other things.

Agni Pwdr^
13-15. Then he should tell brahmins, “O Brahmins !
I am going to the world ofVisnu being freed ifrom all sins^by the
grace of lord Visnu. I am becoming lord Visnu himself”.
(The brahmins should say), “O One with divine wisdom !
You go to the faultless place of lord Visnu by this vehicle and
remain there spotless bearing the form of lord Visnu”. Then
that bed should be offered to the preceptor. One who practises
thus would elevate hundreds of his family and take them to the
world of Visnu.
16-18. That country in which there is a person observing
fast for a month, would become spotless. What to speak about
the family in which there is one who fasts for a month ! Seeing
the person practising a vow fallen into a swoon, one should make
him drink milk and clarified butter. These things would not
nullify the vow. The ghee is allowed by the brahmins, and milk,
water, roots are beneficial remedies (administered) by the pre¬
ceptors. Lord Visnu is the maker of all remedies. Hence he
will make the vow complete.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIVE
Mode of performing the Bhismapancakavrata
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the Bhismapaheaka,^ that is the foremost
among the vows and that which yields everything. It should be
done on the eleventh day in the bright fortnight in k&rttika.
2. (The observer of the vow) should bathe thrice (daily)
for five days and satisfy gods and manes with five kinds of
grains and sesamum. He should worship lord Hari silently.
3. Having bathed the deity with the five things got from a
cow and with the five sweet things, sandal paste should be be¬
smeared and guggulu should be burnt along with ghee.
1, The five days from the eleventh to the fifteenth of the bright half
of kdrttika said to be sacred to Bhl^ma. See chapter 205 below.

4. A lamp should be offered. Food offering should be made
day and night. He should then repeat (the syllable) “Om obei¬
sance to Vasudeva” one hundred and eight times.
5. The performer of the vow should then make oblations of
sesamum and rice dipped in ghee with the sacred syllable of six
letters along with the word ‘oblations.’
6-8. He should worship the feet with lotuses (on the first
day), the knee and thigh with the bilva leaves on the second day,
the navel with the bhrngaraja on the third day, with the banuy
bilva BJidjapa (flowers) on the fourth day and with mdlati on the
fifth day. The votary should lie down (only) on the (bare)
floor. (He should use) cowdung on the eleventh day and cow’s
urine, curd and milk (on the subsequent days). (He should use)
five things got from a cow on the fifth day. He should take
food only in the night on the full moon day. The votary would
get enjoyment and emancipation.
9. After having practised the (Bhismapancaka)Bhlsma, reach¬
ed lord Hari. That is why (it is known as) Bhismapancaka.
One should worship lord Brahma and fast while practising
the vow.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIX
Mode of offering water of libation to the venerable sage Agastya
Fire-god said :
1-4. (Sage) Agastya (is verily lord) Visnu. After having
worshipped him one would reach lord Visnu. When the Sun
has not entered (the constellation) Virgo one should offer liba¬
tion to Agastya for three days and one-third part of a day after
having fasted and worshipped him. An image of the sage
(Agastya) made of the kaia flower should be located in a pot at
(the time of) nightfall and tlxat image in the pot should be wor¬
shipped. He should then remain awake in the night. “O
Agastya ! The foremost among sages ! A multitude of brilli¬
ance ! Great-minded person ! You accept with your wife this
worship done by me” . After having invoked the presence (of

536 Agni Purd^a
(of the sage) with libation, he should worship him with sandal
and other things. ^
5-13. After having led (the image) near the water tank in
the morning libation should be offered. “O One having the
colour of kd^a flower ! Born of Fire and Wind (gods) ! Son of
Mitra and Varuna !-Born in the pitcher Obeisance be to
you ! That Agastya by whom Atapi was eaten as also Vatapi®,
the great demon and the ocean was dried, may he be present
before me. I am praying to (the sage) Agastya with my deeds,
mind and speech. Being desirous of attaining the other world,
I shall pray to the son of Mitra, born in a different continent
and most dear to the gods. Kindly accept the sandal that is the
king among the trees. May you accept the garland, that is the
destroyer of sins, the vessel of piety, wealth, desire and libera¬
tion and that which confers fortune, health and prosperity. O
Lord ! Let the incense be accepted. You make my devotion
steady. You confer on me the desired boon and also auspicious
position in the next (place) (got) by the celestials and demons.
O Excellent among the sages ! Conferer of all the desired fruits !
This libation has been offered by me together with clothes, rice,
fruits and gold. I make known to (sage) Agastya that which I
have raised with my mind. I offer libation with fruits. You
accept libation, O Great Sage !” Agastya being thus exca¬
vated with the spades (gave) men the desired progeny
and strength. (The sage) with fierce splendour along with his
chaste wife nourished the two ears. He then conferred blessing
on the celestials.
14. “O Daughter of a king !® Obeisance to you, the
wife of the sage (Agastya) ! One who is a great devotee ! O
Governess of the celestials ! Accept libation. O Lopamudra ! One who is famous !
15-16. Libation should be offered to Agastya together with
a vessel containing five gems, gold and silver and enclosed by
seven kinds of grains as well as curd and sandal. (The above
libation should be done) by women and without (the reci1 . When the seed of Mitra and Varuna fell at the sight of the nymph
Urvafi, part of it fell into a jar and part into water. From the former arose
Agastya, hence called ‘born of the pitcher’.
2. They were brothers, both demons.
3. Daughter of the king of Vidarbha. ^

tation of) the sacred syllables. “O Agastya ! Foremost among
the sages ! A multitude of splendour ! Bestower of all things !”
1 7. After having accepted this worship of mine you retreat
in peace. One has to forego a kind of grain, a variety of fruit and
a kind of taste for the sake of Agastya.
18. Then the brahmins should be given food (as well as)
ghee, sweet gruel and sweet balls. Cows, clothes and gold should
be given to them as fees.
1 9. That pitcher should be given to a brahmin together with
gold and its mouth being covered by another vessel contain¬
ing ghee and sweet gruel.
20. All would get all things by offering libation for seven
years. A woman (would get) children and fortune and a girl
(would get) a husband born to a king.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVEN
Mode of performing Kanmudavrata
Fire-god said :
1 . The Kauinudavrata, which has been described^ by me,
should be practised in the bright (fortnight) in aivayuji. After
fasting on the eleventh day, lord Hari should be worshipped
for a month.
2. (One .should resolve as follows): “I shall practise the
Kanmudavrata taking food only once (daily) in the brightfort night
in divina after repeating (the name of) Hari for a month, for the
sake of enjoyment and emancipation”.
3-4. After fasting, he should worship lord Vi§nu, after
having besmeared the lord with sandals, agallochum and saffron
with lotus, blue lotus flowers or white lotuses or malali (flower),
(He should offer) a lamp with oil silently. Offering of sweet
gruel, cakes and sweet balls (should be made) day and night,
5. obeisance to Vasudeva”. Having made the offering
(with this syllable) (the vow) should be completed. Food and
other things should be given to a brahmin. The fast for a month
would continue until the lord wakes up. (If it is continued)
beyond that (it would get) greater benefit.

Agni Purana
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHT
Rules and regulations relating to vows and gifts in general
Fire-god said :
1-3. I shall describe briefly the vows and gifts in general.
Whichever vow or whichever gift or whichever article or the
routines in whichever time such as the first lunar day and other
days, on days such as the (Sunday), in asterisms such as the
krttikd, in viskumba (a particular combination) etc., in the (constel¬
lations) aries etc. and at the time of the eclipses, lord Vi.snu
is the governing deity for all these materials, and time. Sun,
Isa, Brahma, LaksmI and all others are the manifestations of
lord Visnu.
4-12. The vow, gift, worship and other acts done for him
would yield all things. “O lord of the universe ! You come here.
(Here are) scat, water for washing the feet, waters of libation,
the sweet drink, water for sipping, bathing, clothes, perfumes,
flower, incense, lamp and offerings. Obeisance to you.” This is
the common statement in worship, vow and giving gift. The
statement for giving a gift is similar. Listen to me. “Today I
offer this article dedicated to Visnu to such and such a brah¬
min belonging to such and such a gotra. I offer this gift to you
for the appeasement of all sins, for increasing the longevity and
health, for increasing the fortune, for furthering the progeny in
the gotra, for conquest, wealth, piety, desire for prosperity, the
removal of that sin, and release from mundane existence. For
the sake of the accomplishment of this gift I am giving to you
only. May the lord, the master of the world, get permanently
pleased with this. O Lord of sacrifice, gift and vow ! Give me
knowledge, fame and other things. Give me piety, desire, wealth
and emancipation, that which is wished by the mind”. Whoever
reads this collection of vow and gift daily, would get the desires
fulfilled, would become pure and get enjoyment and emancipa¬
tion. The vows which should be practised under the auspices of
different lunar days, weekdays, casterisms, positions of the sun,
astral combinations and Manu and the like should not be practis¬
ed by worshipping god Vasudeva in one and the same way.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINE
Rules relating to gifts
Fire-god said :
1. Listen to me. I shall describe the charities that would
bestow enjoyment and emancipation. One who docs acts of
charity (such as digging wells etc. ) would get all things.
2. (Digging) reservoirs, wells and tanks, (constructing)
temples, giving food and (establishing) gardens arc (known to
be) purtadharma, that confers emancipation.
3. Performing (a kind of sacrifice), penance, truth,
protecting scriptures, serving guests, (doing) vaiSvadeva (an
offering made to the gods Visvedevas) arc said to be ista that
take one to heaven.
4. The gift (made) at the time of the eclipse of planets and
(that offered) at the time of the entry of the Sun from one constel¬
lation to another, gift made on the twelfth lunar days etc.
(are also) pfirta, which also take one to heaven.
5-7. A gift at the (proper) place, time and (to a proper)
person would be of crore merits especially in the transit of the
Sun on the tropics, on the equinox, at the (time of) vjatipdta,
at the waning of the day, at different days begiiming the cycles
of period, at the transit of the Sun from one constellation to
another, on the fourteenth days, on the eighth days, on the fullrnoon days, on the twelfth days, at the time of a^^fakas
(a collection of three days beginning from the seventh day
after the full moon), at the time of sacrifices, festivals and marri¬
ages, at the Manu-periods, at the vidhrti (yoga) , on having had a
bad dream and when a good brahmin has been got.
8-12. Otherwise it is desired that a gift (has to be bestowed)
always upon those on whom one has the faith to do. Tropical
(periods are) two, equinoxes (are) two making up four. The
eightysix (auspicious periods are) — the four vimupadis^.y the
twelve transits of the Sun from one constellation to another (and)
the transit of the Stm in virgo, gemini, pisccs and sagittarious.
The eightysix (periods) are said to have eightysix times merits
(than ordinary periods). The two summer and winter solstices
I. They are taurus, Ico, scorpio and acquarious.

Agni Purdm
are meritorious when it has come and when it has not come i.e.,
thirty na4is^ in cancer and twenty in capricorn respcstively.
When the Sun stays in the libra or aries (it would be) ten (nd^is)
in both. In the eightysix (periods) described already sixty nd^ikds
(are auspicious after the Sun’s entry). Among the auspicious
periods of visnupadi sixteen {nd4is) before and after (are auspi¬
cious).
13. It is said to be the vyatipdta if the Sunday morning occurs
in (the astcrisms) iravana, aivani, dhanisfhd and dile^d.
14-15. The krta{yuga) began on the ninth day in the bright
fortnight in kdrttika, the tretd (yuga) on the third day in the bright
(fortnight) in vaiSdkha, the dvdpara {yuga) on the new-moon day
in the month of mdgha and the kali (yuga) on the thirteenth day
of the dark (fortnight) in nabhasyaka (bhddrapada) . One has to
know them thus. One should also know the periods of Manu and
others thus.
16-19. Gifts made on the ninth day of the white (fortnight)
in aivayuky the twelfth day in kdrttikay the third day in mdgha and
bhadrapaday the new-moon day in phdlgunay the eleventh day in
pausa, the tenth day in dsd4hay the seventh day in the month of
mdgha, the eighth day of the dark (fortnight) in iravana, the fullmoon day in asadha, and similarly fifteenth day of kdrttika, phdlguna and jyaisfha, the three asfakas^ in the later part of dgrahdyani
(December-January) and the eighth day known as the as taka
confer undecaying benefits.
20. (In the same way one should give gifts in the auspicious
periods) at sacred places like Gaya, (the river) Gahga and
Prayaga and temples etc. Gifts should be made without being
requested. But knowledge, wealth and girls (should) not (be
given as gifts thus).
21. Gift should be made facing the east and the gift should
be received facing the north. (By this) the longevity of the giver
increases and that of the recipient does not decrease.
22-26. (In general) (the name of ) the of the recipient
and their own selves are repeated and the gift is made (by the
givers) , In the case of giving away a girl in marriage (the name
of) the three (gotras) (should be repeated). Gift should be given
after bathing and worshipping the deity (along) with (the rcci1 . One n&di is equal to 24 minutes.
2. The collection of seventh, eighth and ninth days after fulftmoon.

tation of) the vyahrtis (the syllables bhu etc. of the gdyatrl mantra)
together with water. Gold, horse, sesamum, elephant, servant,
chariot, earth, house, girl and tawny, cow are the ten great gifts.
The money got by one’s learning, valour, penance, means of a
girl, by officiating as a priest and through the disciple is (said to
be) ^ulka (fees, or bride’s-pricc etc.). All the wealth acquired by
following some trade or work is also (known as) iulka. All that
which was got by usury, agriculture and trade and that obtained
as a favour and the one got by gambling, dice, stealing etc. and
similar heroic pursuits (are said to be acquired) by some device.
The three kinds (of acquisition) have three different kinds (of
fruits).
27. Woman’s property is said to be of six kinds — adhyagni
(gift made to a woman at the time of marriage), adkyavdhanika (gift made to a woman at the time of leaving her father’s
house for her husband’s house), gift made (by the husband)
out of love or affection and gifts got from the brother, mother or
father.
28. Brahmins, warriors and tradesmen (have their own)
wealth. (But) a ^udra (will have) by their favour. One should
not give as gift cow, house, bed and women to many.
29-30. If one promises to give a gift and does not give, it
would kill hundred of generations. Whatever little merit one
has acquired should be made to the gods, preceptors, mothers
and fathers with one’s effort. The wealth that has been given
(as a gift) with a view to have something in return (would be)
useless.
31-33. Piety is accomplished by faith. Even water given
(to the thirsty gets) undiminishing (merit). One is said to be an
excellent person (to receive a gift) if he is endowed with knowl¬
edge, good conduct and quality, avoids doing harm to others
and protects and saves the ignorant. A gift made to the mother
is hundred times (meritorious than the others), and that to the
father is thousand times (meritorious). The gift given to the
daughter (gets) endless (merits) and that to the sister (gets)
undecaying (merits). A gift (given) to a creature (is) of equal
merit and that (given) to a sinner (is) of great merit.
34-38. (A gift) to (a person of) the mixed caste (is) two
times (meritorious), a gift to a S&dra{h) four times (meritorious),
to a vaiiya (is) eight times (meritorious) and to a kfotriya is sixteen

Agni Purdita
times (meritorious). I shall describe (the merits of giving a
gift) to a brahmin. (Gift made) to one who has 'studied] the scrip¬
tures is hundred times (merit-worthy), to one who imparts
the scriptures is of endless (merit). It is said that gift (given)
to the priest and the officiating priest is of undecaying (merit).
Gift given to those devoid of wealth and to a sacrificer would be
of limitless (merit). A brahmin who does not do penances and
study and has desire to accept gift would get drowned along with
that just like a practitioner together with the stone in the floods.
After bathing and touching (waters) properly one should
accept the gift after becoming pure and restraining senses.
The recipient of the gift should always repeat the sdviiri {gdyatri).
Then the deity should be glorified together with the materials.
39-48. The recipient should utter the complimentary w'ords
loudly after having received from an excellent brahmin, (in a)
soft (voice) (after receiving) from a ksatriya (warrior), in a low
voice (after receiving) from a viia (tradesman) and mentally
{after receiving) from a iudra. (I shall describe the deities of
different things). All (the gods) are the presiding deities for
(the gift of) protection. Visnu is the deity of the earth. Girl,
servant and female servant are said to be governed by Prajapati.
An elephant is also governed by Prajapati. The deity for the
horse is Yama (god of Death). Similarly all the one-hoofed ani¬
mals and the buffalo are governed by the God of Death. Nirrti
(is the presiding deity) of the camel, Siva is that of a cow. Firegod is tliat of a goat, Varuna is that of a ram, Hari is that of a
boar, Wind-god is that of forest animals, Varuna for the tank,
(Varuna) for vessels of water such as the pot etc. and gems got
from the ocean, Fire-god for gold and iron, Prajapati for food
grains and cooked food, Gandharva for fragrant material,
Brhaspati for dress, Wind-god for all birds, Brahma for knowledge
and its accessories, Sarasvati for books etc., Visvakarma for
sculpture, Vanaspati for the trees etc. I'he deities of the materials
make up the body of Hari. Ahgiras is said to be the deity of
umbrella, antelope-skins, bed, chariot, seat, sandals and vehicle.
All ammunitions, weapons, banners etc. (are governed) by all
the gods. A house also (is governed) by all the gods. (Lord)
Vi§nu is the presiding deity of all things.
49-54. Or Siva may be (the presiding deity) ^because there
is no other article besides the above. One should mention the

name of the material and say that “I am giving”. Then water
should be given on the hand. This is known to be the procedure
in all gifts, (The receiver) should say “ (Lord) Visnu is the
giver. (Lord) Visnu is the materials. I am receiving.” Wish¬
ing the welfare of the giver is the duty of the recipient (that
confers) the two fruits of enjoyment and emancipation. One
may accept gift from all for protecting the preceptors and servants
and also to propitiate gods and manes. But he should not get
satisfied with that. Money should not (be taken) from a iudra
for the sake of sacrifice. The benefit of that would reach the
§udra. Molasses, butter-milk and juices etc. may be accepted by
an anchorite from a Sudra. A brahmin struggling for his existence
may accept gift from all. If the brahmins arc associated with
fire and sun there cannot be any defect in teaching performing
sacrifice or by accepting a gift from a prohibited person.
55. (A gift) is given in the krtayuga by approaching the per¬
son, is given in the tretayuga after inviting (the person concerned) .
(A gift is made) in the dvaparayuga to one who seeks and in the
kaliyuga to one who follows and begs.
56-63. Water should be poured on the ground after mentally
resolving to give to a suitable person. The ocean has its limit.
But there is no limit for the gift. (I shall give) to such and such
a person belonging to such and such a gotra, who is a good soul,
and a proper person who is learned in the Vedas and its accesso¬
ries at the time of the eclipse of the Moon and Sun, at the entry
of the Sun into a constellation, at the sacred places of great merit
such as the Ganges, Gaya, Prayaga etc. “I make a gift of such
and such an article for which Visnu and Siva and others, are the
presiding deities for the sake of (getting) children, grand child¬
ren, house, fortune, wife endowed with good qualities and for
the increase of fame, learning, desire, fortune and health and for
the destruction of all sins and for getting heaven, enjoyment and
emancipation. I give this to you. May lord Hari (identical with)
Siva, the destroyer of spate of evils belonging to the heaven, sky
and earth be pleased. May you be the conferer of the world
of Brahma on me for the sake of getting the piety, wealth and
desire. I offer gold as fee to such and such a brahmin of such and,
such a gotra for the sake of making this gift established”. All
gifts should be made with this sentence for giving a gift.

Agni Purdna
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TEN
Sixteen great gifts
Fire-god said:
1-4. I shall describe all the gifts. The great gifts (are)
sixteen. (The gift known as) the tuldpurusa^ is the first. (The
others are) gift of hiranyagarbha^ brahman da kalpavrksa (celestial
tree). The fifth one (is the gift of) thousand cows. (The gift
of) golden kdmadliemi (the celestial cow) (is the sixth one).
The seventh one (is the gift of) golden horse. (The other gifts
are) the golden horse and chariot and the golden elephant and
horse. Then (the remaining gifts are) five ploughs and (the
gift of) earth, viSvacakray kalpalata, the excellent seven oceans,
ratnadhenu and mahdbhutaghata. (The gift) should be given on an
auspicious day.
5. Gift should be given to a brahmin after having worshipp¬
ed gods in a circle in a shed. Listen to me. I shall describe
ten gifts (known as ) meruddna (heaps of different things ) .
6. The best gift is that of a thousand dronas (a measure)
of grains. The rest are successively half (the quantity) of the
preceding ones. An excellent gift of a mountain of salt should be
given (consisting of) sixteen dronas.
7. An excellent (gift) of a mountain of molasses would be
of ten bhdras (a measure). The rest (would be) successively half
of the preceding ones. An excellent hill of gold would be of
thousand palas (a measure of weight) and the rest as that (des¬
cribed above).
8. A hill of sesamum would be of ten droiias (the rest being)
duly five and three dronas. The hill of cotton would be twenty,
ten and five bhdras (respectively).
9. An excellent hill of ghee would be twenty pots of ghee.
An excellent hill of silver (would be) ten thousand palas.
10-12. (An excellent) hill of sugar (would be) eight bhdras
and the medium (would be) half that (and the inferior still half
that. I shall describe the ten cows by giving which one would
get enjoyment and emancipation. The first one would be the
cow of molasses and the next one would be the cow of ghee.
The third one is the cow of sesamum and the fourth one cow of
1. gold, jewel or other valuable things equal to a man weight given
to a Brahma^a as a gift.

water. (The others are) cow of milk, cow of honey, cow of sugar,
cow of curd and the cow of juices. The tenth one is the cow in
its natural form. This is said to be the rule (governing the ten
cows).
13-18. In the case of liquid materials given as the cow,
they should be in the form of the pots. But they should be a heap
in the case of other (materials ) . One should place a deer skin
of four cubits (length) on the ground besmeared with cow dung
with the neck (part) on the east. Darbha should be spread every¬
where. Similarly (a seat) should be made for the calf with
the tender skin of enaka (a kind of black antelope). The cow to¬
gether with the calf should be arranged such as it faces the
east and the feet point to the north. An excellent gift of cow of
molasses would always be of four bkaras (out of which) the calf
should be of one bhdra. The middle type is known to be of two
bharas (for the cow) and half a bhdra for the calf. The last type
should be one bhdra (for the cow) and a quarter {bhdra) for the
calf. Othei-wise (the gift may be made) according to the molasses
and wealth one may have. One mdsa (a measure) is five krsrialakas (seed of the guhja plant). One suvarna is equal to sixteen
mdsas. One pala is equal to four suvar^as. One tuld is known to
be one hundred palas. A bhdra would be twenty tulds. One
drona (is equal to) four d4haka.
19-22. The cow and the calf both made of the molasses
should be covered by a thin white cloth. The ears (should be
made of) pearl oyster, the feet of sugarcane and the eyes of pure
pearls. The veins (should be made of) white thread, the woollen
blankets (for spreading) of white wool, the backside with copper
vases, the hairs with white chowrie, the two eye-brows with coral,
the breast with butter, the tail with silken cloth, the milk pails
made of bronze and the pupils with sapphire. The ornaments on
the horns should be made of gold and the hoofs of silver. The
teeth should be of different kinds of fruits and the nose of sandal.
23-29. O Brahmin ! After having made ready the cow,
it should be worshipped with these sacred syllables. “That god¬
dess who is the fortune of all beings and who remains in the celes¬
tials may in the form of the cow give me peace. I’he (god¬
dess) Rudrani is always dear to lord Safikara and remains
in the body, may that goddess in the form of the cow
dispel my sin. That one who is on the chest of (lord) Vi^iau

Agni Pur&na
and who is the Svdhd for the fire, who is the energy of the moon,
sun and star, that is of the form of the cow O Goddess of
Fortune ! May that cow which is the fortune of the four- faced
one (Brahma), the god of wealth and the guardian deity of
the world, be the confercr on me. You are the svadha (obla¬
tion of food) for all the manes and the svahd for the partakers of
sacrifices. Hence you are the cow that removes all sins.
Hence you get me peace”. The cow that has been sanctified
thus should be given to a brahmin. The same procedure (holds
good) for the (offerings) of all kinds of cows (mentioned already) .
After having obtained the benefits of all sacrifices one (would
become) pure and get enjoyment and emancipation.
30-34. One should give as a gift a cow having golden horns,
silvery hoofs, of good conduct and having udders with bronze,
with milk and decked with cloth together with the fees. One
who gives such a cow would stay in heaven for as many years
as the number of hairs (on its body). If it is a tawny (cow)
it would again elevate seven generations (of the giver). One
who gives a cow having golden horns, silvery hoofs and bronze
attached udders together with fees befitting one’s capacity would
get enjoyment and emancipation after giving. By giving a cow
with a calf, i.e., a cow that is delivering a calf, one would reach
heaven and stay there for so many years as the number of
hairs (on the body of the cow). It should be given as laid down
before. A cow and a calf should be given as a gift by one that is
about to die as (laid down) before. (He should say) “There
is the dark Vaitarani river at the dreadful entrance to (the place
of) the God of Death. I am giving this black cow in order to
cross that Vaitarani.”
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND ELEVEN
Different kinds of gifts
Fire-god said :
1. One who has ten cows should give one. One having
hundred cows should give ten cows. A person having a thousand
cows should give hundred. All yield the same benefit.

2. Those who give thousand cows (as gifl) would go to a
place where the mansions are golden, there would be flow of
wealth and the gandharvas and celestial nymphs (dwell).
3. By giving hundred cows one becomes free from the ocean
of hells. By giving a weaned calf one stays in comfort in the
heaven.
4-6. By the gift of a cow one would get longevity, health,
fortune and heaven. She is the auspicious queen of the
guardian deities such as Indra and the like; may she be the bestower of all my desires by the greatness of the gift of the shcbuffalo. That mother of the demon in the form of buffalo
the children of which (woman) are established by the assist¬
ance of the Lord of Dharma, may be the bestower of
wealth on me. One would get fortune by giving a she-buffalo
and reach heaven by giving a bull.
7-1 1 . The gift known as satfiyuktahalapaAkti (attached with
ten ploughs) confers all fruits. A collection of ten ploughs is
said to be a paAkti. They should be made of wood and yoked to
bulls. One would stay in heaven by giving them bound with
golden strips. The benefits of giving ten tawny cows at the
Pu^kara (a sacred place) in (the month of) jyesfhS is said to be
undecaying. Similar benefit would accrue by releasing a bull.
(One should say) “O Four-footed one ! You are the virtue..
These four are dear to you. O lord of Vi?nu ! One who nour¬
ishes the manes, beings and the sages ! Let me have the worlds
free blemishes and undecaying when you are released. May I
not have the debts due to the gods, beings, manes and mortals.
You are the virtue. That fate which befalls one who resorts to
you, let it be firm in me.”
12-16. One should mark (the bull) with the circles and
spears and let it go with these sacred syllables (described above).
If a bull is released on the eleventh day of a dead person he would
be freed from the world of the dead. (The same benefit would
accrue if a bull is let loose) at the time of six-monthly cere¬
mony and annual ceremony (for the dead). One who makes a
gift of gocarma (a measure of surface) would get rid of his sins.
A nivarttana would be of thirty each kmifi being ten
cubits. The ground extending to ten times (the nivartana) (is
known to be) gocarma. One who gives dccf*s skin together with

Agni Pursue
a cow, earth and gold would get united with lord Brahma,
even though he had done many sinful deeds. One may give
vessels filled with sesamum, honey and black sesamum*as well
as a prastha (a particular measure) of long pepper. Having
given a bed of good quality one may get enjoyment and emanci¬
pation.
1 7. After having made a golden image of the self and given
(the same as a gift), (the giver could reach) heaven.
1 8. After having made a large house and giving it on e would
get enjoyment and emancipation. (One would reach) heaven
by giving a house, a hut for an ascetic, hall and shelter. One
who builds a cattle-shed and gifts it would be free from sin and
reach heaven.
19-20. One who makes a gift of the buffalo (the vehicle)
of the God of Death would be free from sin and would go to
heaven. One who gives (as a gift the images of gods) Brahma
Hara (Siva), Hari with the celestials and the messenger of the
God of Death in their middle and (the god) PaiSi (Varuna)
as cutting the head of the latter would reach heaven. A
brahmin who accepts this gift known as the* three-faced’ would
incur sin.
2 1 . One should give to a brahmin a wheel made of silver
together with gold after having placed it on (his own) lap.
This is (known as) the ‘wheel of time* of great merit.
22-27. One who makes a gift of iron equal to one’s weight
would not go to hell. One who gives an iron rod of fifty palas
covered by a cloth to a brahmin would not get (the chastising)
rod of the God of Death. One should give the root or fruit or
other material collectively or separately for the Conqueror
of Death for the increase of one’s life. One should make (a
figure of) a man with black sesamum, with the teeth (made)
of silver, eye (made) of gold, wielding a sword in the hand,
bedecked with japa flowers, wearing red cloth, adorned with
a garland of conch-shells, the feet having a pair of sandals,
the sides (covered) by black wool and holding a ball of flesh
in his left (hand). He is (known as) the embodiment of time.
After having worshipped that (image) with perfumes and other
things, it should be given to a brahmin. (Such a giver) would
be free from death and disease and become a monarch.
28. One who gives a gift of a cow and a bqU a brahmin

would get enjoyment and emancipation. One would not die by
giving a golden hairy horse.
29-31. One who makes such a gift endowed with bells
would also get enjoyment and emancipation. One who gives
gold would get the desired things. When gold is given as
gift, silver should be given as remuneration. Gold is the
remuneration even in the case of other gifts. No remuneration
(should be given) when gold, silver, copper, rice and other
grains (are given as gift) or at the daily ceremony for the manes
and at the worship of gods.
32-35. Silver (given) as remuneration at the ceremony for
the manes is a means to get piety, pleasure and material comfort.
A wiseman who gives land as a gift should also give gold,
silver, copper, gems, pearls, wealth and all other things. One
who makes a gift of land, that composed man satisfies the
manes in their world and the gods in the world of gods. One who
gives (as a gift) a market town or small town or village or field
abound with grains or hundred nivartana^ or half of that or a
house etc. or only gocarma* extent of land would get all things.
36. Just as a drop of oil spreads on the waters so also the
fruit of all gifts would follow the mortal in the next birth.
37. The benefit (of making a gift) of gold, land and an
eight year old girl would follow (the giver) in his seven births.
One who gives a girl (in marriage) would elevate twentyone
generations of his family and attain the world of Brahma.
38. Having given an elephant together with remuneration
one becomes free from blemish and would attain heaven.
Having given a horse one would get long and healthy life and
fortune and ascend heaven.
39-40. One who gives a maid servant to an excellent brah¬
min would reach the world of nymphs. Having given a
copper plate weighing five hundred palas (a measure of weight)
or half the weight or a quarter of that weight or one-eighth of
the weight would get enjoyment and emancipation. By giving
a cart together with a bull one would go to heaven by means of a
cart.
41. One who makes a gift of cloth would get longevity,
1. See verse 13 above.
2. See verse 14 above.

health and undecaying heaven. The giver of grains such as the
wheat, kalama (rice sown in June and harvested in December) ,
barley and other (grains) would attain heaven.
42-43. Having given (as a gift) a seat, metallic vessel, salt,
fragrant sandal, incense, lamp, betel, iron, silver, gem and other
rare materials, one would get enjoyment and emancipation.
One would ascend heaven by giving sesamum and a vessel
for keeping sesamum.
44-46. There is nothing superior to the gift of food. Neither
there was nor there would be. The (merit of) gift of an elephant,
horse, chariot, maid-servant, servant and house will not equal
a sixteenth part (of the merit) of giving food. One who gives
food after committing a great sin would become free from all
sins and attain undecaying worlds. One who sets up a place for
distributing water for drinking would get enjoyment and emanci¬
pation.
47. By giving fire and firewood (for travellers) on the way,
one would get radiance etc. and would be served in the (celestial)vehicle in heaven by the celestials, gandharvas and women.
48. One would get all things by giving ghee, oil and
salt. After having given umbrella, sandal and firewood etc.
one would dwell in heaven happily.
49-52. A gift made after worshipping lords Hari, Hara,
Brahma and the guardian deities on the important lunar days
like the first etc., on the combinations (known as) vifkambha
etc., in the (months) caitra and others, in the years and the
(aster isms) aivini etc. is of great merit. One would get enjoy¬
ment and emancipation by providing shady trees, feeding pla¬
ces, (vehicles) to carry burden and for anointing the feet. There
are three things which are of equal merits. (They are) — cows,
land and imparting knowledge. By imparting knowledge one
becomes blcmishless and attains the world of BrahmSTOne who
imparts knowledge about the brahman^ would be equal to one
who gives earth consisting of seven continents.
53-54. One who gives refuge to all beings would get all
things. One who copies and gives the purd^a or Bhdrata or
RSmdyanay would get enjoyment and emancipation. One who
teaches scriptures dancing and music would reiu;h heaven.

55. Money should be given to the teacher and food etc.
for the students. What more can be possibly given by one who
does with a motive to acquire virtues and desires.
56. There is no doubt that one would get by imparting
knowledge every benefit that he would get by (performing) a
thousand Vdjapeya sacrifices.
57. One who reads a book would be the giver of all gifts
at the temples of (lords) Siva, Vi§nu and the Sun-god.
58. All the castes and the four institutions of life separately
and all the gods such as Brahma and others are established on the
gift of knowledge.
59. Knowledge is the wish-yielding cow. It is the unsur¬
passing eye. One rejoices with the Gandharvas by giving the
Upavedas (the secondary texts such as the Ayurveda).
60. One would attain heaven by giving the accessory texts
of scriptures. One would rejoice with piety by giving the
religious law books.
61. There is no doubt that one gets release (from the mun¬
dane existence) by giving the established texts (of any discip¬
line). One would reap the same benefit by giving a book as he
would by imparting knowledge.
62. One would get everything by giving sacred religious
texts and Purd^. One would get the benefit of Pundarika^
by imparting (knowledge to) the disciples.
63-65. There is not known to be any limit for the benefit
accrued by one who gives that by which he lives. That which is
the most excellent in the world and that which is liked by one
should be given to the manes by one who desires to have them
without depletion. One who gives materiab for worship
after having worshipped (lords) Visnu, Rudra (6iva), the
Lotus-born (Brahma), Goddess, Vighne^vara .(lord of impedi¬
ments) and others would gel everything. One who causes (to
construct) a temple and to make an image would get all things.
66. One would be free from blemishes by washing and clean¬
ing the temple. One who draws the mystic diagrams would
become the ruler of a province subsequently.
67-69. After having given perfumes, flowers, incense, lamp,
fi>od offering, circumand>ulation, bell, banner, emopy, (arran1. A unit of meuuremeat.

Agni PurSoa
gcd) a show, musical instruments and music and clothes^ for the
lord, one would get enjoyment and emancipation. One should
give musk, benzoin, sandal wood, agallochum, camphor, musta
(a kind ofgrass), (a fragrant resin) and One who
establishes light at the time of solstice and others with a prastha
(a measure) of ghee would get everything.
70-71. Bathing is known to be with hundred palas (of
materials), bathing with oil with twentyfive palas. A great bath¬
ing is said to be with a thousand palas (of materials) . (By bathing)
with water ten sins (are washed off), by bathing with thick
milk hundred sins (are washed off), (by bathing) with milk
a thousand (sins are washed off) and ten thousand (sins are
washed off by bathing) with ghee.
72. One would get fortune and wealth and would go to
heaven by giving a maid-servant, servant, ornaments, cow, land,
horse and elephant and other things for the deity.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWELVE
Gifts granting the desired fruits
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe gifts that confer the desired bene¬
fits. One should do daily worship each month and do the
worship for (the accomplishment of one’s) desires.
2-3. The undertaking of the vow, worship of the preceptor
and the grand worship at the end of the year (are the routines).
One who gives a horse and a lotus made of flour to lord Siva
after worship in mdrgaiirfa would live in the world of Sun for a
long time. (By giving) an elephant made of flour in paufa,
one would lift twentyone generations.
4. By giving a horse and a chariot made of flour in mdghaf
one would not go to hell. One would become a monarch and
would ascend heaven by giving a bull made of flour in phdlgana.
5. Having given a cow made of sugarcane t^ether with a
servant and a female servant in caitra, one would remain in

heaven for a long time and would become a monarch at the end.
6. One would become verily (lord) Siva himself by giving
seven kinds of rice in aaiidkha . One would become (identical
with lord) Siva by making a circular altar in the dfd^ha.
7. One would ascend heaven and also (become) a
king by giving a vehicle made of flowers in irava^. By giving
two hundred fruits one would elevate his family (and become)
a king.
8. One would become a king after ascending heaven
by giving guggulu (gum resin) etc. in bhddra. Giving a vessel
filled with milk and clarified butter in divina would convey one
to heaven.
9. Having given pieces of jaggery and clarified butter in
the kdrttika one would go to heaven and then be a king. I shall
describe the twelve varieties of gifts (known as) memddna (heaps
of things resembling the Meru mountain) that confers enjoyment
and emancipation.
10-18. In the meruvrata one should give a rmru (moun¬
tain) of gems to a brahmin in kdrttika. Listen to me. (1
shall describe) the measure (of things) in all (the gifts of) Merus
duly. Only a prastha (a measure) of diamond, ruby, mahdnila
(a kind of sapphire), sapphire, crystal, topaz, emerald and pearl
are excellent. Half of that (measure) would be medium and a
quarter of that (would be) inferior. One should avoid doing
trickery knowingly. The Meru should be located in the peri¬
carps presided by (the lords) Brahma, Vi?nu and Isa. Malyavan should be worshipped on the east and that is known as
Bhadra still to its east. A^varak^a is said to be the next. The
Nigadha, Hemakuta and Himavan, the three, should be (wor¬
shipped) on the south of Meru. The three (mountains) Nila,
Sveta and Srhgi are (worshipped) on the north (of Meru).
(The mountains) Gandhamadana, Vaikahka and Ketumilla
would be on the west. Thus the Meru would be associated with
the twelve (mountains). One should worship (lord) Vigi^u or
(lord) Siva after fasting preceded by bathing. The Meru should
be worshipped with the sacred syllables in front of the deity and
given to a brsdunin. (One should say) “1 give this excellent
material of (the shape of) Meru belonging to god Vif^^u to a
brahmin of such and such a gotrd to become sinless and for the
sake eti^jyxnent and emancipation.” (One who does so)
would be hoaoiired by the celestials and would sport in the

Agni Purina
(divine) chariot in the worlds of Indra, Brahma, l^iva and Vi^nu
after elevating his family. One should make the gift even at other
times such as the entry of the Sun from one constellation into
another.
19-22. One should offer the golden Meru of (the weight
of) a thousand palas. It should have three peaks representing
the (lords) Brahma, Vi^igiu and Hara (Siva). Each one of the
mountains should be hundred {palas) . Together with the Meru,
the mountains are known to be thirteen. One who makes a gift
of gold Meru to a brahmin at tne time of solstices, eclipses
etc., in the presence of (lord) Vi$;^u, after having worshipped
lord Hari (Vi$nu), would live in the world of Vi$nu for a long
time. One would be a king for such a long time as the infinite¬
simal particles (of the gift) . One should resolve and give a silver
Meru having twelve mountains.
23-26. It would have the aforesaid benefit. One should
worship lord Vi$nu and a brahmin and resolve (to give)
bhUmimeru (land in the form of Meru) consisting of a circular
orb or a village of one-eighth part. The other parts (carry)
the same benefit as before. One who gives the Meru in the form
of an elephant together with the twelve mountains and the three
beings (gods) would get infinite benefit. Meru (in the form)
of a horse (would be) fifteen horses together with twelve horses.
Giving this (as a gift) after worshipping lords Vi^^u and others
one would enjoy comforts and become a king. One should give
a Meru (in the form) of cow of the same number as the horse
as before.
27. A gift of a Meru (in the form) of cloth would be a
bh^a of silk cloth in the middle with the twelve cloth as moun¬
tains (around). By giving (this gift) (one will have) undimi¬
nishing benefit.
28-29. A mountain of clarified butter (would be) five
thousand palas of ghee, each one (of the mountains being) five
hundred. One should worship lord Hari in this mountain.
Having offered it to a brahmin in the presence of (lord) Vif^u,
one would get everything and reach lord Hari. One would
get (the same fruit) by making a Meru of sugarcandy and giving
in the same way.
50-35. The Meru of grains (should bte) dve (a mea¬
sure equal to 15 drspas) and the other (iiioiin&tiis) ^6f one kkM

each. All should have golden peaks (denoting lords) Brahma,
Vi$nu and Mahe^vara. One would acquire special benefit by
worshipping lord Vi^^u in all of them. One should set up a
Meru of sesamum in the same way measuring ten parts. The
peaks should be as before for that (mountain) and other moun¬
tains. One who makes a gift of a Meru of sesamum would
reach the world of Visnu together with his relatives. “Obeisance
to the form of Visnu. Obeisance to (the mountain) Dharadliara.
(Obeisance) to one having lords Brahma, Visnu and Isa on
the peaks, to one remaining at the navel of the earth, to the lord
of twelve mountains, to the destroyer of all sins, to the devotee
of lord Visnu and to the calm person. You always protect
me so that I may reach lord Visnu together with my forefathers
becoming sinless. Orhy obeisance. You are indeed lord Hari.
I am lord Visnu in the front of (lord) Hari. I shall inform
lord Visnu with devotion for the sake of enjoyment and eman¬
cipation.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN
Mode oj making a gift of earth and its benefits
Fire-god said :
1-4. Is hail describe (the mode of) making a gift of the earth.
The earth is known to be of three kinds (extending to) hundred
crores oiyojanas (containing) seven continents and the oceans.
That earth upto the continent of Jambu is spoken as excellent.
One should make an excellent one with five bhSras (measure of
weight) of gold. The tortoise and lotus (supporting tliat) should
be laid with half that (measure). The excellent earth is said to
be (of the full measure). The middle one (is said to have) two
parts. The last one (should be of) one-third part. The tortoise
and lotus will be one-third. The wish-yielding (celestial) tree
should be made (to weigh) a thousand palas.
5-9. The central stalk (of the tree) together with the leaves^
ihiits and flowers and having five branches shcmld be got ready
and the five should be given by a good man. One who makes

Agni Purib^a
this gift would rejoice in the world of Brahma together with the
manes for a long time. The celestial cow (should be* made)
with five hundred palas in front of lord Vi?nu. The gods
Brahma, Visnu, Mahela and others are settled in the cow.
The gift of a cow is the gift of all (things). It gives all (things)
and also the world of Brahma. Having given a tawny cow one
would elevate all families. By giving a girl (in marriage)
after decorating her, one would acquire the benefit of (doing
the) horse sacrifice. One who gives a land in which all grains
grow would get everyting. One who gives a village or a town or
a hamlet would be comfortable. By setting free a bull in kdrttika
one would elevate the family.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN
The system of veins in the body and their benefits
Fire-god said :
1-4. I shall describe the system of veins by knowing which
one would know lord Hari. Fibre-like things spread out from
the bulbous root below the navel. They are seventy-two thou¬
sand situated at the centre of the navel. They spread out and
occupy everywhere across, above and below. They are situat¬
ed like a wheel. Among these *Vfl, pihgaldy su^umnd, gandhiri^
hastijihvd, prthdy yaid^ alambusd^ huhu and iankhini are the ten
principal veins.
5-14. These veins are said to be carrying the ten life forces —
prd^ay apdnay samdna^ uddna vydna, ndga, kurma, kfkara, devadatta
and dhananjaya. Prdna is the chief wind and is the lord of the ten.
The prdna makes the life living from exhalation after the
inhalation. Remaining in the chest of beings it fills up daily.
The prd^ gets united with life by exhalation, inhalation and
coughing. Because it moves out from the life it is said to
be prdTfa. Apdna pushes down the food in men. It is said to be
apdna because it is the wind that carries the urine and semen.
The wind known as samdna equalises the blood, b^es, phlegm
and wind in the body (caused by) drinking, eating and smelling.

The wind known as uddna agitates the vulnerable points and caus¬
es the quivering of lips, face and causes change in the com¬
plexion of the eye. (The wind) vySna depresses the body and
activates the disease. It is said to be vydna because it returns
frcHn the throat and spreads out. The wind ndga (is known to
be) in vomitting and kurma remains in the opening. (The wind)
kfkara is in eating, devadatta in yawning, dhanahjaya in raising
loud sound. They do not abandon even the dead. Thus goes
the life cycle with the ten activities. Hence it is the cycle of
veins.
1 5-20. The solstices, the equinoxes, day and night, the sun's
passage north and south of the equator, intercalary month, debt,
the incomplete night and wealth (are attributed to the differ¬
ent parts of the body and their functions). The incomplete
night would be the hiccough and the intercalary mouth the
yawning. The debt would be coughing. The exhalation is said
to be wealth. The right side (of the body) is known to be the
north and the left side is designated as the south. The equinoctical points are said to be in the middle line passing through the
two parts while the solstice is that passing from its own nervecentre to another centre. O Brahmin ! Susumna is establi¬
shed in the middle of the body, the idd on the left and the piAgald
on the right. The/>rdpa above is remembered to be the day. In
the same way apdna would be the night. One wind (exists)
in ten forms. The expanse in the middle of the body is said to be
the lunar eclipse. The expanse between the principles of tlie
body is known to be the solar eclipse.
21. Filling the abdomen with wind as much as one desires
is known to be the prdt^dydma known as the pur aka because it
fills up.
22. After covering all the holes, one should remain like a
pot after filling (the abdomen with air) without exhalation
and inhalation. That is the kumbhaka (variety of) prdndydma.
23-26. One who knows the sacred syllable should push the
wind upwards and let out in one breath. He should evacuate i$
upwards (to the region of* the brain). Since (lord) Siva residing
in the body (of beings) himself utters (that) (the letter ha),
that is said to be the repetition for those who know the principles.
That master otpoga does the repetition twentyone themsand six
hundred times in the cotuxe of a day and night. This

Agni PurS^
known as the ajapd is of the form of Brahma, Vi^^u and Mahe-
^vara. There is no rebirth for one that repeats this ajapd {mantra).
27. The foremost ku^^^lini (the energy coiled in one of the
psychometric centres) is considered to be associated with the
moon, fire and sun. It is known to remain in the heart in the
form, of a sprout.
28-32. The location of the creation should be therein be¬
cause of its suspension from that. The foremost worshipper
should contemplate therein the flowing ambrosia. The sakala
(endowed with the parts) is known to be remaining in the body
and the nifkala (without the parts) as devoid of the body. That
one who lepeats harhsa is the lord Sadasiva (ever auspicious).
That person remains in the body of the man both outside and
inside just as oil m the sesamum and fragrance in the flowers.
Lord has his place in the heart. Lord Vi$nu remains
at the throat. Lord Rudra is situated in the middle of the
cheeks. Lord Mahesvara is at the forehead. Lord Biva
should be known as the tip of the vital principle and the higher
and the lower as its end. The sakala form is said to be of five
kinds and nifkala form as the contrary.
33-41. That person who produces the sound that is prdsdda
(propitious) and repeats hundred times would no doubt get
accomplished in six months endowed with^oga. There will be
destruction of all sins because of the knowledge of the past
and future events. One would get virtues such as a$imd
(the power to become minute as an atom) in six months. The
prdsdda luis been described by me as three: gross, subtle
and foremost. Prdsdda is of three kinds — short, long and
protracted. The short one burns sins. The long one would
confer emancipation. The elongated one is in accomplishing
things. It is adorned with a dot on its head. The syllable pka$
is beneficial at the beginning and end of the short sound for
the sake of destroying an enemy. The heart {matOra) at the
beginning and end is stated to be useful in captivating (others*
minds). One should repeat (the same) five lakhs time (standing
facing) the southern face of the deity. After the repetition there
should be oblation of ghee ten thousand times. With the sacred
syllable having been accomplished thus one should do the repeti¬
tion for capUvating etc. It is void above, ^ void iilHhe middUb
and void below. It is devoid of btemithes. .Whichever Ixahmm

knows the three voids would certainly be released (from the
mundane existence). One is said to be not a preceptor if he does
not know the prisUda^ made of the five sacred syllables, endowed
with thirtycight parts. So also the preceptor knows the syllable
oih, the gdyatrif (lord) Rudra and others.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN
Mode of reciting gdyatri and its greatness
Fire-god said :
1-3. One who knows the syllable om is verily a yogin and
(the lord) Hari. Hence one should practise the syllable orh,
that is the essence of all sacred syllables, and the giver of all
things. The praitava (orh) is known to be the first in the applica¬
tion of all the sacred syllables. Hence the act which becomes
complete with that, will not get completed with any other (syl¬
lable). There are three great unmutilating vyahftis (syllables)
which are preceded by the syllable oth. The three-footed sSvitri
(gdyatri) should be known as the face of (lord) Brahma.
4. One who unweariedly repeats these everyday for three
years, reaches the supreme brahman becoming the wind and
embodying the sky.
5. The one syllable is the supreme brahman and prdr^ydma
(control of the birth) in the supreme penance. There is nothing
greater than sfioitri. Truthfulness excels silence.
6-7. The repetition (of gdyatri) seven times would des¬
troy one’s sins and ten times would convey (the person) to
heaven. That goddess repeated twenty times would convey him
to the abode of (lord) livara (Siva). One would cross the ocean of
mundane existence by repeating it hundred and eight times.
The Gdyatri excels the repetition of Rudra and Ku^m&^da
(mantras) in its merit.
8-9. There is nothing excelling Gdyatri for repetition.
There is nothing equal to oydhrtis for doing oblations. A
quarter of the hymn or a half of it or half the hymn or the whole
hymn being repeated purifies one of the sins such as the killing

560 Agni Puribjfa
of a brahmin, drinking of wine, stealing of gold and cohabiting
the preceptor’s wife.
10. On having committed a sin it is said that one should do
oblations with sesamum repeating Gayatrl. After repetition of
Gayatri a thousand times and fasting one gets rid of his sin.
1 1-12. The killer of a cow, the patricide, the matricide, the
killer of a brahmin, the defiler of the bed of preceptor, the
person who has stolen gold and the drunkard get purified after
repetition (of the mantra) a lakh number of times. Otherwise
one should bathe and repeat hundred times remaining in the
water. One would get rid of his sin by drinking water
(consecrated by the repetition) of Gayatrl hundred times.
13. The Gayatrl repeated hundred times is remembered to
destroy one’s sins. That goddess repeated a thousand times would
destroy the minor offences.
14-21. The repetition a crore times would yield the desired
benefits and lead one to godhead and sovereignty. After having
uttered the syllable orh first and (the syllables) bhuhy bhuvah
and svah (the earth, sky and heaven) then, and the pranava (orh)
and Gayatri at the end is said to be (the mode) for repeti¬
tion. Viivamitra is the sage, gayatri the metre and Savita (Sun)
the god (for the mantra) when it is used for appeasement
(of gods), for repetition and for offering oblation. The gods
who preside over different letters constituting the mantra are
the Fire god, Wind god, Sun, Lightning, God of Death, lord
of the water (ocean), Jupiter, God of rain, Indra, Gandharva,
Pu^n, Mitra, Varuna, Tvastr, Vasus, Maruts, Moon, Angiras,
Vilve (devas), jVaja^a(Asvins),Ka, Rudra, Brahma and Vi§nu
respectively who are said to destroy sins at the time of repetition
of Gayatri. (They respectively protect) the toes, ankles, legs,
knees, shanks, the male organ of generation, testicles, hip,
navel, belly, breasts, heart, neck, face, cheek, nostrils, eyes, the
centre of the eye-brows, forehead, front part of the face, the two
sides on the right and left, head and the mouth in order.
22-24. Yellow, blue, tawny, gfreen, colour of the fire, the
golden colour oflightning, smoky, black, red, white, colour of the
sapphire, crystal coloured, golden, white, red, all the lustre,
golden, smoky, blood red, blue red, golden, white, dark green

are the colours of Gayatri. It destroys sins at the time of repeti¬
tion and confers all desires when used to offer oblation.
25-28. Oblations made with sesamum and Gayatri
would destroy all sins. One who desires to appease should
do with barley. One who desires life should do with ghee.
For success in one’s work (one should do) with white mustard.
(One should do) with milk for spiritual splendour, with curd if
one wishes to have children, with salt (grains) if one desires to
get grains. One (should do oblation) with twigs of kslri (milky)
trees for the appeasement of affliction due to planets. Then
one desiring for wealth (should do) with bilva (a kind of tree)
and desiring for fortune (should do) with lotuses. (One should
do) with durv& (a kind of grass) if he desires for health and the
same if portents (are met with). (One should do) yNith. guggulu
(gum-resin) aspiring for prosperity and with sweet porridge if
seeking knowledge.
29. There would be the indicated success with (oblation
done) ten thousand times and the mentally desired (benefit)
with a lakh times. One would be released from (the sin accrued)
by killing a brahmin, be lord Hari and the elevator of the family
with (oblations done) crore times.
30-31. One should invoke Gayatri at the commence¬
ment of oblations done for propitiating the planets or the one for
ten thousand times or any other sacrifices. Then he should medi¬
tate on the syllabic orh. After having remembered the syllable
oTh one should tie up the tuft with the Gayatri. Then after hav¬
ing sipped (three drops of water) one should touch the heart,
navel and shoulders.
32. The sage is Brahma, the metre is gayatri and the
god is the Fire god for the pranava {orh). It is the Supreme soul
and it should be associated in all acts.
33-34. (She should be contemplated as) possessing white
complexion, having fire as the mouth, divine, born in the gotra
of Katyayana, encircling the three worlds, associated with the
support of the earth, wearing the rosary, the goddess seated in
the padmisana (posture of sitting with legs crossed) and auspi¬
cious (with the following words) : ‘*Orh ! You are the lustre, the
sacrifice, the strength, one of the seven Suns, the abode c£ the
gods, the universe, the life of the universe, all beings and the

Agni Puri^
life of all beings. Orh ! to the earth. O Goddess ! Bestower
of boon ! You come ! The one to be repeated ! You be present
before me !”
35-37. Prajapati is the sage for all vydhftis (the syllables
bhU etc.). (They are used) separately and collectively with the
letter of Brahma. The sages (of the are) Visvamitra,
Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Gautama, Atri, Vasisfha and Kalyapa
in order. Fire god, Wind god. Sun, Jupiter, Varuna, Indra,
Visnu are the (presiding) deities of vydhrtis in order.
38. Gayatrl, Usnik, Anustubh, Bj-hati, Pahkti, Trisjubh,
and Jagati are said to be metres (of these) respectively.
39-40. It is remembered that eight drops of water should be
thrown upwards with the hymn dpo hi sfhd^ or drupaddt^ or hira^avarndrhP or pdvamdni* at the end in the use of the vydhftis^ in the
prdndydma and in oblation. It destroys the sin done since the birth.
41. One should recite (the hymn) rtamca^, the destroyer of
sins, thrice in the water. Sindhudvipa is the sage for the hymn
dpo hi sfhd.
42. The metre is gdyatri and deity water for this (hymn)
for brahmasndna (bathing to get rid of sin). It should be used for
sprinkling water on the body or at the time of bathing at the
conclusion of a sacrifice.
43. Aghamarsana is the sage for this aghamarsana hymn.
Anustubh would be the metre. Bhavavrtta is the deity.
44-49. (The mantra) dpo jyoti raso* is remembered to be the
head of Gayatri. Prajapati (Brahma) is the sage for that
because the. yajur {mantras) are not metrical. Brahma, Fire god,
Wind god and Sun are said to be deities. The wind is gene¬
rated from the suppression of breath. Fire is produced from
wind. Water (is produced) from fire and then purity. Then
one should rinse. It moves within beings, cavity and
universal gods. The syllable va^at is the sacrifice in the form of
3. This is Srisukta, ^Vkh. 5.87.14. Designation of B.V. 9.1.1 ff

penance. Water is the lustrous sap of nectar. The sage of the
hymn udu tyam jatavedasarh^ is said to be Praskanna (?):GSyatri
is stated to be the metre and Sun the deity. It is used in the
atirdlra (sacrifice) and the agnisfoma is the employer. Kautsa
is stated to be the sage for the hymn citram dev&ndrrfl. Trisfubh is.
said to be the metre for this (hymn) and Sun the deity.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN
Complete instruction relating to Gdyatri
Fire-god said :
1 -4. After having performed the twilight worship thus, one
should recite Gdyatri. It is known to be Gdyatri because it
saves disciples, wives and lives. It is known as the Sdvitri
because it illumines the Sun. It is (known as) Sarasvati because
it is the form of speech. It is known to be the bharga, the lustre,
because it is the effulgence of supreme brahman. (The root)
bhd denotes shining. It is also known that bhrasj denotes cooking.
It ripens the herbs etc. (The root) bhrdjr would denote shining.
(The word) Bharga would be (denoting) shining. (In this sense)
it has been used in the scriptures many times.
5-6. (It is said to be) most excellent because it has an exalt¬
ed position than all the splendours. It is the one always desired
by those who wish to attain heaven. As (the word) ofwon* means
covering, (it signifies) an eternal, absolutely pure conscious,
absolutely real and great god that is beyond (the states of)
waking, dreaming and deep sleep.
7-10. I am that brahman, the supreme effulgence. I con¬
template on that for the emancipation. That effulgence is
lord Visnu that is the cause of origin of the universe. Some
read Siva, some read a form of goddess, some Sun and some
such as those learned in the scriptures and those propitiating fire,
the fire (god). Lord V4^u of the form of fire etc. is praised in the
scriptures as the brahman. That most exalted place of lord
Vi§nu is known to be that of lord Savit^ (Sun). That lord Hari,
the self effulgent produces the (libations of) clarified butter.
2. RV.l.llS. 1,

Agni Purd^a
(The same god) as the god of rain, the god of wind and the Sun
would nourish (everything) by means of cold, heat etc.
11. Libations cast into the lire reach the Sun. Rains are
produced from the Sun. Food grains (grow) from rain and then
the people.
12-13. (The word) dhtmahi (may be) from the root dhd
(to hold). (It means) “May we retain in our minds”. The
word nah (means) ‘our’ May that Bharga who is in the intellects
of all beings prompt the intellects of those who enjoy in all
their acts and results seen and unseen. He is of the form of Visnu,
Sun and Fire.
1 4. Being prompted by the lord one may reach heaven
or the pit (of mundane existence). Everything is an abode
of the lord. Lord Hari is verily (the worlds) such as the
mahat.
15-16. “I am that lord who sports with the paradise and
the like. That lord the universal being known as Bharga in¬
side the Sun should be contemplated by those desiring for eman¬
cipation for the destruction of birth and death and the three
kinds of griefs. This universal being should be beheld in the orb
of the Sun.
17. You are that Supreme Being, the conscious brahman
which is the exalted position of lord Vi§nu. I am Bharga, the
most exalted fourth place of lord Sun. I am the body and the
like, the state of waking and that upto that brahman. I deem
myself as the brahman. I am that absolute spirit in the Sun. I
am the infinite. Orh. I am that one who always directs the know¬
ledge in auspicious acts and the like.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN
Vasiffha’s kymn to lord Siva
Fire-god said :
1. After having propitiated lord Siva of the form of the
Hhga with G&yatri, Vasis(ha obtained yoga^ Moreover he

got the exalted brahman and emancipation jfrom lord ^ahkara
(Siva).
2. Obeisance to the golden lihga and the lihga in the form
of scriptures. Obeisance to the supreme liAga and the li^a
in the form of the sky.
3. Obeisance to the thousand linga-s and the linga in the form
of the fire. Obeisance to the liAga of the forms of the PurSr^a
and the scriptures.
4. Obeisance to the linga in the form of the nether worlds
and the brahman. Obeisance to the mysterious liAga and the
liAga above the seven continents.
5. Obeisance to the liAga as the soul of all beings and to
the liAga that is the limb of all people. Obeisance to the
unmanifest liAga and the linga of the form of the intellect.
6. Obeisance to the linga representing the ego and to the
linga denoting the beings. Obeisance to the linga of the form of
senses and the subtle principles.
7. Obeisance to the linga denoting the Supreme spirit and
the sentiments. Obeisance to the linga above the (principle of)
rajas and to the (principle) of sattva.
8. Obeisance to the linga of the form of becoming and of
the form of the three qualities. Obeisance to the linga denoting
future and the form of lustre.
9. Obeisance to the linga beyond the wind and of the form
of the scriptures. Obeisance to the linga in the form of the (hymns
of) Atharva {veda) and the S&ma {veda).
10. Obeisance to the linga that is the limb of the sacrifice
and of the form of the sacrifice. Obeisance to the liAga
of the form of principles and to the liAga of the form of the
companion of the lord.
11. You impart me the excellent yoga. (Bless me) with a
son equal to me. O Lord ! May I attain the imperishable
brahman. O Lord (you also confer) tranquillity. May the pro¬
geny be without break and let them have an undiminishing in¬
terest in righteousness.
Fire-god said :
12. Once after having been propitiated by Vasi^fha on the
^riparvata (mountain) thus, Sambhu (Siva) granted the boon
to Vasiffha and disappeared there itself.

Agni Purdpa
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN
Mode of performing the coronation of a king
Fire-god said :
1 , O Vasistha ! I shall describe now the duties of a king
as told by Puskara to Rama as the latter asked (him the same).
Puskara said :
2. I shall describe the duties of a king (foremost) among
the host of other duties. The king should be the slayer of the
enemy, protector of the subjects and administer justice properly.
3-6. He would look after the welfare of all those who are
on the righteous path. He should practise this vow. He has to
choose the astrologer, the brahmin priest, the ministers who had
known the minds of the people and the queen endowed with
righteous qualities. (After having practised the vow) for a year
the king should have the anointment with all the regal para¬
phernalia at the proper moment. But there is no regulation about
time for the same if the king has died (and a new king is install¬
ed). He should be bathed with sesamum and mustard and the
astrologer and the , priest should hail victory for the king.
(Then the king) seated on the throne should proclaim protec¬
tion (for all) and throw open (the gates of) the fortress for the
provincial governors.
7-11. Before the anointment (is done), the priest should
do the rite to appease Indra. After having fasted on the day of
anointment, offerings should be made into the sacrificial
fire for the Manus with the sacred syllables of lord Vis^u,
Indra, Savitp (Sun), and the Viivedevas and the sacred syllables
that are auspicious, beneficial, conferring longevity and protec¬
tion. The golden pitcher known as apardjitd (not defeated by
anybody) containing the remnants of the sacrifice should be
worshipped with perfumes and flowers on the right side of the
fire. (The sacrificial) fire should have flames circling clock¬
wise, having the colour of heated gold, should be like the moving
chariot, be making sound like the cloud and without smoke.
The flames in their natural form, fragrant, resembling the figure
of a svastika^t with clear and high flames and without sparks are
benevolent.
1. Made up of two lines intersecting at right angles having perpendi¬
cular lines in the clock-wise direction at the ends -of two linai.

^2-17. Cats, deer and birds should not pass between (the
king and the sacrificial fire). The king should cleanse his head
with the mud (obtained) from the summit of a mountain, the
ears with the mud from the top of an anthill, the face with that
(mud) from the temple of (lord) Kesava, the neck with the mud
from the temple of (lord) Indra, the heart (breast) with that
(got) from the courtyard of the king (king’s palace), the right
arm with the mud dug up by the tusk of an elephant, the left
arm with the mud dug up by the horns of a bull, the back with
the mud from a tank, the abdomen with the mud from the con¬
fluence of rivers and the sides should be purified with the mud
from both the banks of a river. It is laid down that the waist of
a king should be cleansed with tlie mud (obtained) fiom the
threshold of a courtesan, the thigh (with mud got) from the
sacrificial place, the knees (with mud obtained) from the cow¬
shed, the shanks (with that got) from the stable, the feet with
the mud from the wheel of a chariot. The head of the king seat¬
ed on the throne (should be washed) with the five things got
from a cow.
18-29. Four ministers (of the king) should anoint him with
(waters from ) the pitchers. A biahmin (minister should anoint
him) with a golden pitcher filled with ghee from the east, a
ksatriya (minister) with a silver pitcher filled with milk from the
south, a vaiiya (minister) with a copper pitcher (filled) with
curd from the west and a iiidra minister with an earthen (pot)
with water from the north. Then a brahmin priest reciting the
^gveda should anoint the king with honey and a priest of the
Sdmaveda with waters along with the kuSa. O Fortunate one !
Then the (royal) priest should go towards the pitcher containing
the residual offering , perform duly the protective amulet of
the fire for the courtiers and give it (to the king) with those
sacred syllables mentioned in connection with the coronation
and with the recitations made by the brahmins. Then the
priest should go to the foot of the sacrificial platform and
anoint (the king) with a golden vessel having hundred
holes. The head (of the king) should be touched with the
herbs with (the recitation of the sacred syllables) yd ofadhi^y

Agni Purd^
with perfumesj with flowers with (the syllables) pufpavatP, with
seeds with (the syllables ) brdhma^*, with gems with ( the syllables )
dfufy with kuia dipped in water with (the syllables)
ye devS^^ and a reciter of the Tajurveda or the Atharvaveda should
touch the head and throat with rocand with (the recitation of
the syllables) gandhadv&riP and other brahmins with all the sacred
waters. Then they should hold a pitcher filled with the herbs
in front of the king to the accompaniment of singing and instru¬
mental music and the (waving of) chowries and fans. The
king also should see them as well as the auspicious things such as
the mirror and ghee etc. Then the priest, seated on a bed covered
with a tiger-skin, should worship (gods) Visnu, Brahma,
Indra and others and the lords of planets and place the turban
after having given the respectful offering of mixture of honey.
30-34. The crown of the king should be fixed with the hides
of five animals. The king should place the hides of a bull, a cat,
elephant, lion and tiger on that seat with (the recitation of the
sacred syllables) dhruvS dyauffi. Then the door-keeper should
present the ministers to the king. Then the king should give
presents of cows, goats, sheep, houses and other gifts to the astro¬
logers and priests. (The other) brahmins should be honoured by
(giving gifts of) land, cows, food etc. Then (the king) should
circumambulate the (sacrificial) fire and make obeisance to
the preceptor. (He should then move) backwards, touch the
bull and worship the cow and calf. Then he should ride the
consecrated (royal) steed. Similarly, he should worship the royal
elephant and mount it. He should then go round the royal path
along with his army. Then he should enter the palace and
send away all (those gathered) after pleasing them with gifts.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETEEN
Sacred syllables for coronation
Pufkara said :
1. I shall describe the sacred syllables for the anointment
of a king or god which would destroy sins. One would acawnplish everything by sprinkling water from the pot with the kuSa,
2-6. (The sacred syllables are as follows) : “May the
gods Brahma, Visnu, Mahe^vara, Vasudeva, Sai&kar^a^,
Pradyumna and Aniruddha install you. May the gods Indra
and others occupying ten cardinal points confer victory on
you. The lords of created beings such as Rudra, Dharma,
Manu, Daksa, Ruci, l§raddha, Bhrgu, Atri, Vasistha, Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanatkumara, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu,
Marici and Kalyapa guard (you) always. May the God of
Death, lustrous celestials, (the manes) Barhi^adas, Agni^vattas
Kravyadas, Upahutas, Ajyapas and Sukalins guard you. May
(the goddesses) LaksmI and others, the consorts of Dharma
anoint you with (ires.
7-13. May the consorts of Adityas and others, the progeny
of Kalyapa, Iiaving many offspring, the wives of Krsalva, the
son of Agui,^ (the wives) of Aris^anemi, A^vini and others, (the
wives) of the Moon and the wives of Pulaha, namely,
Bhuta, Kaplla, Darii^tri, Surasa, Sarama, Danu, !§yeni, Bh^i,
Krauftci, Dhrtara$(ri and l§uki (install you). (May) Aru^,
the charioteer of the Sun anoint you. May Ayati (future),
Niyati (fate), Ratri (night) and Nidrii (sleep) who stabilise
the world and support it as well as (the g^desses) Uma, (con¬
sort of Siva), Mena (wife of Himavan), Saci (wife of Indra)
guard (you). May Dhumri, Or^a and Nirrti (confer) victory.
May (the gixldesses) Gaurl, Siva, I^ddhi, Vela, Nadvala, Asiknl
and Jyotsna, the consorts of the celestials and the presiding
deity of the forest (confer victory). May the mahl&alpa (greater
cycle of time), kalpa /smaller cycle of time), manoantara (Manu
periods (a certmn long period of time ),saiAoatoint (years),
wfos and the two half ye^ (I^ed on the movement of tihe sun)
guard you. May the seasons, mcmths, ^Ktnights, night^^ day,
twilight, fitAw (hmar days), nmhSrtas (period nf 48 minutes),
which are the constituents ofthe time personified (guard you).

Agni PurSf^a
14-41. May the planets such as the Sun as well as (the
fourteen Manus) Svayambhuva and other Manus guatd you.
Svayambhuva, Svarocisa, Auttami, Tamasa, Raivata, Caksusa
the sixth, Vaivasvata, Savarni, Brahmaputra, Dharmaputra,
Rudraja, Daksaja, Raucya and Bhautya are the fourteen Manus.
May the foremost celestials Visvabhuk, Vipascit, Sucitti, Sikhi,
Vibhu, Manojava, Ojasvi, Bali, Adbhuta, Santi, Vrsa, Rtadhama, Divasprk, Kavi, Indraka, Raivanta, Kumara, Vatsaka,
Vinayaka, Virabhadra, Nandi, Visvakarma and Purojava ano¬
int you. May the celestial physicians Nasatya,^ the eight Vasus
Dhruva and others, the ten Angirasas and the scriptures anoint
you for gaining perfection. May the soul, duration of life, mind,
mental power, egoism, life-breath, possessed of oblation, the most
important, divine law and truth guard you. May Kratu, Daksa,
Vasu, Satya, Kalakama and Dhuri (lead you) to victory. May
the Pururavas, Madravas, Visvedevas, Rocana, Angiiraka and
others, Surya, Nirrti and Yama, Ajaikapat, Ahirbiidhnya,
Dhumaketu, Rudrajas, Bharata, Mrtyu, Kapali, Kihkini,
Bhavana and Bhavana protect you with their children and wives,
Kratusravah, Murddha, Yajana, Abhyus'anah, Prasava, Avyaya,
Daksa, Bhrgu, the celestials, Manah Anumanta, Pranah,
Nava, Apana, Viryavan, Vitihotra, Naya, Sadliya, Harhsa and
Narayana protect you. May the foremost among the celes¬
tials who are devoted lo the welfare of univcise such as Vibhu,
Prabhu, and the twelve Suns Dhata, Mitra, Aryama, Pusa,
Sakra, Varuna, Bhaga, Tvasta, Vivasvan, Savita and Visnu
as well as Ekajyotis, Dvirjyotis, Trijyotis, Gaturjyotis, Ekasakra,
Dvisakra, Trisakra, Mahabala and Indra command (saying)
‘do not’. Then may Pratimakft, Mita, Sammita, Amita, Maha¬
bala, Rtajit, Satyajit, Susena, Senajit, Atimitra, Anumitra,
Purumitra, Aparajita, Rta, Rtavak, Dhata, Vidhata, Dharana,
Dhruva and Vidharana, the mighty friend of Indra, Idfksa,
Adrksa, Etadfk, Amita^ana, Kri^ita, Sadrksa, Sarabha, Mahatapas, Dharta, Dhurya, Dhuri, Bhima, Abhimukta, Ksapatsaha,
Dhrti, Vasu Anadhfsya, Rama, Kama, Jaya, Viraf, the fortynine wind gods protect you. May the Gandharvas — Gitrahgada,
Citraratha, Gitrasena, Kali, Crnayu, Ugrasena, Dhrtara^fra,
1. Literally means helpful, denotes the A^vmi kum&ras,^ the celestial
physicians.

Nandaka, Haha, Huhu, Narada, Visvavasu and Tumburu
anoint you for your victory. May the foremost among the priests
and the divine group of damsels Anavadya, Sukesi, Menaka,
Sahajanya, Kratuslhala, Ghftaci, Visvaci, Pufljikasthala, Pramloca, tJrvasi, Rambha, Pancacuda, Tilottama, Citralekha,
Laksmana, Pun^arika and Varuni guard you. May the demons
Prahlada, Virocana, Bali and Bana and their sons and other
foremost demons Heti,Praheti, Vidyut, Sphurjathu anoint you.
(May) the Yaksa, the accomplished soui-Manibhadra, Nandana,
Pihgaksa, Dyutiman and Puspavanta bring forth victory. (May)
the treasures Sankha{conch) ^ padma (lotus), makara (fish), kacchapa
(tortoise) (bring) victory.
42-46. May the ghosts Ordhvakesa and others, the goblins
who dwell on the earth, the (divine) mothers led by Mahakala
(form of iSiva at deluge) and Narasimha (man-lion form of
Visnu), Guha (son of Siva), Skanda, Visakha and Naigamcya
(other names of Guha) anoint you. May the female goblins
and female attendants on God I§iva dwelling in the sky and on
the earth and the principal birds such as the Garuda, Aruna
and Sampati guard you. May the great serpents Ananta,
Vasuki, Taksaka, Airavata, Maliapadma, Kambala, Asvatara,
6ahkha, Karkotaka, Dhytarastra and Dhananjaya, and the
elephants Kumuda, Airavana, Padma, Puspadanta, Vamana,
Supratika and Afijana protect you always from all evils.
47. May the swan, the bull, the lion and the buffalo,
(respectively the vehicles) of Brahma, iSahkara, Durga and God
of Death guard you.
48. (May) Uccaihsravas, the lord of the horses, (lord)
Dhanvantari, Kaustubha, the foremost among the conches,
always (proect) the mace, spear and the disc.
49. May Nandaka, Dharma, the governor of conduct,
Citragupta, the wieldcr of the punishing rod, Pihgala, Mrtyu
l^death) and Kalaka (the regulator of time) protect the weapons.
50-51. May the sages Valakhilyas and others and the fore¬
most among the sages such as Vyasa and Valmiki, (the foremost
among the kings of the past) Prthu, Dilipa, Bharata, Du§yanta,
l§akrajit,Bali, Malta, Kakutstha, Anenas, Yuvanasva, Jayadratha,
Mandhata, Mucukunda apd Purpravas guard you.
52-53. May the presiding deities of the grounds and the
twentyfive principles confer victory on you. (May) the golden

Agni Pvfd^
earth, rocky soil, nether world, blue soil, yellowish red^ earth,
white soil, RasStala (a nether world), the earth, the terrestrial
region and the foremost among the continents Jambu etc.
(bring you) fortune.
54-55. May the Uttarakurus and the continents Ramya,
Hiranyaka, Bhadrasva, Ketumala, Balahaka, Harivar^a, Kimpuru^, Indradvipa, Kaieruman, Tamravarna, Gabhastiman,
Nagadvipa and Saumyaka guard you.
56-72. Vanina, the ninth gandharvay the confercr of domi¬
nion protect you. The mountains Himavan. Hemakuta
Ni^dha, Nila, Sveta, Sfhgavan, Mem, Malyavan, Gandhamadana, Mahendra, Malaya, Sahya, Suktiman, J^^avan, Vindhya and Pariyatra bestow peace upon you. May the Pgoeda
and the other (Feda^), the six accessory texts^ ItihUsaaxidPurd^f
medical science, science of music and archery, the accessory
Vedas protect you. Phonetics, the texts laying down mles
for sacrificial acts, grammar, etymology, astronomy and metrics,
the (four) scriptural texts, mimSrhsiPy the science of logic, code of
laws and Purina are the fourteen branches of learning. (The
schools of philosophy such as) the SSnkhya and Toga^ the PdSupata*, the Vedas and the PdHcardtra* arc the five dogmas. May
(the goddesses) Gayatri, Siva, Durga, Vidya and Gandhari
protect you and confer peace on you. the four oceans of
salt, sugarcane juice, liquor, clarified butter, curd, milk and water
and the d'^^erent sacred spots protect you . (They are) Pu§kara,
Prayaga, rrabhasa, the excellent Naimi^a, Gayalir§a, Brahma-
^ira, Uttaramanasa, Kalodaka, Nandikund^* Paftcanadatirtha,
Bhrgutirtha, Prabhasa, Amarakanfaka, Jambumarga, the spot¬
less, the hermitage of Kapila, Gang&dvara (Haridvara), Ku5avarta, Vindhyaka, Nilaparvata, Varahaparvata, Kanakhala,
Kalafijara, Kedara, Rudrakofi, Varanasi, the great spot Badarikairama, Dvaraka, Srigiri, Pura?ottoma (Puri), Salagrama
and Varaha, the spots of confluence of the rivers with the ocean,
Phalgulirtha, Bindusara, Karavirairama and the rivers Gahga,
1. Phonetics, the texts laying down rules for sacrificial acts, grammar,,
etymology, metrics and astrontnny.
2. The texts dealing with the interpretation of vedic texts.
9. Invite philosophic^ texts.
4. Vaiioavite {diilostphical texts.

Sarasvati, Satadru, Ga^ifjlakJ, Acchoda, Vipala, Vitast&, Devik&>
Kaveri, Vanu^a, Ni^cira, Gomati, Pari, Canna^vati, Rupi,.
Mandakini, Mahanadi, Tapi, Payo^ni, Vcni, Gaurl, Vaitara^i,
Godavari, Bhimarathi, Tungabhadri, Arani and Candrabhagi
(and the goddesses) Siva (and) Gauri anoint and protect you.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTY
Accomplishment of assistance to the king
Pufkara said :
1-7. A foremost king thus crowned along with his ministers
should conquer the enemies. A brahmin or a k^atriya should be
appointed by the king as the commander-in-chief. He should
also be a descendant of a noble family and well-versed in ethics.
The door-keeper (should be) learned in ethics. The emissary
should be speaking sweet, strong and a matchless warrior. The
betel-bearer (may be) a man or a woman devoted (to the king),
capable of enduring fatigue and be affectionate. One who is
proficient in the six expedients of royal policy^ should be made
the minister of foreign affairs. A guard should bear the sword.
A charioteer should know the strength of (the hostile) army.
The chief cook (should be) a beneficiary, learned and one living
in the (royal) kitchen. The courtiers should be well-versed in
righteousness. The (royal) scribe should be well versed in (the
art of) writing. The door-keepers should know the appropriate
time of call and bebeneficial. The treasurer should be a man wellacquainted with the gems and be ben^cial in the acquisition
of wealth. The royal physician should know the science of m^icine. The superintendent of elephants should know (the science
of) elephants. The rider of an elephant should be one who has
cmiquered fatigue. The s«q>erintendent ofhorses should know
equinolc^. The superihteiuients of ftMts should be boaeficient
and wise. Hie architects should be well-versed in the nature of
the grounds.
I. A^ance, war, march, hal^ seeking ihdlter and duplicity.

Agm Purana
8. Persons (employed) to give instructions in (the jise of)
weapons, should be well-versed in the use of weapons projected
by the machines or discharged by the hands or not discharged
entirely or discharged and held back and fight with hands. He
should be beneficial to the king.
9. The officer in the harem should be old, fifty years old if
women and seventy years old if men. They should be engaged in
all types of work.
10-15. (The man) in (charge) of the arsenal should be
wakeful. A peison is employed in a task after knowing (his
ability). A king should employ foiemost, medium and ordinary
people after knowing the tasks as excellent, medium and ordi¬
nary. A king desirous of victory should bring beneficial accom¬
plices. Righteous men (should be engaged) in righteous acts,
valorous men in tasks like battle, clever men in acts yielding
material gains and men of good conduct in all acts. Eunuchs
should be employed in (matters relating to) women and cruel-
(hearted men) in cruel deeds. Whomsoever the king knows to
be of good conduct, that pe?son should be employed (by the
kings) in the acts of piety, acquisition of wealth and pleasure.
Vile people (should be employed) in bad acts. The king should
employ in appropriate task those people whose fidelity has been
tested. The minister should engage properly men of the same
kind to find the evil doers just as an elephant (is employed to
control) the wild ones.
16-24. Experts should be employed in their own fields of
specialization. The servants who have been serving since the
time of the grandfather and father (of the king) should be
engaged to do all tasks except in matters which are to be done by
the heirs. In those acts, only those who have come (in that line
should be employed). Men who have come from other kings
(and) desiring protege should be given protection (irrespective
of the fact) whether they are bad or good. If one is known to
be bad, (the king) should not trust him and keep his livelihood
under his control. Men who have come from a different country
should be watched by (engaging) spies and then honoured (if
they are found to be good). The enemies, fire, poison, serpent
and the sword on one side and the trustworthy, distinguished
servants (on the other side) should be known (as Bqual). So
also the wicked servants on one side (equal the loyal servants) (?)

The king should have the spies as the eyes. He should always
employ the spies. The spies should not be known to the people.
They should be good and not known to each other. (He should
employ the spies) in the guise of tradesmen, diplomats, astro¬
logers, physicians and as ascetics knowing the strength and weak¬
ness (of the people). The king should not trust (the words of)
a single person. He should believe the words of many. The
king should mitke use of the likes, displeasures, merits and de¬
merits of his servants and people, as well as the good and bad
(deeds done by them.) in order to control them. He should
do only such acts which would attract them and desist from
acts causing displeasure. The king would be adorned by the
fortune of the pleasure of the people because of pleasing the
people.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE
Code of conduct for the servants
Puskara said :
1-5. The servant has to carry out the orders of the king,
like a disciple, for the prosperity of the master. He should not
disobey the commands of the king. He should speak only that
which is good and dear to him. If an unpleasant news is
beneficial (to the king), (the servant) should let him know in
privacy. When he has been employed in some work he should
not swindle the money. He should not do anything that would
affect his dignity. He should not similarly put on the dress of
the king and speak and act in the manner of the king. The super¬
intendent of the attendants of the harem should not have any
contact with those dismissed (by the king) and have become
enemies. The servant should guard the secret of the king. After
having done some act of ingenuity, (the servant) should ascribe
it to the king. He should not give publicity to any of the secrets
heard by him from the king. When some (superior person)
orders him (to disclose) he should say, “what to do ?’*

Agni Pttrd^
6-7. He should wear the dress, gems and ornaments given
by the king. He should not enter the royal chamber without
being asked (by the king). He should not see him at an impro¬
per place. He should avoid yawning, spitting, coughing, frown¬
ing based on depravity, raising the eyebrows and eructation near
him.
8-14. One should engage others cleverly by making the
king know about his qualities. Perfidy, avarice slandering,
atheism, meanness and fickle-mindedness should always be avoid¬
ed by one in the service of the king. A servant who thus asso¬
ciates his own self with the self by means of scriptural knowledge
and manual work should then do the service to the king for the
sake of the growth of fortune. He should always bow down to
the sons, favourites and ministers of that person (the king). He
need not gain the confidence of the ministers. He should do
(such acts) which please the king. (The servant) should ignore
those not liked by the king. One who knows the king should
desire to earn his livelihood from those liked by the king. He
should not speak anything when not asked by the king. He
should do the desired when (he has) a misfortune. The king
would be pleased with a person who gathers the words spoken.
The king also would not suspect (that he would disclose) his
secrets. (The duty of the servant is) to enquire about the health
(of the king) and to make the seat ready (for him) . (A servant)
rejoices to hear the exploits of the king. He rejoices even after
(hearing) an unpleasant (comment). He receives the small
remuneration and remembers it on other occasion. Only such
a servant should be employed. The services of others should be
avoided.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO
Construction of Forts
Pufkara said :
1-2. I shall describe the excellent fortification. The king
should reside in the fort. It should abound with th^ traders and

servants and sparsely with others. It should have few brahmins
and plenty of artisans. A country not depending on rain-water
and having plenty of water (for cultivation) is commended.
3. It should not be vulnerable for attack by others and
should abound with flowers, fruits and grains. It should be im¬
passable by foreign army and should be free from rogues and
thieves.
4-5. The mighty king should build one of the following
types of forts and live there. O Bhargava (son of Bhrgu;
Parasurama) ! Fort guarded by archers, land, men, forest,
water and hill (are the six kinds of forts). The excellent among
these (forts) would be the fort protected by the hill. It is indes¬
tructible and it destroys others.
6. Such a fort should have the market place, temple and
other things. A fort furnished with weapons and implements
and surrounded by water is an excellent one.
7-9. I shall describe the means of protecting the king. The
king has to be saved from poison. The Sirifa well ground with
(cow’s) urine, (known as) pancMga destroys poison. Satdvari^
chinnaruhdy vi^aghniy taniuUyakay koS&takiy kalhdriy brdhmiy citrapafolikdy man^ukapamiy vdrdhi, dkdtrly dnandakarhy unmddiniy somardji and
the gemstone destroying poison (are the antidotes for poison),
10. Residing in the fort possessing the characteristics of a
dwelling place, (the king) should propitiate gods. (He)
should protect the subjects, conquer the wicked and make gifts.
11. (The king) who takes away the articles (dedicated to)
the god would dwell in hell for a kalpa (period). The king
being devoted to the worship of gods should erect temples.
12-13. The temples should be protected and (images of)
deities should be installed. A wooden one is meritorious than the
earthen one, one made of bricks than the wooden one. One
made of stone is meritorious than that of the (image) made of
brick. One made of gold and gems (is meritorious) than
that of the stone one. Even by the construction of a temple
sportively one would get enjoyment and emancipation.
14. One who donates paintings, musical instruments and
(arranges for) dramatic performances to be seen and who anoints
the deity with oil, clarified butter, honey, milk and other things
would go to heaven.

Agni PuTdm
15-18. The king should worship and protect the brahmins.
He should not take away the belongings of a brahnyn. (The
king ) would reach hell and remain there till the inundation
of beings (deluge) by taking away (a piece of) gold, a cow
or an ahgula breadth of a thumb) measure of land (from a brah¬
min) . There is no other sin greater than the killing of a brahmin.
The brahmins would make non-divine into divine and divine into
non-divine. Brahmins are the most fortunate ones. They should
always be respected. A brahmin woman who weeps would
destroy the family, kingdom and subjects (of a king).
19-23. A righteous king should protect the chaste women.
The women should engage happily and efficiently in the cores
of household work. (She should be) decorating well the house¬
hold articles and be frugal in her expenses. She should always do
service to her husband to whom her father has given her (in
marriage). The lady practising continence after the death of the
husband goes to heaven. She should not have the desire (to live)
in other’s house and should not be quarrelsome. A widow as
well as the wife of a man who has gone abroad, should not deco¬
rate her person. She should always be bent on the worship of
god and the welfare of the husband. (A woman whose husband
has gone abroad) should wear some ornaments for the welfare
(of the husband). The woman (widow) who enters the (funeral)
fire along v/ith the (dead) husband would also reach heaven.
(A householder) should worship the goddess of fortune and
do the cleansing of the house etc. (He should worship lord)
Vi?nu on the twelfth day of Kdrttika and then make a gift of a
cow together with a calf. Her husband was saved by Savitrl
(wife of Satyavan, king of Salva) by practising truthfulness and
good conduct. There need not be any doubt that a woman
would have children by the worship of the Sun on the seventh
day in the bright (fortnight) in (the month of) mdrgaHr§a .

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE
Duties of a king
Pufkara said :
1-4. A king should appoint a head for (every) village, for
ten villages, for hundred villages, and then an over-all head.
Their salaries would be in conformity with their duties. (The
king) should watch them daily through (his) spies. Any irre¬
gularity that has arisen in the village should be controlled by
the village head. If (he is) notable (to set it right) (he) should
approach the head of ten villages and report him. The head of
the ten villages also should take appropriate step after having
heard the same. The king would get wealth etc. by protecting
the state.
5-13. A wealthy man gets righteousness and enjoys the
desires. All actions without (being supported by) wealth would
be ephemeral just as the river in the summer. There is no diffe¬
rence between the fallen and the poor in the world. No one would
take from the fallen. A poor man would not give. Even the wife
of the poor would not lend him support. A king oppressing the
country would dwell in hell for a long time. A king should
do in the same way as a pregnant woman who would abandon
her comforts and would attend to the welfare of the child in the
womb. What (use) of the sacrifices or of the penance (for a
king) whose subjects have not been protected. One whose sub¬
jects have been well protected, his house would be equal to
heaven. One whose subjects have not been protected, his house
would be the hell. The king collects one-sixth (of the income)
of both the good and bad subjects. (The king) would acquire
virtue by protecting (the subjects) and sin by not protecting them.
The subjects should be protected (by the king) from the oppres¬
sions by thieves (in the guise of) the officers of the state, espe¬
cially the writer-caste,just as a virtuous woman afraid of a
villain (is protected). The subjects being protected from their
fear (by the king) would be the subjects of the king. If not pro¬
tected they become an easy prey fqr them. The wicked should
be put down and the tax laid down in the codes should be taken.
14-17. Half (the amount collected) should be kept in the
treasury and the other half should be given to brahmins daily.
Having found a treasure a brahmin should take it in entirety.

580 Agni PurSxja
The same having been found by a ksatriya^ a vaiSya or a SUdra
it is enough if one-fourth or one-eighth or one-sixteenth part of
the treasure is given (to the king) in order as per law. One
who lies is punishable (with a fine) of one-eighth part of the
treasure. The king should keep an unclaimed property in his
custody for three years. (One who is able to establish his claim)
after three years by saying that ‘it is mine’ should be given the
property as laid down. On the contrary the king would forfeit
the wealth.
18-21. The owner (of a property) deserves (to get) that
property after furnishing (details about) its nature, dimension
etc. The king should manage the property belonging to a minor
till he (the minor) completes his study or crosses the state of
childhood. The same (procedure) should be followed in the
(case of the properties) belonging to widows with children and
those not having the guardians. The righteous king should
punish those relatives who seize (the properties) of faithful
women (who have become) widows and weak, even as they are
alive, with the punishment meted to the thief. In general the
property stolen by a thief should be paid by the king himself.
22. The king should obtain from thieves and the officers
in charge of the protection, the property taken by them. One
who lies that he has been robbed when he has not been robbed
should be punished and expelled (from the coimtry).
23-29. The property that has been stolen by the inmates
of the house need not be restored by the king. O Brahmin !
the king should take one twentieth of the value from the mer¬
chandise belonging to his country. The fees to be levied on
goods from foreign countries should be determined after knowing
the cost, the wear and tear and the profit got by the trader. (In
this case) one twentieth of the profit should be taken. If not
(paid) (the importer) should be punished. Freight should not
be collected from women and mendicants. The ferryman should
be made to repay by the king that which has been lost in transit
on account of the fault of the ferryman. The king should take
one sixth in the case of the grain iUka (barley) and one eighth
in the case of the grain Hmbi (a kind of kidney bean ) as toll
befitting the region and season. The king should take four and
five parts respectively in the case of animals and gold. Only
a sixth part should be collected in the case of perfumes, herbs.

cereals, flowers, roots, fruits, leaves, vegetables, straw, bamboos
hides, wicker works and vessels made of stone and all (other
materials), honey, meat and clarified butter.
30-33. (The king) should not levy tax on the brahmins
even in emergency. The king in whose realm a brahmin,
well-versed in the scriptures, perishes on account of hunger, his
kingdom gets ruined on account of diseases, famine and thieves.
The king should ascertain the attainments land provide him
an occupation. (The king) should always protect him just as
the father (would protect) his son. The life of the king, the wealth
and the kingdom would increase by the meritorious deeds of a
person (brahmin) being protected by the king. The artisans
of the king should work for a day in a month (without any
remuneration). The other workers under him should (work
without any remuneration) by taking food only.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED TWENTYFOUR
Duties of a king in the harem
Puskara said :
1-2. I shall describe the duties of the king in the harem.
Virtues etc. (are) the purpose of life (for the king). The kings
should entertain them without mutual conflict in the company
of the women. Virtue is the root, worldly prosperity the bough
and action or deed the great fruit. One who fosters this tree of
the three objects of worldly existence, would realise the fruits.
3-9. O Rama ! Women are subject to desire. Hence the
gems are gathered for their sake. They should be entertained and
also not much entertained by the king who desires for wealth.
One should not indulge excessively in eating, sexual pleasure and
sleep. It would cause disease. The king should share his bed
only with his beloved women. A woman behaving badly, not
rejoicing in (hearing his) exploits^ associating with the enemies
(of the king), feeling haughty and proud, wiping her fece when
kissed, not feeling grateful after accepting a present, sleeping
before and getting up later after sleep, shaking the body when

Agni Purity
touched and preventing from touching the body on account of
shyness, scarcely listening to pleasing words and keeping the
face turned away, ignoring to look at things placed in front,
concealing the loins, having a pale face when looked at, turning
her face away from the friends, appearing as if a mediator in the
(affairs of) other women loved (by the king) and not adorning
her person even after knowing that it is time for adorning (should
be rejected).
10-19. One who is disinterested should be rejected and one
who is loving should be entertained. (The characteristics of a
loving woman are as follows). She rejoices even at the sight
(of her husband). When looked at she casts her eyes down.
Being looked at she places her shaking glances elsewhere. Yet
she would not be able to turn aside her look completely. O
Bhargava (son of Bhpgu, Parasurama) ! She exhibits her con¬
cealed parts of body and covers up with effort the organs prohi¬
bited (from being displayed). She embraces and kisses him
(immediately after) being seen. She always speaks only the
truth. When being touched feels horripilation later manifest¬
ing as the sweat-drops (on the body). (O Rama ! She
asks for easy and simple things (from the husband). She
gets great rejoice after getting even a little. She feels elated
and favoured much by the mere pronunciation of her name.
She sends fruits to her husband with the impressions of her
nails. She holds those sent by her husband on the chest out of
regard. She besmears the body as if with the ambrosia by her
embraces. She sleeps after (the husband) had slept and would
get up before (he gets up). She would wake him up from sleep
by touching his thigh much. O Sage ! The clarified butter
becomes fragrant by combination with the powders of kapittha
and a column of curd as also with barley put in milk. This is the
way by which an eatable thing should be dressed. Now I shall
describe the mode of preparation of perfumes.
20-22. O Rama ! Cleansing, gargling, vomitting, adorn¬
ing (with flowers etc.), heating, burning (incense sticks) fumi¬
gation and perfuming are indicated to be the eight acts. Puri¬
fication of a thing is by washing it with, water containing the
leaves of Kapittha, bilva, mango and Karavira. In the absence
of these, purification should be done with water saturated with
musk.

23-29. The twenty-one herbs for fiunigation are — nakha,
kufphaf dhanOy rnddisly spfkkay Saileyajay jahy saffron, shellac, sandal,
agallochum, niraday saralay devak&?thay camphor, k&ntdy bdldy
kundurukay gugguluy Srinivdsaka axid sarjarasa. Two of these should
be taken and mixed with parts of resin from a idla tree. They
become fit for fumigation by being mixed with nakha, piny&kay
malaya and honey and made as desired in the proper way. The
bark, tubular part, fruit, oil, saffron, granthiparvakay Saileyay tagarOy
kdntdy colCy camphor, mdrhsiy surd and kupfha are said to be the
things (to be used) for bathing. One should bathe with any
three (things) from these collected as one desires after mixing
with the musk. This would increase the passion.
30. If one bathes with tvak, murd and analada in equal pro¬
portions added to half (the quantity) of bdlaka with saffron and
oil, one would have the fragrance of the lotus.
31 . By adding a half of tagara (in the same), it will have the
fragrance of th.e jdti flower. It gives a captivating fragrance of the
bakula (flowers) with the dhyamaka (grass).
32. One would get an auspicious fragrant oil by putting
the manjisfhdy tagarUy coluy tvak, vydghranakhay nakha and gandhapatra.
33. O Rama ! the oil extracted from the sesamum and
scented with any of the flowers would certainly have the frag¬
rance of the flower.
34. Cardamom, clove, kakkolay nutmeg and camphor mixed
with the skin of the nutmeg would be able to make the mouth
fragrant.
35-38. O Rama ! a kdrsika (weight) of camphor, saffron
kdntdy musk, harenukay kakkola, cardamom, clove, jdti, koiakay
tvakpatray trupi, mustay kastdrikd latdy the thorns of clove, the fruit
and skin of nutmeg and kafuka should be powdered and a fourth
part of the essence of khadira that gives fragrance should be added.
Then tablets should be made of them by (adding) mango juice.
When kept in the mouth they give fragrance and destroy the
diseases of the mouth.
39. Arecanut well washed with the waters of the leaves of
five (trees) and made fragrant with the (above) things (used)
for (making) the pills would make the mouth fragrant.
40. O Rama ! (the herbs) kafuka and dantakdpfha soaked

584 Agni Purina
in cow’s urine for three days and perfumed as the arecanut would
make the mouth fragrant.
41. Equal parts of tvak and pathya mixed with half (the
quantity) of the camphor would give an attractive fragrance in
the mouth similar to that of the nagavalli (betel).
42. The king should always protect the women thus. He
should not trust them, especially, the mother of children. He
should never sleep in the night in the apartment of a woman.
The faith (placed in them) should be feigned one.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE
The duties of a king
Puskara said :
1-2. A king should protect the princess. He should instruct
them in the sciences ol virtue, polity, erotics, archery and fine
arts through reliable persons. In the guise of protecting the body
of the prince, guardians should be engaged (to guard from)
those feigning to speak pleasant.
3. He should not be given (an opportunity) to associate
with angry, greedy and dishonoured persons. If not able to
inculcate virtue (in the prince, the king) should bind him with
pleasures.
4. An obedient prince should be engaged in all posts of
authority. The king should avoid hunting, drinking and dice
(playing) that destroys the kingdom.
5-7. (He) should also avoid sleeping during the day-time,
strolling about idly and scurrilous language. He should also
leave off censuring, cruel infliction of punishment and extrava¬
gance. The destruction of mines, neglecting- the care of the
fort etc. and scattering wealth are said to be extravagance.
A gift that is made to an unworthy person at an inappropriate
place and time and engaging in unworthy acts are said to be
extravagance.
8. One should avoid passion, anger,' haughtiness, pride.

greed and arrogance. Then one should win (the love of)
citizens after having controlled the servants.
9. Then (he) should subjugate his external enemies.
The external enemies are of three kinds — those belonging to
the same clan, those having enmity from the period of the ances¬
tors and those who have enmity on account of some particular
reason. Among these three each preceding one is greater
than the succeeding one.
10. O Fortunate one ! Friends are of three kinds —
friend of the father and grandfather, feudatory under the enemy
and artificial.
11. O Knower of virtue ! An empire is said to possess
seven constituents — king, minister, subjects, fort, punish¬
ment, treasury and allies.
12-16. The central figure is the king. He should be protect¬
ed and the kingdom is especially dependent on him. One who
rebels against any of the above constituents of the kingdom
should be killed. The king should be firm and liberal at (the
appropriate) time. Thus there are two worlds (to be conquered
by the king. The king should not cut jokes with the servants.
The servants soon get an upper hand of the king whom they can
persuade to laugh. In order to control people he should
feign grief (in their misery). He should speak preceded by a
gentle smile. He should make them feel delighted. It would
certainly be detrimental to the work if the king is procrastinating.
Procrastination is commended in the (following) acts — passion,
arrogance, pride, quarrel, sinful acts and unpleasant things
to be told. The king should hold secret counsel. There is no
danger from secret counselling.
1 7-20. The acts relating to the state done (by a king hold¬
ing such a counsel) is known from the deeds done and begun to
be done. One’s mind is known from the postures, gestures, gaits,
action, speech and the changes in the eye and face. The king,
should not keep his own counsel, nor consult a large number
(of his ministers). The king may have the counsel with many
(ministers). But it (should be had) separately. (He should
see that) none of his ministers would disclose his secret counsels.
Men will always have trust in some one somewhere. In counsel
decision must be made by one wise man.

Agni Purd^a
21-22. A king would perish on account of immodesty and
would acquire a kingdom on account of modesty. (A kirfg should
learn) the three sciences, the science of administration, meta¬
physics, science of wealth and business from the world. Only a
person that has conquered his senses would be able to keep his
subjects under his control.
23. The gods and all brahmins should always be worshipp¬
ed and gifts should be given to them (brahmins). Gift made to
a brahmin (would be) imperishable and the treasury cannot be
destroyed by any of these.
24. Not retreating in the battle, protecting the subjects
and giving gifts to the brahmins are the supreme good for
a king.
25. (The king) should likewise arrange for the welfare and
livelihood of the poor, destitute and old people, widows and
women whose husbands have gone abroad.
26-33. (The king) should arrange for (the proper pursuit
of) the orders of the varna (castes) and airama (stages of life).
(He should) worship the ascetics. He should not trust everyone
and trust only the ascetics. He should make (others) trust
him adducing reason (to show that his words) are not impeach¬
able. The king should think about the wealth like a crane, con¬
quer like a lion, pounce (on the enemies) like a wolf, dart forth
like a hare and strike firmly like a boar. The king should also
be showing vanity like a peacock, faithful as a horse and be
speaking pleasantly like a cuckoo. A king should always be
suspicious as a crow while living in the residence of a stranger.
A king should not partake of the food and touch a bed not
tested before. He should not visit a woman whom he had not
known before and not board an unfamiliar boat. One who
oppresses his subjects would be deprived of the position and com¬
forts of a sovereign. Just as a nourished bull gains strength and
becomes fit for work, so also O Fortunate one ! the nourished
sovereignty becomes fit for work. All these works are dependent
on the providence and on one’s efforts. Out of these two the
providence is unthinkable and one’s accomplishments depend
on his effort. The kingdom and the wealth of the earth of a king
belong to him by the good-will of the people.

TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYSIX
The means of Conciliation
Pufkara said :
1 -4. One’s own act that has been acquired from a previous
existence of a person is known as the providence. Hence peo¬
ple declare that will-force is superior. So also an adverse provi¬
dence can be nullihed by one’s elBforts. One will accomplish by
his previous deeds of virtue without providence. O Bhargava
(son of Bhrgu) ! Effort yields fruit at the proper time by the
grace of providence. The providence and effort are the two that
yield fruit for a man. The fruits would be accomplished at
the proper time by the combination of rain and ploughing.
Along with virtuous deeds one should exert effort. One should
neither be lazy nor be dependent on fate,
5-11, All the stratagems are accomplished by means of con¬
ciliation and other things. The seven means are conciliation,
making gifts, creating dissent, punishment, stratagem, indiffer¬
ence and deceit. Conciliation is said to be of two kinds — true
and untrue. Of these two the untrue (reconciliation) would
be for the censure of the good people. Those who belong to good
families, upright, always virtuous and have conquered their
senses are conquerable by conciliatory words. Even demons are
taken by false (conciliations). The description of the good ser¬
vices rendered by them (is conciliation). A dissension may be
created between cwo who are inimical to each other, angry, afraid
of each other and have been insulted by each other. He should
instill fear in them. A king should give hopes to his own people
(relatives). He should cause dissent in adversaries by holding
out threats about which they are afraid. One who causes such
dissents among such kinsmen should be protected by the king.
The anger of the soldiers is external and those of the ministers,
counsellors and princes etc. (are internal). The king should
pacify the internal anger and conquer that of the enemies.
12-16. Paying money is the excellent expedient. By
giving money one would get both the worlds There is no one for
instance who is not influenced by the payment of money. Only
(a king) who makes a gift of money would be able to cause dissent
in the enemies who have beeome allies. A king should accom-

Agni PurSna
plish by (means of) punishment and service that which could
not be accomplished by the othei three. Everything rests on
punishment which would destroy everything if improperly used.
A king would be destroyed by punishing those unpunishable
and not punishing those punishable. In the absence of punish¬
ment, the gods, demons, serpents, men, accomplished persons,
goblins and birds would transgress their limits. The wisemen
call ‘the punishment’ so because it controls the uncontrolled,
punishes the unpunishable, controls and punishes.
1 7-20. The king like the sun cannot be looked at on account
of his splendour. He should be like the moon to look at in order
to please the people. The king is the wind-god since he spreads
himself in the world by means of his spies. He becomes
fire when he burns the wicked. When he makes the gift to the
brahmins he is the lord of wealth (Kiibera), Because he
showers wealth he is known to be god Varuna among
the celestials. The king would be the earth by supporting the
universe with his forbearance. Then he is lord Hari (Visnu)
because he would protect the people with determination,
incantation, strength etc.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN
The code of criminal laws
Pufkara said :
1-8. I shall describe the criminal laws by (enforcing) which
an elevated position is attained by a king. You know that (the
weight of) three barley (grains) is (equal to) one berry seed.
(The weight of) a black gram would be that of five berries. O
R^a 1 It is said that sixty berries (make up) a h^lf of one
karsa (weight). O R^a ! A suvanja (weight) is said to be
(equal to) sixteen blackgrams. Four suvar^ make up one
nifka and ten ntfkas one dharana. These arc the measures of weight
(used) in (weighing) copper, silver and gold. O Rama !
KSrfika is said to be kSffdpa^ by coppersmiths well-versed (with
the same). Two hundred and fifty pa^ are remembered to be

the sahasa first. The middle one is known to be (equal
to) five (hundred panes) and the foremost one as one thousand
{pams). (These are the three kinds of punishments). If a per¬
son tells T have been robbed’, when he has not been robbed by
the thieves and is handed over to the king, such a person should
be punished by making to pay the same amount. One who tells
differently or falsely (about the exact amount robbed), both
these should be levied double the punishment by the king.
The men belonging to the three castes (other than brahmins)
who bear false witness should be levied punishment. A brahmin
(bearing false witness) should be expelled. The above punish¬
ment has not been prescribed (in that case). One who enjoys
(a property) entrusted with him should be levied a fine cf equal
value.
9-11. O Righteous one ! (The same fine should be levied)
in the case of clothes etc. (being used similarly). One would
not swerve from righteousness by such an act. One who
conceals the entrusted property and one who asks for restoration
of things without having entrusted the same (to some one)
should be punished like robbers or levied double the fine.
One who sells away another’s property unknowingly is free of
fault. But (one who sells another’s property) knowing (that it
belongs to another) deserves punishment as for a robber. One
who receives the price for a work and does not give goods* is
indeed punishable.
12. The king should levy a fine of one suvarna for one who
promises (to give something) and does not give. One who accepts
payment and does not do the work should be levied a fine of
eight krsrtalas.
13-22. But (a master) dismissing a servant before (the
end of) the term should be punished with the same fine. One
who has a remorse after buying or selling something may return
to its master or take from him within ten days (as the case may
be). Neither one can receive nor return after ten days (in such
a deal). Any person receiving or returning (such a property
after that) should be levied a fine of six hundred {pai^)by the
king. One who solicits a girl for a bridegroom, should be levied
a fine of two hundred {pfUfos) by the king whether the marriage
has been done or not. One who gives in marriage a girl who had
already been married to another should be punished by a king.

Agni Purd^a
The fine of uHama sdhasa (one thousand panas) (should be levied)
in that case. One who enters into a solemn agreement (with
a person for sale) and sells it to another person out of greed deser¬
ves to be punished with six hundred (paisas). The keeper (of a
cow-shed) not restoring the cow (to the owner) after receiving
the charges for the upkeep should be punished by the king with
one hundred (panas) and a smarm if not taken proper care (of
the entrusted animal). Land to the extent of one hundred dhanus
(one dhanu is equal to four cubits) should be set apart around the
village and twice or thrice as much around a city (for the graz¬
ing of the cows) . It should be made in such a way that a camel
would not be able to look over (the encircling wall). When the
(stored) grains have not been enclosed and were lost there would
be no punishment. One who frightens (the owner) of a house,
tanx, garden or land and takes the same should be punished with
five hundred (panas) . (H it is done) inadvertently the fine (would
be) two hundred (panas). All those who break the boundaries
should be punished with the first sdhasa^.
23-25. O Rama ! A censuring a brahmin deserves
to be punished with (a fine of) one hundred pariaSy a vaiiya, two
hundred panas and a iudra, a capital pimishment. A brahmin
having censured a ksatriya should be punished with (a fine of)
fifty (panas), (having censured) a vaiSya, twentyfivc (panas)
and (having censured) s. Sudra, twelve (panas). A vaiiya (having
censured) a ksatriya should get (punishment to pay) the first
(class of) sdhasa. A iudra having censured a ksatriya should be
getting (the punisliment of) severing the tongue.
26-27. A iudra giving moral instruction to brahmins is liable
for punishment. One who preaches falsely the doctrines of
scriptures should be levied (a fine of) twice the sdhasa. One
who insults men of respect should be (meted the punishment of)
uttama sdhasa. But the above described punishments should
be half if the crimes have been done inadvertently or for fun.
28. One who accuses his mother or father or elder brother
or father-in-law or the preceptor should be levied a fine of one
hundred (panas). (The same punishment should be levied) for
obstructing the pathway of the preceptor.
29. One of a lower caste should without enquiry be severed

of the organ by which he had done harm to a member of the
(three) higher castes.
30-31. The king should cause the lips to be cut off if a
person spits on the ground with pride. Similarly, one passing
urine or faeces on the body (of a brahmin) (should be punished
by cutting the) penis and the anus respectively. If a member
of a low caste had occupied the seat of a member of a higher
caste, his lower organ (buttocks) should be cut. One who causes
injury to any organ of another (should be punished by cut¬
ting the same organ (of the offender).
32. The killers of a cow, elephant, horse or camel should
have their legs and hands cut off. One who would make a tree
barren deserves the fine of a suiarna.
33-36. When the pathway or a boundary or the tank has
been cut (by a person he) should be levied double the (above)
fine. One who either wilfully or unintentionally takes away the
articles of another should restore it to him to satisfy him and pay
the fine to the king. One who steals the rope or the pot from the
well and damages the channel should be punished for a month
(with imprisonment). One should be punished (similarly) if
he beats an animal. The punishment for stealing ten pitchers
full of paddy is more than death. The punisliment (for stealing)
more than that (quantity) would be eleven times (the former).
Capital punishment (should be ordered for stealing) gold, silver
etc. (and for kidnapping) men and women.
37. The organ with which one would steal from others
should be removed by the king for the sake of discipline.
38-39. A brahmin taking little (quantity of) vegetables and
grains etc. (for his use without the knowledge of the owner)
would not be a criminal. (Similarly) in the case of taking for the
cows or gods (one would not be a criminal). One who attempts
to kill another, should be killed.
40. One who seizes the house or field (belonging to another, )
one who copulates with another’s wife, one who is an incendiary
and one who administers poison should be killed. So also in
the case of one who attacks with a drawn weapon.
41-42. A king should kill those who cause the death of
cattle by magic spelb. One should not converse with another’s
wife and should never copulate with a forbidden (woman).
A girl choosing her husband herself should not be punched by

Agni Purina
the king. A man of the lower caste holding incest with woman
of the higher caste deserves to be killed. The woman who
breaks her faith in the husband, should be made to be bitten
by dogs. A woman defiled by a man of her own caste should be
made to live on a morsel of food (a day).
43-47. A woman defiled by one of the superior (caste)
should have her head shaved. A brahmin copulating with a
vaiSya woman and a ksatriya going to a woman of the low caste
(.should be fined) with the first (variety of fine). A ksatriya and
a vaiiya are punishable for going to a iudra woman. If a courtesan
after having received a contract, goes to another on account of
greed, she should pay (the first one), twice the contracted amount
and (pay) twice the amount as fine. One’s wife, sons, servants,
pupil and brother having done an offence should be beaten with
a rope or with a piece of bamboo A thief should be struck on
the back but not on the forehead. One would acquire sin (by
doing so) (by striking on the forehead). The officers in charge
of protecting the people seizing very much should be banished
(from the kingdom) after having seized all their (property).
48. Those who have been employed to do certain work if
do not do the work of their employers, the king should make
those shameless, cruel-minded to be penniless.
49. Likewise the king should banish the minister or justice
after having taken the entire (property) for doing the work of
another (king).
50. If one violates the bed of the preceptor, (mark of)
female generative organ should be made (on the forehead),
a pot of wine in case of drinking of wine, a dog in case of stealing
and the head of a person in the case of killing a brahmin.
51. The king should kill (criminals belonging to) iUdra
and other (communities) and banish the brahmin sinners.
The wealth belonging to great sinners should be offered to
(god) Varuna (Grod of righteousness).
52. (A king) should kill all those who offer shelter, food
and wealth to thieves in the villages also.
53-54. The feudatory chiefs and the governors of provinces
in the kingdom who are sinful should be killed. The king should
place on the pike after having cut the arms of thoslf!^ thieves who
commit theft in the night after having agreed (to show good

conduct). The king should kill those who break tanks and
temples.
55. One should be levied (a fine of) a kdrsdpa^a for having
committed nuisance on the thoroughfare when there was no
adversity and be made to clean the impurity.
56-59. One who breaks his contract every month should
pay (a fine of) five hundred (panas) to the party concerned
(Merchants), dealing fraudulently with honest men in respect
of the price (of a commodity), should be punished with the
first or the middle (kind of) fine. The king should confiscate
all goods from the obstructing merchants by (paying) small
sum and punish them with the uttama (variety of) sdhasa separa¬
tely. One who adulterates the materials and who sells imitationarticles should be given the middle (kind of) punishment. One
who makes contraband goods (should be made to pay) uttama
(sdhasa). One who insults in a quarrel should be given the
punishment of twice that (amount).
60-64. A fine of kfsnala^ (should be collected) firom a brah¬
min or a iudra who eats the forbidden food. One who makes
false balance and weight and those who make use of these should
be levied the uttama (kind) of fine. The women who administers
poison to her husband or preceptor, or a brahmin and children
or sets fire to the house should be banished (from the country)
with cows after having cut her ears, hands and nose. Those men
who damage a land or house or village or forest and one who
seduces the wife of the king should be burnt with the fire from the
cremation ground. One who copies the royal edict omitting or
adding (some sentences) and one who sets free an adulterer and
a thief should be punished with the uttama (sdhasa) fine. The
punishment for one who ascends the vehicle or the seat of the
king is the uttama sdhasa.
65-66. If one thinks that he has not been defeated even
though he has duly been defeated, (the king) should defeat him
again and inflict double-fold punishment. One who summons a
person that had not done any crime should be put to death. If
an accused person escapes from the custody of the punisher on
account of the latter*s carelessness, that punisher should pay the
fine.
1. See the first verse, p. 588.

Agni PurS^
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT
Instructions relating to military expedition
Puskara said :
1 . When a king is attacked by a strong enemy and he thinks
“I have been attacked”, he should undertake the military
expedition.
2. If the (king thinks that the) warriors had been wellcared for and the servants well supported and he feels, “I have a
strong army and I am capable of protecting the central (army)”,
he should go with them and move into the camp.
3-5. Otherwise one may invade (the country of) the enemy
when it (the latter’s country) is afflicted by natural calamities
such as the appearance of the earthquake in that direction or the
comet afflicting it or the army of the enemy king dislikes that
king and awaits his ruin. One should enter the kingdom of the
enemy when he has auspicious throbbing (of the muscles)
of the body, has good dreams and good omens. One should em-
•ploy an army consisting largely of infantry etc. and elephants in
the rainy season.
6. In the early and advanced winter it should consist of
chariots and cavalry, while it should consist of four divisions
of an army (cavalry, infantry etc. ) in the spring and autumn.
7. An army consisting of a large number of infantry would
always win the enemies. The throbbing (of the muscles) on the
right side (of the body) would be commendable.
8. So also the palpitation on the left back and the heart and
mark of mole (on the left side) should be known as not commen¬
dable. While the contrary to what has been told on the left
side would be auspicious for women.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE
The significance of dreams
Puskara said :
1-14. I shall describe the good and bad omens and the way
to prevent bad dreams. The growth of grass and trees on one’s
body except the navel, the breaking of bronze on the head, the
shaving (of the head), remaining nude, clad in tom dress, anoin¬
ting with oil, besmearing with mud, falling from a great height,
one’s marriage, music, playing on the lute or any other stringed
instrument, swinging in a hammock, gathering lotus and metals,
killing of serpents, seeing red flowers and trees and a cdnddla^
riding a pig or dog or ass or camel, eating the flesh of birds, and
the oil of krsara (?) entering the mother’s womb, getting into the
funeral pyre, the fall of the flag-post etc., the fall of the moon
and the sun, seeing the divine beings of the terrestrial and celes¬
tial regions as well as a calamity (such as the earthquake), the
wrath of the divine beings, brahmins, other beings and precep¬
tors, dancing, laughing, marriage and singing, playing on strin¬
ged instruments other than the lute, drowning in a river, bathing
in water mixed with cow-dung, or muddy water or water mixed
with ink, embracing the unmarried girls, sexual union of men,
injury to one’s limbs, purging or vomiting, starting in the direc¬
tion of the south, being afflicted by diseases, plucking of fruits,
breaking of diseases, breaking of minerals, falling of buildings,
sweeping the house, playing with goblins, flesh-eaters, monkeys
and low-caste men, insult from others and feeling grief on
account of that, wearing ochre robes and playing in that dress,
immersion in oil and drinks anointing with red unguent are
inauspicious omens and it is better not to describe them.
15-18. (After dreaming as above) one should continue to
sleep, bathe, worship a brahmin, do oblations with sesamum,
worship (gods) Hari (Vi$9u), Brahma, Siva, Sun and Ganapati
(Vinayaka). Then one should recite hymns (on gods) and
repeat hymns such as the PurusasSkta^. The dreams dreamt
in the first quarter of the night yield results witlun a year, the
second (quarter), within six months, the third quarter of the

Agni PurSifM
night, within three months, the fourth (quarter), within a fort¬
night and within ten days (if dreamt) at (the time of) the sun¬
rise. If (two dreams) either auspicious or inauspicious (were
dreamt) on the same night, one should indicate the result of the
dream dreamt later.
19-22. Hence, it is not commended to sleep after a good
dream (has been dreamt). (Dreaming) as climbing a hill,
mansion, elephant, horse or bull is beneficial. O Brahmin !
(Seeing) trees and white flowers in the sky (seeing) the navel as
grown with trees, (seeing oneself) as having many arms and many
heads, (seeing) the appearance of grey hair, bearing a garland
of white (flowers), wearing white garment, the eclipses of the
moon, sun and the stars, washing (oneself), embracing the
flag-post and the raising of the banner (are good).
23-27. O Brahmin ! Seizing of land and stream of water,
victory over the enemies, success in dispute, dice-play and battle,
eating of raw meat and drinking of sweet porridge, seeing blood,
bathing in blood, drinking of spirituous liquor, blood and wine,
drinking of milk, making marks with the weapons on the earth,
(seeing) the cleai sky, and sucking milk from cows, shebuffalos, lionesses, she-elephants and mares are commendable.
O Brahmin ! The favour from the gods, brahmins and precep¬
tors, the anointment with water and falling down from the horns
of cow (are also commendable).
28-29. O R^a ! (The dream) as falling down from the
horns of a moon is known to be capable of bestowing kingdom.
The installation as the sovereign, the cutting of one’s head, the
death, the destruction of one’s house by fire, the gain of royal
rewards and the play on stringed instruments (are auspicious).
30-31. The family of a person flourishes that sees an ele¬
phant or horse or gold or bull or cow. (Dreams of) riding a bull
or an elephant, the climbing a peak or a tree, weeping, besmeared
with ghee or excreta, copulating with a forbidden women,
(seeing) a white cloth, clear waters, tree laden with fruits and
clear sky (are good augury).

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTY
The inauspicious auguries
Pufkara said :
1-4. MuLtxires of herbs and black cereals are inauspicious.
Cotton, grass, dried cow-dung, wealth, charcoal, molasses and
resin, one having a shaven head or one that has besmeared oil
(for bathing) and one that is nude, iron, mud, hide and hair, a
lunatic, an eunuch, SLcdn^dlay a dog, an outcaste and others, men
guarding the captives, a pregnant woman, widow and oil-cake,
etc., dead (body), husk, ash, skull and bone and broken vessel
are not commendable (to be seen ) . The sounds of musical instru¬
ments that are broken, frightening and harsh are also not com¬
mendable.
5. The sound ‘come on*, (heard ) in front of the person under¬
taking a journey) is commendable, (while) that from behind
is not (commendable).
6-7. The undesirable sounds (such as) “Where do you go**,
‘Stand*, ‘Do not go*, ‘What is there for you by going* are for
death. So also (the appearance of) carnivorous animals, banners
etc., the fall of vehicles etc., the breaking of weapons, dashixig
of the head against the door etc., and the fall of umbrella, dress
etc., (are not commendable).
8. An inauspicious (augury) gets destroyed by the worship
and invocation of lord Hari (Vi^^u). If a second inauspicious
augury is seen (while setting out) then one should re-enter the
house.
9-13. White flowers are excellent augury. (So also) a
pitcher full (of water) is greatly meritorious. Meat, fish, a dis¬
tant sound, an old man, an animal, goat, cows, horses, elephants,
(images of) gods, glowing flame, dBrvd (grass), wet cow-dung,
courtesan, gold, silver, gem, vacd, white mustard, herbs, beans,
weapons, sword, umbrella, throne, insignia of royalty, a dead
body without (being followed by) mourners, firuit, ghee, curd,
milk, unbroken rice, mirror, honey, conch, sugarcane, auspici¬
ous sentence, the instrumental music of the devotee, the loud
sound of thunder and lightning are all auspicious. The satis¬
faction in the mind (of the person undertakii^f a journey is also
auspicious.

Agni PurStfo.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE
The good and bad auguries known from the sounds of
animals and birds
Pufkara said :
1 . Birds let us know the good and bad indications for a man
staying or leaving a country or town or (putting) a question.
2. All excited sounds are pointed out to indicate evil accord¬
ing to fortune-tellers and cooing sounds are said to indicate good
results by fortune-tellers.
3. The excitements of birds are said to be of six kinds based
on the divisions of time, direction, place, karam (a division of
the day), the sound and the species (of the bird).
4-6. Each preceding (item in the above list) should be
known as more powerful. The nocturnal (bird) moving in the
day-time and that of the day-time moving in the night (are
known to be the excitement in time). One should know the
malefic asterisms, ascendants and planets also as excited. It is
known to be dhumita (obscured), joah'W (burning) and ahgdrita
(burnt) if the sun goes to or stays or leaves (a particular
quarter). These three are remembered to be the excited ones
and the gentle (cooings) are of five kinds.
7-9. It is said to be agitated bird if it makes an excited
sound in the direction that is (termed) agitated. Similar (appel¬
lations should be given) to wild (birds making sound) in the
village and the village (birds) in the forest as well as on an inaus¬
picious tree. O Foremost brahmin ! The deSadipta (agita¬
tion in respect of a place) is known to be in inauspicious place.
It is designated as kriyddipta (excitement in respect of an action)
if there is any action improper for one’s own species. It is said
to be the rutadipta (excitement in respect of sound) making
broken and harsh sounds. It is known to be the jdtidipta (excite¬
ment in respect of the species) in the case of the carnivorous
species alone.
10. If the excited characteristics of different categories
occur together it is stated to be good. If they are mixed the result
is said to be mixed.
11. The cows, horses, camels, asses, dogs, (birds) sSrikd^
small house-lizards, sparrows, vultures and tortoises and others,
are said to be living in the villages.

12. Croats, black sheep, parrots, elephants, pig, buffalo
and crow are said to be both domestic and wild. All other (birds
and animals) are wild.
13. The cat and the cock are both domestic and wild. We
know about them from the change in their characteristics.
14-16. The snakes, peacocks, ruddy geese, mules, pigeons,
cows, light-brown horses, wild cocks, hawks, jackals, wag-tails,
monkeys, Sataghna (?), sparrows, cuckoos, blue jays, hawks,
kapihjala^ the three, tittiri (francoline partridge), peacocks,
pigeons, wag-tails, gallinules, parrots, cranes, cocks, skylarks
and deer are known to be moving about during daytime.
17. The fowlers, owls, Sarabha-s^^ curlews, hares, turtles,
jackals and pingalikas (a kind of owl) are said to be nocturnal.
18-19. Ganders, deer, cats, mongooses, bears, serpents,
red dogs, lions, tigers, camels, domestic boars, men, dogs,
porcupines, bulls, jackals, wolves, cuckoos, cranes, horses, men
in ragged clothes and alligators wander day and night.
20. The above seen in a group in front (of the king) making
an expedition with the forces are stated to bring victory and seen
on the back cause defeat.
21-22. If the blue jay comes out of the house and makes
the sound remaining in front, it indicates humiliation for the
king and (making sound) on the left (indicates) quarrel and
gaining food. It being sighted on the vehicle or on the right
side of the body are commended. The peacock making an
unusual sound conveys plundering by thieves.
23-29. O Rama ! a deer (seen) in front of one that has
set out would be (indicating) danger to life. O Rama ! The
bears, rats, jackals, tigers, lions, cats and asses (running away)
in the opposite direction as well as mule braying strangely (would
indicate the same result). The kapinjala (bird) (seen) on the
left or right is an excellent (augury). But it does not augur well
(if seen) on the back. The tittiri (bird) (in any one of the above
positions) is not commended. Thy black deer, boars and spott¬
ed antelopes crossing from the left to the right would always be
beneficial and the contrary (movements) are condemned. The
bulls, horses, jackals, tigers, lions, cats and asses are known to
1 . The edtaka bird that it said to driok water directly from the rains.
2. A fabulous anlinal poweriUl than the lion.

Agni PurS^
confer the desired results if they move to the left horn the right.
The vixen, fyamdnana (?), chucchU (a kind of animal), pingald
(a kind of owl), house alligator, sow and a female cuckoo (are
said to be) male (omens) if they are on one’s left. The vulture,
r&sa (?) monkey, Srikarm (antelope), and citkarS (?) are
known as feminine (omens). The monkey, Srikarm, pipilikS,
ruru (a kind of deer) , and hawks (auger well seen) on the right.
The sounds made by the bull that is born, the serpent, hare,
hog and alligator are good.
30-33. Then it is not desirable to see the monkey and bear
at the commencement of a work. The strong omen from a bird
as one sets out on a day should be explained by wise men as bear¬
ing result on the same day. O Brahmin ! Mad ones, those
concerned only with the prey, young ones, those mutually quar¬
relling and those separated by a distance should be known to
bear no effect. The vixen howling alone or in groups of two or
three or four forebode good. It is said to be not beneficial if
five or six (vixen howl). It would be good if seven (vixen howl)
and there would be no effect if more than that.
34. The volcano facing the sun that causes the horripila¬
tion in men should be known to bring ill luck to vehicles and
increase the fear.
35-36. When an antelope is seen at a good place it would
give good results. It would give bad results for the whole year
for the man (if seen) at a bad (place). One may know the result
for himself for the whole year as he had seen the deer on the first
day.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO
Omens known from birds
Pufkara said :
1. An army would take possession of a city that is under
siege by that way through which many crows enter that city.
2. It indicates unfordable fear if a crow taking its abode in
the place of the army goes about cawing with agitation and fear.

3. If (the crow) pecks at the shadow, body, vehicle, shoes,
umbrella and clothes and other things (of a person, it indicates)
death (for that person). If it honours (the person, he) will be
honoured. If it gives something that it is fond of, (it augurs)
good.
4-6, A crow going to and fro at the entrance (to a house,
indicates) the return of the absentee owner of the house. It
indicates destruction by fire (if the crow) throws a red or burnt
thing inside the house. A red (thing) placed (by the crow)
in front of a person indicates imprisonment. O Bhargava (son
of Bhrgu), if (a crow) brings (to the house) a yellow substance,
gold or silver, it would indicate the gain of that (substance).
So also one should indicate the loss of that thing which (a crow)
should take away.
7. (If a crow) vomits raw flesh in front (of a house) there
would be gain of wealth. (There would be) gain of land if (a
piece of) earth is thrown. (There would be gain of kingdom if
a great gem is cast.
8. If the crow (flies) favourably to the person who under¬
takes a journey it bids welfare and he would be able to accomp¬
lish his task. But if (it flies) against him it should be known that
the task would not be accomplished and would cause fear.
9. If the crow comes cawing loudly against (the person)
it would be an impediment to the journey. A crow on the left
IS considered to be benefleial and causing destruction of the
task if on the right.
10. (If the crow flies) on the left in the direction (of the
person undertaking a journey), it is excellent and medium if ■
on the right. (If it flies) against the direction of the traveller
on the left, it would cause impediment to the movement.
11. If the crow comes to the house when the traveller is
beginning to move it should be known that he can set out. (If
a crow) stands on one leg and looks at the sun with a single eye
it causes fear.
12. (If a crow) makes its habitat in a hollow of a tree there
would be great misfortune. A crow (seen) in the saline soil is
not for good. But (the same seen) as having its wings with mud
is commendable.
13. Acrow (s^m ) as having its mouth full of excreta accom*

Agni Purdij.a
pllshes all things. O Son of Bhfgu 1 The other birds should
also be known as (indicating the same results) as thefcrow.
14-20. Dogs (howling) on the right of a royal camp (indi¬
cate) the destruction of the brahmins. If they howl at the place
of Indra in the palace, at the main entrance to the royal city and
inside the house, it would augur the death of the lord of the house.
It indicates the accomplishment of the task, if (a dog smells
the left side of the body (of a man) and fear if (it smells) the
right side of the body and the left arm. A dog coming against
the traveller would be adverse to the journey. O Bhargava
(son of Bhrgu) ! (a dog) obstructing the path (of a traveller)
indicates robbers on the way. (A dog) holding a piece of bone in
the mouth (being seen in front indicates) fruitlessness (of the
effort). Similarly (a dog being seen) holding a rope or rag in
the mouth is sinful. (A dog being seen) as holding the shoes as
well as full of meat in the mouth is also beneficial. (A dog being
seen) as holding the hair or any filthy substance in the mouth is
inauspicious. (A dog) urinating and going in front (of the
traveller) would bring fear. If (one sees a dog) urinating and
going to an auspicious place or tree or to an auspicious substance
(it indicates) the accomplishment of the task for that person.
O Rama (Parasurama) ! Jackals and other (animals) should
also be known (to indicate) the same (result) as a dog.
21. The lowing of the cows should be known as auguring
fear for the master. (If a cow lows) in the night it would be indi¬
cating fear from thieves. (If it) wails (it forebodes) death.
22. If a bull bellows in the night it would be for the welfare
of the master. A bull let loose in the night would confer victory
on the king.
23. The cows belonging to a person that were given as gift
(mdicate) security (if found) eating (as they wish). (The cows)
that had withheld showing affection to the calves are known to
be (indicating) miscarriage (in the family).
24. (The cows) that pound the earth with their feet and
arc frightened bring fear. (The cows) that have wet skin, hor¬
ripilation and earth stuck to the horns are auspicious.
25-31. It should be told in the same way in the case of the
she-buffalos and others by those knowing (the science). A sad¬
dled horse (being seen) as ridden by another (o^er than the
appointed person) forebodes evil. (A horse being seen) as plung-

ing into the water and tumbling over the ground is not desirable.
A horse that (is seen) sleeping without a good cause causes mis¬
fortune. (If a horse) has aversion to barley and balls (of grains)
all of a sudden it is not commended. Bleeding from the mouth
and trembling of the body are also not commended. (If a horse)
plays with cranes, pigeons and the sdrikds (a species of birds),
one should indicate death. A horse licking the leg with the
tongue with tear-filled eyes forebodes ruin. (If a horse) scratches
the earth with the left foot or sleeps during the day (lying) on
the left side, it does not confer good. The horse that passes urine
once (a day), that is looking drowsy, does not allow to be
ridden and that returns home frantically if ridden upon, indi¬
cates impediment for the journey. (It indicates the same result)
if it touches the left side (of its body). (The horse) that neighs
(on seeing) the enemy warrior and touching its leg brings vic¬
tory.
32-35. If an elephant courts (openly) in a village it would
ruin the country. If a she-elephant after delivering a calf runs
amuck (it forebodes) the death of the king. (If an elephant)
does not allow itself to be ridden or frantically returns home after
being ridden or ichor flows from the elephant, it foretells the
death of the king. (An elephant) crossing its left foot with its
right foot and entwining its right tusk with its trunk is
auspicious. A bull or a horse or an elephant entering the enemy
forces is inauspicious. If clouds get broken (suddenly) and rain
excessively, (the king) would get his army routed.
36. The tumbling down of the umbrella at the time of a
travel or during the war on account of adverse asterisms and
planetary conditions or the wind blowing against (the forces)
forebodes fear.
37. Contended men and favourable planets are the charac¬
teristics for (foreboding) victory. The warriors being attacked
by the crows and demons (forebodes) the destruction of the
army. The east, west, north-east and north are the excellent and
auspicious directions.

604 Agni PurS^A
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE
The propitious periods for undertaking an expedition
Pufkara said :
1-3. I shall describe all kinds of journeys relating to a sove¬
reign. A journey should be abandoned when the Venus has set
or is in a weak house or debilitated or in the house of an enemy
or retrograde or malefic. One should avoid a journey when the
Mercury is retrograde, the presiding planet of the quarter or
any other planet (in a similar position), is under the vaidhftP,
vyatipdta, ndga^^ iakuna, catuspada and kintughna.
4. One should avoid undertaking journey under ( the in¬
fluence of) vipat {t3ra)^t naidhana, pratyari, as well as the janma,
the^ ganda^ and the void lunar day.
5. The north and the east are said to be having the same
virtues. In the same way the west and south are of the same
virtues.
6. . One should not cross the obstacle that has risen from the
north-west to the south-east. Sundays, Mondays and Saturdays
are not auspicious (for a journey).
7-10. (The asterisms) krttikd and others (for journey)
in the east, (the asterisms) maghd and others (for journey) in
the south, (the asterisms) anurddhd and others (for journey) in
the west and (the asterisms) jyeffhd and others (for journey)
in the north are all commendable. I shall describe the measure
of the shadows (cast by the sun on different days. It is said
to be twenty for the Sun, sixteen for the Moon, fifteen for the
Mars, fourteen for the Mercury, thirteen for the Jupiter, twelve
for the Venus and eleven for the Saturn. These arc said (to be
valid) for all actions. One should not set out on a journey under
his native ascendant and in the direction of the rainbow.
11. One should march on an expedition after meditating
on lord Hari for victory if the omens and other things are good.
I shall describe the circle (of twelve primary kings) to be thought
about that would offer protection to the king.
1 . This and the next one are among the twenty-seven yogas or combi¬
nations.
2. This and the foHowii^; three are some of the eleven divisions of a daycalled karaoas.
3. This and die next three are the astral Indications.
4. This is one of the twentyseven yogas.

12. A kii^;dom is said to consist of seven constituents —
the king, minister, fort, treasury, punishment (law), allies and
township.
13. One should destroy all those who obstruct (the normal
course) of the seven constituents of a kingdom. Efforts should
be made by the king to make all these circles develop.
14-15. The kingdom over which a king exercises direct
control would be the first circle. The feudatories of that kingdom
should be known as the enemies. If they are attached (to the
paramount lord they) should be known as friends. The next
(circle is) the allies of the enemy. The next (circle) should be
known as the ally of the ally. The next (circle would be) the
enemy of the ally of the ally.
16-20. Those in front have been described. Tell me those
who are behind. Then there would be the enemy in the rear.
A king whose kingdom lies next but one is said to be the next one
(friend in rear). A hostile king would be the next one (friend
of the rear enemy). That which is adjacent to the former is said
to be the next one (friend of rear friend) . O Brahmin ! This
is (the way of maintaining order) by an independent king that
has an enemy and is desirous of conquering (the same). O
Excellent among men ! It is not possible to declare that it is
settled. One is said to be an intermediary that is capable of
punishing and favouring. A mighty king that would be able to
punish and favour all is said to be neutral. No one is really one’s
enemy or ally. One is an enemy or an ally on account of some
reason. I have described these twelve circles relating to a
king.
21-25. Enemies, are known to be of three kinds — ancestral,
personal and artificiaL Each one of tlie preceding class among
them are (known to be) stronger (than the succeedii^ ones).
One that is a personal enemy is considered by me as artificial.
An enemy in the rear of an enemy and his hostiles would be one’s
iGriends. A king should subdue his hostile king in the rear by
means of strati^es. The ancient authorities commend the cxtinction of an enemy with (the help of) an ally. An ally may become
an enemy after being a feudal. A king wishing to vanquish an
enemy should himself destroy him if it is possible for lum to do*
There wiU not be any fear from an enemy when the glory is
waxing. A king desiring to conquer righteously should exercise

Agni PuTlt^a
control over the world in such a way that the people do not feel
^ricf-stricken and trust him. *
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYFOUR
The six expedients used by the king
Puskara said :
1. I have already described (the political expedients of)
conciliatory measures, creating dissensions, bribery (to win the
enemy) and punishment. I have described the punishment
(to be made by the king) in his own country. I shall (now)
describe (the punishment to be meted to a person living) in a
foreign country.
2. Punishment is said to be of two types — public and pri¬
vate. Public punishment (consists of) looting and the destruc¬
tion of villages (of the enemy country), destruction of the
food grains and setting fire. (The private punishment consists
of) killing by poisoning or settingfireor by engaging several men,
dishonouring pious men and poisoning waters.
3-7. O Bhargava (son of Bhrgu) ! I have described
the mode of executing the punishment. Listen ! I shall describe
when (the king) should be indifferent. A king should make
peace (with his enemy) if he thinks that by his battle in the
battle-field there would be bad consequences. One maybe indif¬
ferent (when he would find) the conciliatory measures as
securing the position (of the enemy), paying a bribe would be
squandering money and creating dissension would have punish¬
ment as the consequence. One may resort to indifference (if
he is sure) that ‘this person is not capable of doing any harm to
me’ and ‘1 am not capable of causing any harm to him*. In that
case the king should hmniliate the enemy (by being indifferent) .
8-14. I shall describe the strategies of illusion (to be practis¬
ed by a king). The enemy should be agitated by false portents
by sending extensive lighted torches (tied to) the tails of strong
birds in the camp of the enemy. Then the fall of the meteor
should be shown to them. In this way many other portents
also should be shown. The enemies should thus be agitated by

different (kinds of) deception. The astrologers and ascetics
should proclaim the fall of the enemy. A king that desires to
conquer the earth should agitate others by the above (procla¬
mation). The favour of gods should also be proclaimed to
others. A king should declare (to his men) “We have received
increased strength and you strike without fear; all others have
been routed”, when the battle has begun. War-cry and great
commotion should be made saying that the enemy has been
routed. (It should also be proclaimed) ; “The king has been
blessed by the gods profusely and is ready for the battle”. I
shall describe Indrajdla (a kind of stratagem in war).
15. A king should exhibit the four divisions of the army
(such as the infantry, cavalry, men mounted on elephants and
chariots) (to delude the enemy) that the gods had sent them for
aid. Showers of blood should be shed on the enemy.
16. Severed heads of the enemy should be exhibited on (the
terrace of) palaces. I shall describe six expedients, among
which war and peace are most excellent.
17. Making peace, war, expedition, halt, seeking shelter
and duplicity are said to be the six expedients.
18-25. Making peace is known to be a treaty. War is
offending (the enemy). Expedition is said to be the march aga¬
inst the enemy by the one that desires to conquer. It is said to
be ‘the halt’ when (a king) remains in his own territory (mobi¬
lising his forces) for the war. Mobilisation of half the army in
the enemy country is said to be ‘seeking shelter*. It is said to be
duplicity on account of resorting to indifference or neutral
position. A king should seek a treaty with an equal (person)
or not of lower strength and more powerful. A powerful king
should make a war with (a king of) inferior strength. In that
case he should take a stronger (king) as an ally when he is not
having an enemy in the rear. A king should niobilise his army
when he could easily intercept the work of the enemy, though
he is not free from an enemy in the rear. One who is strong en¬
ough could mobilise half of his atmy in the territory of the enemy
even though he may have an enemy in the rear. An alliance
with another king is said to be the worst of all expedients a king
fighting with a stronger adversary is compelled to do. It is smd
to bring many a long and tedious marches, loss of many lives and
expenditure. A king should have an alliance only when he would

Agni Purd^
have great benefits later. Moreover, he should have an alli¬
ance only when he has been deprived of all his strength*
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE
The daily duties of a king
Puskara said :
1-2. I shall describe the perpetual daily duties of the king.
The king should put an end to his sleep with the songs and music
of the panegyrists when two muhurtas (fortyeight minutes)
are still left in the night. He should then see spies in such a
way that they are not known as his own men by anybody.
3. He should then hear the report about the income and
expenditure as laid down. After having eased, the king should,
go to the bath-room.
4. The king should then bathe preceded by cleansing the
teeth. After having done the twilight worship and the repetition
(of the sacred syllables) (the king) should worship lord
V^udeva (Vi^nu’s manifestation as Kr^i^a).
5. He should then offer unto the fire holy (twigs). Liba¬
tions should be offered to the ancestors. Accompanied by the
blessings of brahmins, he should then give a cow (as gift) together
with gold.
6. He should then see his face in the mirror after having
adorned himself and besmeared (his body with sandal-paste).
(He should also then see his face in clarified butter kept toge¬
ther with gold. The king should then hear about (the nature of)
the day etc.
7. (He should then take) medicines prescribed by the
physicians. He should then touch the auspicious things. He
should then see the preceptor and go to the court after having
been blessed by him.
8. O Fortunate one ! He should then see brahmins,
ministers, counsellors and others presented by the door-keeper.
9-13. After having heard the traditional histmy and things
to be done, he should determine the business (to faie done). He

should then look into civil disputes and have counsel with the
counsellors. He should not have the counsel with a single
person or with many or ignorant men or untrustworthy men.
He should also not make public the secret (counsel) . The coun¬
sel he had should be given effect to promptly so that the state
may not get affected. The secret counsel is considered to be
guarded well by a king by his postures. Wise men gather
secrets from the postures of others. A king gets prosperity by
following the words of astrologers, physicians and connsellors, because they sustain the king. After having had the counsel
(he should do) physical exercises with discs, chariot and weapon.
14. He should then bathe in tanks not inhabited by living
creatures and see lord Vi§nu that has already been worshipped.
He should then see fire into which oblations have been made
and also see brahmins that have been worshipped well.
15-17. After having adorned himself he should take food
after having fed beings and after having tested the food
duly. After having taken food, he should chew betels and rest
lying on the left. He should then have inquiry in the sacred
texts. After having met the warriors and seen the granary
and the armoury he should do the evening twilight worship.
He should then think of the tasks to be done, send spies, eat
food and spend time in the harem with instrumental music and
being guarded by others. A king should do thus daily.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX
The rites preceding the march of a king
Pufkara said :
1-5. 1 shall describe rites to be performed before com¬
mencing a march. When a march of a king has to begin after
seven days, (lords) Hari (Vi^nu) and Sambhu (Siva) should
be worshipped as well as lord Viniyaka (the el^hant-faced
god, lord of impediments) with sweet balls and other things
(on the first day). After having wordupped the guardian
(deities) of (different) directions, (the priest) should lie

Agni Purity
down (on a bed). He should then worship gods either
(remaining) on the bed or in front of them. He should then
think of Manu. “Obeisance O iSambhu (conferer of good) !
to the three-eyed, dreadful and conferer of boons. Obeisance to
the dwarf (manifestation of lord Visnu), the formless lord of
dreams. O Master ! Lord of the lords ! Bearer of the trident !
One riding the bull ! O Eternal one ! Let me know in my
dream while I sleep, the good or evil (to befall me). (The
impressions) in the waking state (maybe driven) far away.”
The priest should thus utter these sacred syllables (on the
second day).
6. He should worship the guardian (deities) of the quar¬
ters, Rudras and the lords of directions on the third day,
the planets on the fourth day and the two Alvins (divine physi¬
cians) on the fifth day.
7-14. Then (the gods on the way (of expedition) and
the sacred rivers (presided over) by those gods should be wor¬
shipped. Offerings (should be made) to gods dwelling in
heavens, atmosphere and earth. The group of goblins and
(gods) Vasudeva and others should be worshipped in the night.
(Worship should be) made to (goddesses) Bhadrakal! and Sri.
One should pray to all gods. “May gods Vasudeva,
Sahkar$ana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha,' Narayana (Visnu),
Abjaja (born in the lotus, Brahma), Visnu, Narasimha (manlion form of lord Visnu), the boar (manifestation of lord Visnu),
O Rama ! Siva, Isa* (liana), Tatpuru^a, Aghora, Satyaja®,
the Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu,
(the ascending node of Moon), Ketu (descending node of Moon),
Ganapati (lord of goblins), Senan! (son of i^iva and Parvati) (leader of the celestials against the demon Taraka), (god¬
desses) Candika, Uma (consort of Siva), Laksrai (consort of
Vi§nu), Sarasvatl (goddess of speech), Durga a form of Parvati),
Brahmam (consort of Brahma), the Rudras (forms of Siva,
eleven in number), (the celestials) Indra and others such as the
1. This and the preceding three are the four forms of lord Vi$9U.
2. This and the next four are the five forms of Siva.
3. Obviously a mistake for Sadytya denoting Sadyoj&ta.

Fire-god, serpents, Tark?ya (Eagle, vehicle of lord Visnu)
and other celestials dwelling in heavens, atmosphere and
earth be for my victory. Let them crush the enemies in the
battle after having accepted offerings (made by me). O
Gods ! I have sought your refuge together with sons, mother
and servants. Obeisance to you ! After going to the rear of the
enemies destroy them. I will offer more than that I have given
after returning from the battle”.
15-21. On the sixth day, the king should bathe for victory
just as the bath at the coronation. Lord Trivikrama (mani¬
festation of lord Visnu as a dwarf and taking three strides humi¬
liating king Bali) should be worshipped on the seventh (day),
the day of expedition. The weapons and vehicles should be
worshipped with the sacred syllables prescribed for nfrSjana
(rite of purification). The following sacred syllable should be
uttered (in the ear of the king) with the sounds of auspiciousness
and victory. ‘‘May the celestials dwelling in heaven, at¬
mosphere and earth be bestowers of longevity on you. May
the success of gods be attained by you. Let your (expedition)
be the expedition of gods. May all gods protect you”. After
having heard this, the king should proceed. After having taken
the bow together with the arrow with (the recitation of the sac¬
red syWdhXtydhamma^^ y (the king) should place his foot in the
direction of his enemy after having repeated (the sacred syllable)
tad visnoti^. (After having set) his right foot, he should place
thirty steps in different directions such as the east in due
order. He should duly climb the elephant., chariot, horse and
the animal carrying the burden. After having climbed he should
move on along with the sounds of musical instruments without
looking back. After having gone (a distance of) a kroSa (two or
two and a half miles) he should halt and worship gods and
brahmins. He should move to the foreign country protecting
his own arxTiy.
22-23. After having reached the alien country (enemy’s
domain) the king should protect the guardian (deity) of the
country. He should worship deities and should not destroy
their properties. He should not humiliate the natives of that
1. Gould not be identified.

Agni PurSna
country. After having returned to his metropolis again after
having gained victory, the king should worship gods and
tnake gifts. *
24-27. If there is a battle on the second day, the elephant,
horse etc. should be bathed and lord Nfsiritha (man-lion mani¬
festation of lord Visnu) should be worshipped. The royal in¬
signia such as the umbrella etc., weapons and the goblins (should
be worshipped) in the night. After having worshipped lord
Nrsirhha and all vehicles in the morning, (the king) should
see the sacrificial fire kindled by the priest. After having made
oblations into the fire, the king should worship brahmins.
After having taken the bow and arrow he should mount the ele¬
phant and move. He should walk in the country of the enemy
without being noticed (by anybody) (and find) the nature (of
the enemy). He should cause a small army of men spread
extensively.
28-35. A small army as the mouth of a needle can stand
against many. The arrangement of the army is of the
form of animals and things such as the garuia (the king of
birds), crocodile, circle, vulture, semi-circle, vajravyUha (a
strong impenetrable array), cart (shaped), the sarvato-hhadta
circular (array) and sUcivyuha (as a needle). An army in one
of the above arrays should be arranged in five parts — the two
composing its two principal wings, the two forming its sides to
protect the wings and the fifth one would be the main body.
A battle should be fought with one or two of the above parts.
The remaining three parts should be stationed only for their
protection. A king should never be in arrays. If the main
force is destroyed, (the whole army) will be routed. A king
should not himself fight. A king should remain at a kroSa (about
two or tw'o and a quarter miles), behind the army. It is said
that a broken army could be resustained by that. One’s stay
is not laid down if the main army has suffered a defeat. The
soldiers in the array should not be set up too close or too wide
apart, so that there may not be any clash of their weapons
mutually.
36-43. One who wants to break the hostile army should do
so only with collective strength. So also the enemy should pro¬
tect it from being broken with the collective strength. That
division of a hostile army among many divisions, should be.

first attacked and broken through (by the commander) as he
desires. O Brahmin ! There should be four soldiers to guard
each foot of an elephant. There should be four cavalry and an
equal number of armoured soldiers for guarding a chariot.
(There should be) an equal number of bow-men as the armoured
soldiers in front of the armoured soldiers in the battle. Behind
bow-men, the cavalry and the chariot-fighters and then the
soldiers mounted on elephants should be set up by a king.
He should look after the duties of the infantry, elephants and
horses with effort. Bold men should be placed in front. Only
a division of the army should be shown. Cowards should not be
placed in front because that would break the work of
driving away the enemy. The bold men remaining in the front
would enthuse cowards in the battle. Men of tall stature with
acquiline noses, not having squint eyes, with well-blended eye¬
brows, irascible, fond of quarrels, contented, happy and lustful
are known to be bold.
44-48. Carrying the wounded and the dead from the battle¬
field, offering water to the elephants in each war, bringing wea¬
pons (to the soldiers) are said to be the work of the soldiers.
Protecting their own army from the enemies desiring to break,
breaking the collected force (of the enemies) are the works
of armoured men. Making (the enemies) turn away from
battle is the task of bow-men. It is said that the chariot of a
wounded person should be led away to a distant place. It is stated
that the work of the chariot-warriors is to frighten the enemy
army. The duties of men mounted on elephants are to break
through the collected force of the enemy, to gather soldiers
got split in the army of the self and the destruction of walls,
arches, battlements and trees.
49. The ground for the infantry to fight is known to be
uneven and that for the cavalry and chariot as even. The battle¬
fields for the elephants are pointed out as wet.
50-55. After having arranged the arrays thus and having
the Sun behind and the Venus, Saturn, guardian deities of
the quarters and the gentle breeze being favourable, all the war¬
riors should be encouraged by repeating their names and the
(achievement of their) clans (and pointing out) gain of pros¬
perity on success and gain of heaven for the dead. After conquest
over the enemies one gets pleasures. There would be supreme

Agni Purdr^a
position for the dead. There is no way of requital for the food
taken from the master equal to (sacrificing in) the battle. They
would be washed of their sins as blood flows from the bold
warriors. The endurance of pain due to wounds is the
excellent penance. Thousands of celestial women attend on a
man killed in the battle. One’s master gets (the result of)
the deeds (done) by those who run away after being defeated (in
battle). It is said that such people get the fruits of killing
a brahmin at each one of their step. The gods would be lost for
one who deserts his companions in the battle-field.
56-60. It is said that the brave who do not retreat in
battle would get the benefit (of performing the sacrifice) of
oivamedha. If the king is righteous he would be victorious.
He should fight with men of equal valour. Men mounted. on
elephants should be fought by men mounted on elephants.
Retreating men, spectators, those not having weapons and those
that have fallen should not be killed. One should do treacherous
warfare when one is fatigued, sleeping, is crossing half the river
or forest and on bad days. Raising up arms one should cry
that the enemies have been defeated. “We have got the ally
with abundant strength. The king (of the enemy forces) and
the commander have been slain or the (hostile) king had retreat¬
ed.” One may kill easily the retreating warriors.
61. O One well- versed in righteousness ! incense that
stupefies the enemies should be burnt. The banners and other
paraphernalia and the musical instruments making frightening
sounds should be made use of.
62-65. After having gained victory in the battle, one should
worship gods and brahmins. In a battle won by the minis¬
ter, the gems (acquired by the minister) should be made over
to the king. The wives of a defeated king would not belong to
anyone else (but to that defeated king). The wives of the de¬
feated king should be protected (by the conquering king).
A king should honour a hostile king defeated in the battle and
treat him as his own son. He should not fight with him again.
He should honour the customs and manners (of that country) .
Then after having entered his native country, he should enter
the palace when a fixed star is ruling. He should worship
the deities etc. and protect the families of warriors. He should
divide the booty got from the battle among hi?^#crvants. The

procedure for commencing a military expedition has thus been
described to you. It gives sure success for the king.
CHAPTER TV/O HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN
A hymn in praise of goddess ^ri {Laksmi) for the sake of success
Puskara said :
1. Indra made the prayer to (the goddess Sri (Lakstnl)
in days of yore for securing the kingdom. A king should simi¬
larly do that prayer for the sake of victory.
Indra said :
2. 1 make obeisance to the mother of all worlds, that is
born of the ocean, the (goddess) Sri (Fortune), that has eyes
like the lotus that is waking up after sleep and that penon dwell¬
ing on the chest of lord Visnu.
3-4, O Goddess ! You are the success. You are
the Svadha (food olfered to the manes), the Svaha (obla¬
tions). You are ambrosia. (You are) the purifier of the
world. You are the twilights, night, lustre, wealth, memory,
faith and Sarasvati (the goddess of speech). (You are)
the sacrificial knowledge, supieme knowledge and secret knowl¬
edge. O Auspicious one ! O Goddess ! You are the knowl¬
edge of the soul and the conferer of the benefit of emancipation.
5. You are the metaphysics, the three Vedas and the science
of administration. O Goddess 1 The Beautiful ! This has been
filled by your beautiful worldly forms.
6. O Goddess i Who else other than you would rest in
the body composed of all sacrifices of the mace-wielding
Lord N^ayaha, the god of gods whom the yogins contemplate.
7. O Goddess 1 All the three worlds were forsaken by
you and the Earth was almost lost and resuscitated by you now.
8. O Most Fortunate One ! Men would always get
wives, sons, house, fidends, grains, wealth etc. on account of your
glances.
9. O Goddess 1 It is not impossible for men seen by your

PurO^
glances to get beauty, health, fortune, destruction of the enemy
beside happiness.
10. You are the mother of all beings; and Lord
Hari (Visnu), the god of gods, is the father. O Mother J
This world of movable and immovable beings is pervaded by
you and lord Vi§nu.
11-12. O Purifier of all ! Do not forsake honour,
treasury, granary, house, attendants, body and wife. One resting
on the cltest of lord Vi§nu ! Do not desert children, circle
of friends, cows and ornaments.
13. O Spotless one ! Those men forsaken by you would
be forsaken at once by nobility, truth, purity and other qualities
such as good conduct.
14. Men seen by you would atonce be endowed with ail
qualities such as good conduct, the fortune of good family
etc. even though they be without good qualities.
15. O Goddess ! Whoever is seen by you would be praise¬
worthy, possessing good qualities, fortunate, belonging to a good
family, wise, valiant and victorious.
16. O Consort of lord Visnu ! The Sustainer of the
universe ! All qualities sucii as good conduct shed their
excellence at once in men fi’om whom you have turned your
face.
1 7. Even the tongue of Braluna is not capable of describing
your qualities. O Goddess I.otus-eycd ! Be gracious. Never
forsake us.
Pufkara said :
18-19. Being thus adored, (goddess) ^>ri (Lak§mi) conferr¬
ed on Indra the desired boon (such as) firmness of sover¬
eignty and success in the battle etc. It confers enjoyment and
emancipation on those reciting or hearing the hymn. Hence one
should always read and listen to the hymn on (goddess) Sri
(Lak^ml).

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT
The ethics narrated by Rdma
Agni said :
1. 1 have narrated the ethics told by Fu$kara. Listen.
I shall now narrate the ethics narrated by Rama to Laksma^a for victory and that would increase piety etc.
Rdma said :
2. Wealth should be acquired by rightful means. It should
be developed and guarded. It should be given to a deserv¬
ing person. These are the four obligatory acts of a king.
3. Humility is the cause of statesmanship. Humility is the
resultant of determination from scriptures as well as the
control of senses. The king should guard the earth endowed
with these.
4-5. Scriptures, knowledge, fortitude, dexterity, proficiency,
reticence, energy, eloquence, generosity, endurance at the time
of distress, greatness, purity, amity, renunciation, truthfulness
gratitude, good family, good conduct, self-control are the qua¬
lities for gaining fortune.
6. The elephant (in the form) of senses running uncon¬
trolled in the forest of diverse pleasures should be controlled
with the goad of knowledge.
7. A king should give up the aggregate of six things,
namely, lust, anger, greed, delight, pride and arrogance. The
king who rejects these would be happy.
8. A king being endowed with modesty should contemplate
on metaphysics, the three Vedas^ emissary and polity with those
well-versed in these and those practising them.
9. The knowledge about true nature of things is got
through metaphysics. Virtue and vice rest on the three Vedas,
Material prosperity and misfortune depend on emissary and
justice and injustice on polity.
10. Abstaining firom lulling or causii^ injury to beings,
courteom language, truthfulness, purity, kindness, and forbear¬
ance are the general virtues of the religious students.
1 1-13. One should show companion to all beings and prac¬
tise codes of conduct. Courteous words, compassion, charity
and protection of one that has sought refuge are the acts o£ good

Agni Purd^
people agreeable to pious men. Which king would do impious
acts for the sake of the body that is encompassed by misery and
disease and that is liable to get destroyed today or tomorrow ?
One should not oppress the poor people desiring his own happiness.
14-15. A poor man being oppi'essed kills the king by means
of his anger. A king desiring his own good should conduct
with more humility than that shown to a respectful kinsman
with folded palms. One should always speak only in a pleasing
manner to friends and foes.
16. Those who speak pleasingly arc gods and those who
speak harsh are animals. One should always worship gods
with cleanliness and get purified with piety.
17-18. The preceptors (should be respected) as gods
and friends as one’s own selves. The preceptor (should be
pleased) by bowing down, fhe favourable pious men (should
be pleased) by doing true gestures and services. The gods
(should be pleased) by good deeds. A friend should be attract¬
ed by courteousness and kinsmen by showing respect.
19-22. The wife and servants (should be pleased respecti¬
vely) by (showing) affection and (making) gifts. The rest of the
people (should be won) by (showing) compassion. Not reviling
the acts of others, maintaining to do one’s duties, kindness to¬
wards the poor, sweet words towards all, helping a true friend
even by (sacrificing one’s) life, receiving warmly the person
that has come to the house, making a gift (according) to one’s
ability, forbearance, absence of pride in prosperity, not jealous
at other’s prosperity, not speaking words hurting (the feelings of)
others, practising the vow of silence, maintaining the bondage
with kinsmen, keeping even attitude towards one’s own men
and taking actions conducive to welfai'e are the acts of
greatmen.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE
The duties of a king
R&ma said :
1. The king, ministry, kir^dcHn, fort, treasury, army and
allies helpful to one another are said to be the seven aonstituents
of a kingdom,.

2-16. The sovereignty is the most important means of a
kingdom. It should hence always be protected. Gk>od descent,
good conduct, (young in) years, good quality, compassion,
quick action, consistency, truthfulness, service to the aged,
gratefulness, being fortunate, intellect, possessing an unwicked
retinue, able to exhibit his valour, faithtulness, forcsightedness
zeal, purity, generosity, modesty and virtuousness are the quali¬
ties of a pious man and a king. A king, seeking his o.vn good,
should make those belonging to a good family his attendants,
be not cruel, but capable of winning the people and pure. A
king should be eloquent, confident, possessing good memory,
distinguished, strong, self-controlled, a leader, well-versed in polity
and the different branches of fine arts, capable of facing an
attack, capable of remedying all evils, one wiio knows the move¬
ments of hostiles, one who knows tlie principles of peace¬
making and war; capable of knowing the secret counsels (of the
hostiles), knower of opportune time and place, one that takes
goods in the proper way and distributes to the proper person,
free from wrath, greed, fear, doing evil, liaughtiness and fickle¬
ness, free from harassing others, calumny, jealousy, envy and
untruth, fortunate (in getting) the counsel of the aged, able,
showing his amiable manners and one tliat is fond of good
qualities which are known to confer prosperity. Men of
noble descent, virtuous, brave, learned, attached, those who
would implement the rules of punislunent sliould be the
ministers of the king. The minister should moreover be having
good physique, a native of the country, belonging to a good fa¬
mily, endowed with good conduct and knowledge in arts,
eloquent, courageous, possessing good eye-sight, enthusiasm,
discrimination, devoid of rigidity and hcklemindedness, friendly,
capable of enduring hardship, virtuous, possessing (the qualities,
of) truthfulness, good nature, firmness, perseverence, dignity,
good health, able, having retentive memory, firm devotion (to
the king) and not creating enmity (with other kings). Good
memory, good £q>plication of the mind conducive to gain, deci¬
sive knowledge, firmness and guarding the secret counsels are
the virtues of a minister. The royal priest should be profiicient
in the Vedas and codes of punishment.
17-23. The priest should do the expiatory and welfareyieldu^ rites as laid down in Atiusrvaveda, The wise king

Agni Pur^a
should examine the fitness of these ministers with the help of
experts. The two qualities of having a clear sight and skill should
be examined. He should know about the family and the integ>
rity from his own people. The three qualities — ability in service,
knowledge and endurance should be examined. So also the
boldness, and their pleasure in conversation should be known.
Their eloquence, truthfulness, enthusiasm, greatness, endurance
for hardship, firmness, loyalty and steadiness in distress should be
noted. The king should know their devotion, friendship and
honesty from their conduct. Likewise their strength, good nature,
health, good conduct, not being fickleminded and not exhibiting
their enmity (should be known) from their companions. Their
gentleness and meanness should be known (from their aets)
in his presence. Everywhere the virtues of them (practised)
not in his presence should be gauged from results.
24-25. A region having good crops, meritorious, endowed
with minerals, beneficial for cows, having plenty of water
having holy cities, enchanting, abounding in elephants, having
water courses and not depending on rains is commended for
abundant prospeiity.
26-27. It should abound with iudras^ artisans and mer¬
chants and have great enterprises and agriculturers. (It should
abound with men) fondly attached (to the king), hating the
hostile king, capable of enduring hardship. It should contain
people who have come from different countries and who are
pious, possessing cattle and strength. Such a country is commend¬
ed. The head should be wise and not addicted to any vice.
28-30. The fortress should be built on hills having a river
or desert or forest (as a boundary) covering a large area and
having a deep moat, high walls and gateways. The fort should
contain water, grains and treasures to stand a long sic^e. Those
surrounded by water, mountain, forest, desert and archers are
six (kinds of forts )^. The forts should be replete with choice
things, righteously acquired since the time of forefathers that
would stand a heavy drain for the furtherance of righteousness
etc.
31-37. (The servants should be descendants) of their fore¬
fathers’ (servants), subservient, salaried, known for their valour,
1. It mentions only five names.

belonging to a good family, able, possessing knowledge about
omens. (The army of the king shoald be) armed with different
kinds of weapons, conversant with different types of warfare,
possessing varied kinds of warriors, having horses and ele¬
phants duly sanctified, which lias endured hardships in battle
and sufferings in expeditions etc. Those who administer justice
should be undivided and mostly drawn from the k^atriya com¬
munity. One tliat is proficient in yoga^ good-natured, possess¬
ing a strong army, conversing affectionately, able to wait pati¬
ently for the outcome, not divided and belonging to a good
family should be befriended. Approaching from a distance,
uttering words having clear meanmg and agreeable to the heart
and doing good deeds are the tliree ways of acquiring friendship.
One gets tixrce kinds of fruits such as piety, enjoyment
and prosperity tlirougii the friend, fhe son of a friend, a newly
acquired Ificnd, an ancestral friend and one protected from
distress are known to be the four kinds of friends. Truthfulness
and other things and similar pleasure and pain arc the qualities
in the friend.
3d-4i. I sliall describe the conduct of those who serve (the
king) . A seivaut should serve the king (to the best of his ability).
Ability, good disposition, firmness, forbearance, ability to
endure hardship, liappincss, good conduct, enthusiasm are
ornaments tor tire servants. A servant should serve the king to
the best of iiis ability for the agreed period.* He should give up
visiting the plaee of enemies, doing cruel acts, haughtiness
and jealousy. A servant should not exchange harsh words
with fiis superiors. He should not publicise the confidential
matters and the secret councils of his master. He should desire
the prosperity of the affectionate king. He should desert a king
that is not affectionate.
42. Dissuading the king from doing evil deeds and
persuading him to do good deeds (are said to be) the good con¬
duct in brief for the relatives, friends and servants.
43-45. The king, like the god of rain, should be sustainer
of ail good. He would take a part of the earnings from the sources
of one’s earning. He should employ efficient men to be in charge
of all deeds. A good king should protect e^ht things such
as agriculture, trade, fort, bridge, elephant stable, mines.

$22 Agni Purdm
ocean (the source of gems) and the abodes of the downcast
and thus follow a good code of conduct.
46. There is danger for the subjects from the (following)
five sources such as the soldiers, thieves, subjects, king’s officers
and the greed of the king.
47. The king should take tax after having taken note of
this danger at the proper time. He has to protect his own body
and the external body, the kingdom.
48. He should punish those deserving punisliment and
protect himself from poison as well as his wives and sons from
the enemies. He should never trust them.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTY
The six expedients used by a king
Rdma said :
1-5. A king should think mainly about the circle of twelve
kings. The enemy, friend, ally of an enemy, ally of an ally, ally
of an ally of the enemy are known to be at the front of the con¬
queror. An enemy in the rear, a king whose kingdom lies next
but one, the allies of these two is the circle (of kings) of a king
desiring to conquer. One who is beyond the enemy and the
invader is the neutral. One is a master in favouring the united
and the suppression of the divided. One who is beyond this
circle of kings and possessing a greater strength is known to be
a neutral. One is a lord in favouring the allies and the annihilalation of the divided. I shall describe the treaty, battle, vehicle,
seat etc.
6-9. One should make a treaty with the strongly opposed
for one’s welfare. Treaties are said to be sixteen — kapdla, upakdra,
santdna, sangata, upanydsa, pratikdra, sarftyoga, purufdntara, adfffa^
naray ddi^ta, dtmmt upagrahat parikramay cMnna, paradOfarjui and
skandhopaneya. Reciprocally beneficial, mutual amity, being
related to each other apd makii^ presents (as token of ^iendshlp)
are the four principal treaties.

10-14. One should not make treaties with the twenty
people such as a child, an old man, one ill since a long time, an
excommunicated relative, a coward, cowardly people, greedy
people, one who has renounced the world, one excessi¬
vely fond of worldly things, one devising many schemes, a
despiser of gods and brahmins, an ill-fated one, one who
speaks ill of fate, one suffering from famine, one having a dis¬
contented army, one having many enemies within the country
and one who had become free in course of time and one
swerved from adhering to truth and virtuous life. They should
always be fought. A war is the result of mutual offence of
men (hostile kings).
15-18. One aspiring the prosperity for himself, one being
oppressed by another and one having favourable position,
time and strength should begin war. Taking possession of
kingdom, women, suzerainty, knowledge and strength, pride,
honour, loss of fortune, destruction of knowledge, one’s soul force
and the virtue, that is due fate, dishonour on account of a friend,
the destruction of a relative, cessation of the favour of (natu¬
ral) elements, disturbance among the circle of monarchs, intense
attachment for the sake of one are the causes for hostility.
19-24. Enmity is said to be of five kinds — through the co¬
wife, on account of one’s abode, on account of wife, that
arising from one’s expression and that due to an offence. It should
be amended by (suitable) expedients. A king should not engage
in any of the following sixteen kinds of war, such as giving
meagre result, yielding absolutely nil result, of uncertain result,
that vitiating the existing order, proving fruitless in the long run
that which affects in the long run and the existing order, with
an army mobilised by enemy whose strength is not known, being
undertaken for the sake of an ally or for the (recovery of a)
woman or that (lasting) for a long time, or with brahmins,
with one equipped with an untimely providence, with (an
enemy) supported by a mighty friend, when it yields some result
only at that moment but with no fruit in the long run and that
which bears fruit in the long nm but no benefit at that very
moment. A king should undertake a task that would bear fruit
at that moment and also in the long run.
25*32. One should yfikgc war when one’s forces arc happy
and strong and the enemy forces are of contrary nature. One

Agni Purina
should commence a battle when the friend, an ally and a neigh¬
bouring king are firmly attached to him and that of tho enemy
is the contrary. A military expedition is said to be of five kinds
by experts such as an open foe, as an ally (If one of the comba¬
tants), as united force, as occasional and remaining neutral.
Like the expedition, halt is also of five kinds according
to the ability of mutually (combating forces) of the enemy
and the invader. One should infiirm his arrival to (the com¬
mander of) the stronger of the two opposing forces remaining
without taking the side of either of them and like the eye of the
crow remain un-noticed. One should join the stronger one
when the hostilities begin. When both of them suspect his feign¬
ed neutrality and would dislike the engagement, one should
himself attack the enemy that is more antagonistic. When a
king with his army is routed by the powerful enemy and does not
find a strategy, he should practise truthfulness and noble virtues
of the ancestors. He should visit the powerful ally frequently,
stay by his side, view things as he does and show gratitude for
the support extended. The code of conduct for those seeking
refuge has been heard.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYONE
The four means conciliation etc.
R&ma said :
1. The power of counsel is commended than the power of
greatness and enthusiasm. Kavya (Sukra), the preceptor of
demons), possessing greatness and enthusiasm was conquered
by the priest of the celestials (Bfhaspati).
2-4. One should not have a counsel with untrustworthy
and foolish persons. How can a scheme that is impossible to
begin be made to bear the fruit without toil. A counsel is
laid down as of five kinds — knowledge of the unknown, ascertain¬
ment of that known (already), removal of doubt relating to an
ambiguous matter in politics, (determination) of the right time

and place of action and helpful means, and remedial measures
against misfortunes.
5. The marks of success in the acts are the cheerfulness of
the mind, faith, efficiency of* the means, aid and effort.
6. Pride, negligence, lust, prattling in sleep and enjoying
pleasures with the beloved women break the secret counsel.
7-13. A person who is bold, having good memory, eloquent
well-versed in the (wielding of) weapons and in the sciences,
and one accustomed with the work deserves to become a messen¬
ger of the king. A messenger is said to be of three types such as one
that discharges duty efficiently, one that does moderately and
one who just conveys the message. (Each one of the succeed¬
ing one) is inferior by a quarter based on the ability (of the
respective ones). One should not enter the city of the enemy
and his assembly without having (previous) acquaintance.
One should abide the right time and should fall upon (the
enemy) after knowing (the opportune moment). One should
know the weakness of the enemy as well as his treasury, friends
and strength. He should also know the likes and dislikes from
the looks and gestures (of the enemy). (An enemy) should
make four-fold eulogies of both the sides (i.e. the master and the
enemy). He should live with good spies having the guise of
ascetics. An ambassador would be an open spy. A spy in dis¬
guise is of two kinds. Spies would be in the guise of a mer¬
chant, agriculturer or mendicant and the like. When the effort
of the messenger has become fruitless, the king should attack the
distressed enemy. One should take into account the natural
calamity (that has befallen the enemy) and fall upon him.
14-24, Because it destroys the good fbrtime on account of
bad policy it is said to be misfortune. Conflagration, water,
diseases (epidemics), famine and hell are the five calamities
due to divine agency. The rest are due to human agency. The
misfortune due to divine agency should be subdued by means
of human effort and appeasing rites. The misfortune due to
human agency should be removed by means of expedients based
on the rightful living. Deliberation, the reaping of the fruits
of deliberation, following a course of action for future contin¬
gencies, the income and expenditure of the state, enforcing
laws, the prevention of (the encroachment by) the enemy,
(taking) remedial steps for the calamity and the protection of

Agni Purd^a
kingdom and the king are the duties of a minister. Hence
one beset with misfortune would ruin kingdom. G61d, grain,
clothes and vehicle would be through the subjects. In the same
way other things (are got through the subjects). If the subjects
are having misfortune (all the above) are destroyed. Citizens
of the city etc. help to protect subjects having misfortune as
well as the treasury and law if it is sought. (The duties of feuda¬
tory chiefs) arc to put down disturbance, help the sovereign
in war, protection of people and taking note of the allies and
foes, A king would perish on account of the fault of the vassals
and suffer misfortune. Treasure enables a king to pay his servants,
to win him friends and subjects, to aid the purposes of virtue and
desire, to attend to the renovation of forts. If that is having
misfortune, it would ruin the king. The king is dependent
on the treasury. The enforcement of law is a means to create
friends and foes, to acquire land and gold, to conquer enemies,
to accomplish a work quickly that would take long time. If
that is affected it would ruin the king. An ally would collect
together allies, destroy the enemy and help him with money
etc. If that is affected, that would destroy the king.
25-27, The king having a vice would destroy the affairs
of the state. The vices of a king are the use of harsh words, (inflic¬
ting) cruel punishment, wasteful spending of revenue, drink¬
ing, (excessive enjoyment of the company of) women, hunting
and gambling. Idleness, obstinacy, pride, intelligence and dupli
city are the defects of a minister as already pointed out. Drought
and epidemics etc. are the misfortunes of a country.
28. Shattered machines, walls and ditches not equipped
with weapons and possessing a depleted army are the defects of
a fort.
29. One nearly drained, not filled regularly, not being
accounted, not accumulated, made waste and situated at a far
off place are the defects in treasury.
30-33. Being obstructed, scattered, not honoured, dis¬
respected, not existing, afflicted with disease, tired, arrived from
a distant place, newly recruited, much reduced, disappointed,
repulsed much, abound with hopes and disgust, deceived, having
wives, having grievance within, break in the supply of pro¬
visions of different kinds, the base being made vttid, divided by

the hostile (king), deprived of a leader and bribed by the hostile
king at the rear are said to be the defects of an army.
34. An ally suffering adverse fate, attacked by the enemy
forces, having lust, rage etc. and energy would be (considered
as) an enemy.
35-41. Lavish spending of money, inflicting harsh words
and punishment on account of anger, due to lust, hunting,
gambling, drinking and women (are the vices of a king). Harsh
words create the estrangement in the world and havoc. Punish¬
ment is a means (to achieve) things difficult to accomplish. A
king should remove it with care. A king that inflicts punishment
and harsh words would agitate the subjects. The agitated sub¬
jects resort to the enemy. Multiplication of enemies would be
for your destruction. A wasteful expenditure of wealth to a
greater extent in order to defile one is said to be extravagance in
spending by the learned in political science. By drinking one
becomes ignorant, by hunting one gets destroyed by the enemy.
One should wander in the forest that is guarded doing hunting
in order to remove hardships due to victory. The destruc¬
tion of virtues^ wealth, life and quarrels etc. would be on
account of gambling. Delay and affliction to virtue and wealth
would result from the defect of association with women. On
account of the vice of drinking (there would be) destruction of
life, indecision relating to things to be done and not to be done.
42-46. One who knows the (mode of) laying the capital
and the opportune moments would conquer the enemy. The
dwelling of the king alongwith the treasury should be in the
midst of the royal capital. The artisans, friends, unhostile fores¬
ters and the main division of the army should be placed surround¬
ing the royal dwelling. The army should be placed ready at a
corner imder the lead of the commander. They should roam
about the quadrangular points in a circle during the nights.
Information relating to one’s self should be known (dirough
spies) moving about the borders (of the country). All should
leave and enter the city being noticed. The seven (political)
expedients such as conciliation, gift, dissension, punishment
indUffera«:e, cotyuring and deceit should be instituted fcM* accom¬
plishing them.
47-51 Conciliation is of four kinds such as the esepression
of gratitude, recollection of the relationship between one another.

Agni Purdiffa
use of soft words and seeing and submission of the self with the
words “I am yours”, when (the other person) had cdhie. The
making of a gift of wealth to one that has come (is of three kinds
such as) excellent, medium and inferior. The making of a gift
is of five kinds (such as) giving back (the gift), accept¬
ing (the gift) received, making a novel gift, accepting a gift
by his own choice, giving and returning. Dissension is
of three kinds by experts knowing dissension (such as) destroy¬
ing amity, creating a thrill of fear, inducing dissension between
the two. Punishment is of three kinds (such as) killing, confis¬
cating the property, and imposing hardship.
52-53. (Punishment is also of two other kinds such as)
public and secret. The public enemies (should be punished)
in public. In cases in which the people would get agitated by
killing in public, (killing by poisoning) the food is commended.
The enemies (of the public should be killed) by employing
special black rites or with weapons etc. A member of the
brahmin community alone should not be killed even after being
under control after conciliation.
54-58. A good person should do conciliation (speaking)
sweet words as if besmearing the heart, looking (at the person)
as if feasting and taking in his form as if ambrosia. One duped
with false hopes, desirous (of getting) wealth, one being invited
and insulted, one having contempt for the king, one superseded
in honour, one thinking much about his virtue, one whose virtue,
desire and riches have been cut off, one that is angry, one having,
self-respect, insulted, one rejected without any cause, appeased
even though had enmity, one whose wealth and wife have been
taken, one deserving to be honoured but not honoured and such
men permanently remaining in the enemy camp and are to be
suspected should be divided.
59-62. (A king) should honour those that have come
(from the enemy side) with presents and pacify those on his own
side. Winning affection by conciliatory measures, showing
threats, and honouring and buying the allegiance of principal
men are stated to be the means for dissension. One having a
frustrated ally is ruined like the timber eaten by an insect. (A

king) possessing the three kinds of regal power^ and one who
knows the proper place and time should subjugate his enemies
by (means of) force. The ruler of a neighbouring country who
is favourably disposed should be pacified in the event of his
being befriended by mighty allies. The greedy and poor (should
be won) by making a gift. Other friends (should be won by
pointing out) danger from others. The wicked (should be won)
by threats of punishment and the sons, brothers and others by
conciliatory measures. The chieftains of the army, the warriors
(and) the heads of provinces (should be controlled), the
vassals and foresters by making gifts and (causing) dissension
(among themselves). The offenders (should be put down)
by (means of) dissension and punishment.
63-68. After having propitiated the images of gods the male
should dress as the female and illusions should be made by men
such as the forms of goblins, meteors, monsters and vixens,
assuming the desired form, showering of weapons, fire, stones
and water, (and showing) the divine phenomena such as dark¬
ness, wind, fire, and cloud. Bhima (one of the Pan<^avas) killed
Klcaka"' (son of king of Vira(a) assuming the form of a woman.
It is said to be indifference when one does not dissuade another
from unfair battle or plight just as Hidimba (the demoness that
married Bhima) remained indifferent towards his brother (when
he was fighting with Bhima). Indrajala (stratagem) such as
clouds, darkness, rain, fire, mountain, wonders, the banners of
a large army causing fright and mirage-like picture of being tom
and spread should be shown in order to frighten the enemies.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO
Statesmanship for a king
RSma said :
1-6. After having worshipped gods and arranging six
divisions of the army (the king) should march against the
enemy. (The six divisions of the army are) the central force,
the front, the rear, the auxiliary, hostile and the pioneer.
1. These are the supreme position of the king, the strength of a good
council and energy.

Agni PurS^a
Each (division) of ihe (above) forces are more important (than
the succeeding ones). (The same holds good in the case of)
reverses also. The commander-in-chief should go to such
places as the rivers, mountains, forests and forts wherever there
may be danger, with the army in array consisting of six divi¬
sions, machines, treasury, foot-soldiers, cavalry, chariots and
elephants. The leader (of the forces) should march at its head
being surrounded by best warriors. The queen, king, treasury
and the excellent warriors of the army should be placed in the
middle. The cavalrymen (should be) on the two sides, the
chariots by the side of the cavalry and the elephants by the side
of the chariots. The pioneer forces (should be by the side) of
the elephants. Then the commander-in-chief should go slowly
behind all with a fully equipped army encouraging the dejected.
7-13. A marching army should be set in (the array of) a
crocodile and in (the array of) a hawk with raised wings or a
sQci or viravaktra^ in case of danger in the front. In case of fear
behind, (an array in the form of) the cart (should be made).
(In case of fear) on the sides, (an array) known as vajra (should
be made). If there is ’danger on all sides one should set up
(the array known as) sarvatobhadra. (A commander) should
guard his army (while passing through) a cave, mountain forest,
river and dense forest. (He should also guard) when the army
has to go a long way, when it is tired, when it suffers hunger,
thirst or adversity, when it is affected by ill-health, famine and
epidemics, when attacked by robbers. (He should also protect
the army) from marshy land, dust storm and watery place. He
should see that they are neither scattered nor gathered together
on the way. (He should also guard them) while sleeping, eating
their food, while staying at an unfit place, when they are not
well-placed, when they have been scared by robbers, fire and
fear and when they have been struck by rains and wind. When
the army of the enemy (is in a similar position) it should be
struck. One should have an open encounter (with an enemy)
only when the grounds and time are favourable and one is
strong. On the contrary (one should do) treacherous warfare.
When they (enemies } are attacking, the bewildered should be
killed.
1 . Types of arrangement of the army.

14-17. (An enemy) on another’s soil (could be won) from
staying in one’s own soil. (An enemy) in one’s own soil (could
be won) by means of sowing seeds of dissension. (An enemy)
subject to the wrath of his people should be made captive by
employing the foresters and others and killed. They can also be
conquered by employing extremely brave warriors. (One may
also employ) dissension, bribe or (may) draw away. By appear¬
ing in front of (the enemy) the king would become a sure object
of their aim. T^en (the enemy) should be killed by extremely
brave warriors by striking swiftly with a strong force. Brave
warriors could be set in an array in front or at the back (and
the enemy) could be killed. It has been explained by these
two (methods) as to how to attack the two enemies on the adja¬
cent sides in a treacherous warfare. If the front part (of the
hostile army) is in an unfavourable land, the rear portion
should be attacked swiftly.
18-22. If the front and rear are both unfavourable (one
should strike) on the sides in the same way. After having fought
with the vanguards, allies (of the enemy) and the pioneers,
one should attack the fatigued, slow and the one whose aid has
been cut off without causing fatigue for his force. In the alter¬
native, one should defeat by emploiyng the pioneer force or the
allies. Or, one should feign defeat and attack, (the enemy) that
is complacent that he has won by resorting to good counsel.
One should destroy the enemy force when it is restii^ in the
camps, barracks, villages, fields and among subjects without
protection. Otherwise the cattle of the enemy should be
seized and then the army on their Way to reach the goal. Or
the hostile army fatigued on account of overnight vigil fearing
an attack and sleeping during the day overcome by sleep should
be attacked (to gain victory).
23-27. In the alternative (a hostile army) sleeping during
the night without any fear (should be attacked) by (employing)
elephants or with men armed with swords. The functions of
(men on) elephants are proceeding in front of the marching
army, entry into forest fortification, division of the united (hos¬
tile) army, collecting together a divided army, causing right,
breaking the doors (of the fort) and the protection o£ the trea¬
sury. Division of an undivided army and effecting the union
of fiiendly forces are the task of (the men on) chariots. The

Agni Purd^
functions of cavalry are to reconnoitre the forests, different
directions and the highway, guard the transport of provisions,
follow the retreating army, attend to tasks requiring quick
action, follow the weak and attack the last columns and rear
(of the hostile army). (The functions) of infantry are to
bear always the weapons, inspecting the camps and the high¬
ways and to remove (obstructions).
28-33. The ground (suitable) for infantry should not
be very uneven or abound with thick rows of trees, ant hills,
bushes and thorns and should have (provision for) escape. The
ground (suitable) for cavalry should have scanty trees, should
be quickly traversible, firm, without sand and not be marshy
and have (provision for) escape. The ground (suitable) for the
chariot should not have trees, fields, mire, trees causing obstruc¬
tion, creepers and mire. The ground for the elephant are hills
difficult to cross having streams. (A king should march) setting
the army in an array consisting of different (segments) such as
chest etc. It is known as the rear of the army. It is capable
of serving the needs of the king. An array not having this (the
division) would appear as if it has been segmented. A wise
king desiring to conquer should not fight without having (the
array with) the divisions. The treasury would remain with the
king. A kingship would be suzerainty over the treasure,
34-48, The soldiers should be paid (rewards) on gaining
victory. It is not proper to give only a little. A lakh (should be
given) on the death of (the enemy) king and half that when the
son of that king is killed. Similarly (the soldiers) should be
paid when the (enemy) commander-in-chief is killed or at the
killing of the elephant etc. Otherwise (the soldiers) should
fight in such a way that the infantry, cavalry, (men on) chariots
and elephants do not get affected when the battle has been com¬
pleted. (The soldiers) should fight without confusion. Con¬
fusion causes melee. One should employ an elephant in battles
causing great confusion. Three infantry soldiers would be equal
to fight a cavalryman. Three such cavalrymen should be em¬
ployed (to combat) a single elephant (man).. Fifteen infantry
men would guard (each) foot (of the elephant). It is laid down
that an arrangement known as an anl^a (a unit) of the elephants
should be made for (guarding) the chariot.^ There should be
nine elephant men. The vulnerable point of such an army is

said to be of five kinds. An array should be set by this division
of the army. The chest, sides and wings are said to be
(three) divisions. An array is said to have seven parts such
as the chest, sides, wings, centre, back (hip), rear and the edge
by those well acquainted with (the arrangement of) arrays. The
array (called) guru consists of chest, sides and wings together
with the rear. That of hJcra is devoid of two sides. The
commanders should remain being surrounded by excellent war¬
riors. They should fight without any faction defending one
another. Excellent warriors of the army (should be) at the
centre. A commander (of an army) is the life of a battle. It
would be destroyed if it is without a commander. The powerful
elephants should be placed at the chest (of an array), the chariots
on the sides and horses on the wings. This array is said to be
breaking the central force. An army of horses at the centre, an
army of chariots on the sides and an army of elephants on the
wings is known to be an array of breaking the inner (force) .
Station the cavalry in the place of chariots, the infantry in
the place of cavalry (in the above order) or place elephants
everywhere in the array in the absence of chariots. (There is
another view). If there is more than the required army it is
said to be dbadha.
49-59. (An array called) bhoga consists of arranging (the
army) in concentric circles. (An array called) dan^a is of many
kinds. (I shall describe them) to you. Listen. (An array)
spread horizontally would be (called) dan4a. (The array called)
bhoga is in the form of a wave. (The array called) man^ala
(would be) in perfect circle. The asarhhata (class) (would be)
in concentric circles. (The other arrays such as) the pradara,
dfdhakuy asahj/a, capa^ kukfi, pratiffhay supratiffhay fyenUy vijayay
saHjayCy vUdlUy vijaya, sSciy sthSndkar^ camUmukhay sarpdsya and
valaya are all invincible and modifications of (the array called)
doiida. They have the following characteristics — extending
on both sides, extending on one side, extending in one wing,
extending on both wings, three others of the contrary nature.
(The array) pratiftha extends on the wing and chest (and) the
other suprati^pia is the contrary. (The arrays called)
pak^a and dhemu^ pokfOy doisthib/fa and da^ia after that (are of)
doubled units at the end or an additional wing or of the reverse
of another. They should be known to have the characteristics

Agni Purdtfa
of two or four columns of soldiers in order. (The arrays known
as) gomUtrikdf ahisaHcSri, iakafa and makara are said to be Varia¬
tions of the (array) bhoga. So also (the array called) pHripldvaA^
gaka. (The array called) yugorasya (consists of) two wings in
(the array) dania. (The array of the form of) cart is contrary to
that. (The array of the name) crocodile is of mixed nature.
(The array) k^a (is marked) by the rows of elephants. (The
arrays) sarvatobhadra and durjaya are the modifications of the
array (called) mandoXa. That which has openings on all sides is
the first one and that having the eight army units is the second
one. (The arrays known as) ardhacandrcdca (of the shape of half
the moon) and urdhv&nga (elevated parts) (arc formed) by
the combinations of (different) divisions of (the class known
as) the vajra. In the same way (the arrays known as) karkaSrngi
(the pincers of a crab), kdkapdda (the feet of a crow) and godhikd
(lizard) are known from their difference in shape (consisting) ,
of three, four and five units of army.
60-67. Seventeen kinds of arrays could be formed from the
(array called) danda- Two from the mai^d^^o (class), six from the
asanghata and five from the bhoga (are combined) in a battle.
(The structures of the abovesaid battle arrays) may be modified
by omitting a wing or two wings. Otherwise (a squadron)
may be taken from the chest (of the army) and placed around
the edges. After having attacked the boundary army in the front
with the army forming the wings, one should strike the army at
the hip with (the army at) the boundaries and attack with that
comprising the chest. The routed soldiers of a hostile army as
well as the reserves should be completely destroyed and one s
own should be expanded. The main part (of the hostile army )
should be attacked with double that of the main and the reserve
f orce (of the hostile army) with the main. A compact (hostile)
army should be scattered with a strong contingent of elephants.
If (the hostile army) is (in the array) dandaka with the flanks,
wings and chest (drawn up) then (a general) should employ
the (array) danda and quickly show the position. (The array
called) pradSraka would be by the addition of two wings to the
danda. If it is added with wings and flanks it is known as drdha.
The array that is increased by (addii^) two flanks is known to
be asahya. The (array) kfUUaka (consists of) keeping 4;he flanks
and wir^ down and attacking with the troops at the chest.

68-72. The array valaya is said to be (the union of) two
dai^ias capable of breaking the enemy. The (array) dwrjaya
(consists of) four valayas that is capable of routii^ the enemy
forces. By changing the arrangement of elements (troops)
on the flanks, wings and chest of (the array) hhoga (we get the
arrays) sarpacSri and gomUtrikd. The array Sakafa is of the shape
of a cart. The reverse is said to be the array amara capable
of destroying the enemies. The arrangement (of troops)
on the sides, wings and chest would be in the same way as the
(arrsLy) mandala. The divisions (called) and others
are variations of the maijtdala. In the same way the arrays sarva~
tobhadra, the excellent vajrdksa, the crow-shaped one, the half
moon, irngdtaka (resembling the junction of four roads) and
acala of the forms corresponding to their names should be
formed according to one’s convenience that would prevent
the enemy forces.
Fire-god said :
73. O Brahmin ! Rama^ reached Ayodhya after killing
(the demon) Ravana. Laksmana (brother of Rama) killed
Indrajit (son of Ravana) in days of yore by means of statesman¬
ship narrated by Rama.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE
Physiognomy of men and their indications
Fire-god said :
1. O King ! Ethics were described by me to Rama.
1 shall now describe the characteristics of men and women
as described by Samudra to sage Garga fonnerly.
Samudra said :
2-7. 1 shall describe the good and bad characteristics of
men and women. O Virtuous one ! A man having (the signs
and features symbolised by the terms) ekddhika*^ doiitdila (two
whites), trigambhira (three depths), tritrika (three triads or nine
virtues), tripralamba (three elongated organs), a spreading in
three, threefolds (of skins), trivinata (having bends at three
1. One the mnniiettations c^lord Vln^u.
2. These terms are esr^lained below in verses 7 ff.

Agni PurSi^a
places), trikdlajiia (knowing the three periods of time) and
trivipula (broad organs at three places) would be possessing &ood
characteristics. Similarly, (one possessing) four marks (on four
different parts of the body), or four equal parts of the body, or
cubits four frontal teeth (of commendable size), dark complexion
of four, in four (parts of the body), sweet smells at the four
(joints of the body) and four (specific^ organs) of short stature,
five (parts of the body) small and long, six (parts) raised, eight
bones (strong), seven (parts) glossy, nine (parts) clean, nine
(parts like) the lotus, ten (parts like an) array and of the form
of the fig tree, fourteen pairs (of parts) equal and sixteen eyes
is commended.
8-15. (The term) ekadhika stands for virtue together with
(the goals of life) righteousness, attainment of riches and plea¬
sures. (The term) dviSukla (signifies) the whiteness of teeth and
the eyes except the two pupils. (The term) trigambhira (de¬
notes) depth in the ear and navel and (the term) trilrika the
virtues of absence of envy, compassion, forbearance, endowed
with auspicious deeds, purity, desire, liberality, ease and valour
known as one triad of virtue. (The term) tripralamha (denotes)
a person that would have the testicles and arms long. One who has
spread by his radiance, fame and fortune on the quarters,
country and his own class (is said to be) trikavy&pi. A person
that has three folds on the belly (is said to be) trivalimdn. Listen
to me. I shall describe the man having three bends. (He
is the person) that bows to the gods, brahmins and preceptors.
One who knows the suitable time for (the practice of) virtues,
attainment of riches and pleasure is said to be the knower of
three periods. One who lias a broad chest, forehead and
face (is said to be) trivistirna. The two hands and two feet bear¬
ing (the marks of) banners, umbrellas etc. (are deemed to be
bringing good). The fingers, chest, back and hip that are equal
are commendable. The commendable height (of the human
figure is) four cubits. Four (frontal) teeth having moon-like
lustre (is meant by caturdarhfprah). I shall describe the four
black things. The two pupils of the eyes, the two eye-brows,
the beard and hair (are the four) black (things).
1 6-26. The absence of bad smell in the nostril, mouth,
perspiration and armpits (is caturgandha). The four short things

are short penis, neck and the two shanks. The Hnger-joints
nails, hair on the head, teeth and skin (are the Hve) minute,
(parts). The two cheeks, two eyes, forehead, nose and the space
between the breasts (are the five) long parts. The chest,
shoulders, nails, nose, face and the back of neck (are the six)
:aised parts. The seven parts that are glossy are the skin,
hair on the head, teeth, hair on the body, one’s sight nails
and speech. (The eight bones that are strong are those in)
the two knees, two thighs, back, bones of the hand and
nose. The nine parts that are clean are the two eyes,
two nostrils, two ears, penis, anus and face. The ten (parts
of the body) of men of the lustre of a lotus that are commended
are the tongue, two lips, palate, eyes, hands, feet, nails,
tip of the penis and face. The hand, foot, face, neck, two
ears, heart, head, forehead, belly and back, the ten that are
broad (like an array) are praiseworthy. One is said to be of
the form of a fig (tree) if the inter-space between the two middle
and index fingers of the extended arms is equal to the height.
The two feet, ankles, buttocks, sides, groins, testicles, breasts,ears,
lips, thighs, shanks, hands, fore-arms and eyes are the pairs of
fourteen organs that are equal in general for a man. One that
sees with the fourteen branches of learning and the two eyes is
said to be having sixteen eyes. One with extremely dry body
with exposed veins and emaciated, smelling badly (is deemed to
be) unfortunate. The person with contrary (characteristics)
and pleasing look is commendable. The voice of a lucky man is
sweet. His gait resembles that of an elephant in rut. He
has two hairs from the same root. It gives protection from fear
at once.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR
The characteristic features of women
Samudra said :
1-6. A woman that is beautiful in all her limbs, having the
gait of an elephant in rut, having heavy thighs and hips and
possessing a look like that of a longing pigeon is commendable.
One that is having luxurious dark hair, slim, not having hairs.

Agni Purd^a
on the body, beautiful, feet touching the ground evenly, and hav¬
ing a pair of breasts closely pressing each other (is also deemed
to be lucky) . The navel spiralling right to left, the private organ
resembling the leaf of the fig (tree), ankles having a dip in the
middle and (the dip in) the navel is of the measure of (the head
of) a thumb (are also commendable). One that is not having an
elongated abdomen (is also praiseworthy). One whose hairs
are not soft is not good. One that is not having the name of an
asterism, tree and river, one that is not fond of quarrels, one that
is not greedy and one that does not speak harsh is auspicious and
is honoured by the celestials. One that is having her cheeks of
the colour of the madh uka flower, one that is not (having the body
as) sinewy and abound with hairs, not having the eyebrows
close to one another (is also commended) . Even if one is crooked
if she bestows her affection on the husband (she is deemed to be)
the life of the husband even if the good characteristics are not
present. If the quality of attraction is present other qualities
(would also be present). One whose little toe does not touch the
earth is verily the death itself.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE
The characteristics of the royal fan^ how and sword
Fire-god said :
1-6. The handle of (the royal) fan (should be of) gold.
The royal umbrella made of the feathers of hashsa^ peacock,
parrot or the feathers of crane is praised. It should not be made
with mixed feathers,. (An umbrella) of a brahmin (should be)
of square shape and that of a king (should be) circular and white.
(There should be) three, foiur, five, six, seven or eight joints on
the handle (of umbrella). The auspicious seat of the king
(should be made) with (the wood of) the kfira trees of fifty inches
long. Its breadth should be three cubits and decorated with gold
and other things. O Excellent brahmin 1 The bow (is made
of three materials) iron, horn or wood. The three qj^terials for
the bow-string are the bamboo fibre, hide and wood. Four

cubits would be the excellent measure of a bow. It is said to
be mediocre if equal and inferior if less than that. Materials
should be added at the middle part for the sake of the grip of the
fist.
7-13. O Brahmin ! the tip of the bow made of horns or
iron (should be having) minute edge (covered) by hides. The
edge (should be) like the creeper, (like) the eye-brow of a beautiful
damsel and should be fastened well. O Brahmin ! One should
make the bow separately made of the horn or iron or (the two)
mixed. A good bow should suitably be decorated with particles
of gold. A bow that is crooked, broken and with incisions is not
commended. Gold, silver, copper and black iron are remember¬
ed (to be the materials) in (making) a bow. A bow (made of)
horns of a buffalo, a Sarahha (a fabulous animal) or rohifa
(a kind of deer) are auspicious. A bow (made of) sandal,
cane, sdlay dhavala and kakuhha (trees) (are good). The most
excellent bow is that made of bamboos cut and collected in the
autumn. The bow should be worshipped with the sacred syllab¬
les called trailokyamohana (captivating the three worlds) (used)
for the swords. The arrows (may be made) of iron, bamboP or
reeds. (They should be) straight and gold-coloured and bound
by sinews. (They should have) good feathers. (They should
have) gold feathers that are good. (They should) be cleaned
with oil and be of good colour. One should worship weapons,
bows and other things befmre starting an expedition or the royal
consecration.
14-27. The king (should also worship) those carrying
banners and weapons and the astrologers. Lord Brahma
performed a sacrifice on the banks of celestial Ganges on the
peaks of the Meru (mountain). When he was contemplating
at the sacrifice he saw the demon Loha (that causes) obstruction.
As he was thinking about that, a great mighty form appeared
from the fire in front of him. He bovred down to t^ lord
(Brahmii) and the celestials greeted him with joy. Lord Hari
took the sword (called) Mmdaka from the demon as
requested by the celestials. The lord seized it slowly and it be¬
came unsfa^thed'. The sword was blue (in colour) with gem
(studd^) handle. Then the demon beoune (endowed with)
hundred hands. That demcm made the celestials run away in
the battlefield by means of the mace: The body of the demon was

Agni PurAfjia
cut by lord Hari with the sword and (the parts of) the body
fell on the earth and all of them became pieces of iron on atcount
of their contact with the (sword) JVandaka. After having killed
him lord Hari gave him a boon (saying) “Your holy body
would become (the material) for weapons on the earth”. On
account of the grace of lord Hari, Brahma also worshipped
lord Hari with the sacrifice without obstruction. Then I shall
describe the characteristics of a sword. Swords that are pro¬
duced at (the places) Khati and Kha^tara are known to be
worthy of being seen. Those belonging to (the region called)
*Rsi’ (would be capable of) cutting the body. Those produced
from Surparaka would be strong. Those got from Vanga are
sharp and capable of cutting. Those produced from the country
Anga are sharp. Sword (of the length) of fifty inches is said to
be excellent. Half of that measure is known to be medium. One
should not bear a sword shorter than that length. O
Noblest one ! It is said to be extremely worthy to wear a sword
that is long and that which makes a sweet sound like that of a
bell. A sword having the tip resembling the lotus flower or
round is commended. Swords having the colour of the tip of a
karavira leaf, the smell of ghee and the lustre of the sky (are also
good). Spots at equal intervals of an inch on the swords are
commendable as on the liAga. Those resembling the colour of a
crow or owl and of an uneven shape are not auspicious. One
should not see his face reflected in the sword. One should not
touch the sword after eating (without washing the mouth).
One should not disclose the value and quality of a sword. One
should not place the sword under the head in the night.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX
The testing of gems
Fire-god said :
1-7. I shall describe the characteristics of gems. The gems
that are to be worn by the kings are diamond, emerald, ruby,
pearl, sapphire, mahSnila (a kind of sapphire), Bpis lazuli,

gandhaSasyaka (?), moon-stone, sun-stone, puldta, karke’-
tanay topaz and the jyotirasa. Crystal, rdjapafta (an inferior kind
of diamond) and are auspicious. O Brahmin ! Ruby,
ganjd, conch-shell of a variety, gomeda, rudhirakfa (holy beads
and the marking nut (are auspicious). O Excellent brahmin!
Dhuli emerald, blue vitriol, lead, pilu, coral girivajra (?) the
gem (found) in the serpents, auspicious diamond, fiffibha (?),
pinda (?), bhrdmara (a kind of stone ?) and utpala — (these) gems
set in gold (and worn) would confer prosperity and success.
Inward lustre, free from impurities and good formation of the
shape (are the characteristics of good gems).
8-15. Such gems could be worn. Those not having lustre,
impure, cracked and containing pebbles inside should not at all
be worn. It is commendable to wear the diamond. The diamond
that could be carried away by water, that is unbreakable, with¬
out impurity, of hexagonal shape, has the lustre of the rainbow,
light and (brilliant) like the sun is auspicious (to wear). Simi¬
larly an emerald possessing the hues of the plumes of a parrot,
glossy, radiant, without impurity and containing minute parti¬
cles resembling powdered gold is auspicious. The rubies got
from crystal mines would be extremely red and spotless. Those
got from (the place) Kuruvinda are naturally red. and those got
from sulphur mines are of dark brown (colour). The pearls got
from oysters are free from impurities. O Sage ! Those got
from the conch-shells are superior to them. (The pearls) obtain¬
ed from the tusks and temples of the elephants, those got from
the boars and fish and those found in the bamboos and clouds are
excellent. Rotundity, whiteness, transparency and heaviness
are the (good) qualities in a pearl. A good sapphire shines in the
milk, spreads more lustre and tinge of its own colour. It should
be declared as invaluable. The lapis lazuli of red-blue (colour)
is excellent and should be used in a necklace and other (orna¬
ments).

Agni Purd$a
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN
TTu characteristics of a site for building
Fire-god said :
1-3. I shall describe the characteristics of a building site for
the brahmins and others. They are white, red, yellow and
black (soil) in order (for the four castes). A building site should
have the smell of ghee, blood, cooked rice and wine in order (for
the four castes). (They should also) taste sweet, pungent and
acid and other secondary tastes in order. (The ground) should
be cleared of kuSa, reeds, kdSa (a kind of grass) and durva (a
kind of grass having razor-like edges) after having dug out pieces
of iron etc. and worshipped the brahmins.
4-9. Sixty-four squares should be made. Lord Brahma
(occupies) the four central squares. The presiding deity (of the
two squares) on the east of those (squares) is said to be lord
Aryama. God Vivasvan is (on the two squares) on the south.
God Mitra is (on the two squares) on the west. Gods
worshipped on the angular points are :) God Mahidhara
(Prthvidhara) is on (the two squares on) the north. Apas and
(Apa) Vatsa are on the south-east. God Savitra, Savita, Jaya
and Indra (are respectively) on the south-west and west. God
Rudra and (personification of) disease are on the north-west.
(The gods worshipped) outside on the east and other directions
from the angular squares are Mahendra, Satya and l§e$a on
the east. Grhaksata, Aryaman^, Dhrti and Gandharva on the
south, Puspadanta, Asura Varu^a and Yajfia* on the west and
Bhalla^ Soma, AditP and Dhanada on the north. Naga is
the lord on north-east. Similarly, the first and the last are
said to be the lords in each one of the eight directions.
10-15. Paijanya is the first god. The second one is
Karagraha. (The other gods are) Mahendra, Ravi, Satya,
Bhfia andGagana. Pavana (should be worshipped) in the east,
(gods) Antariki^a and Dhanesvara in the south-east and the
celestials Mfga and Sugrivaka in the south-west. Roga and
Mukhya (should be worshipped) in the north-west, Pu?pa,
1. Yama and Bhmgar^a in other texts.
2. Seya in other texts.
3. Garaka, in other texts.

Kubera as well as Grhaksata, Yama, Bhr^a, Gandharva and
Nagapaitrka on the south, Dauvarika, Sugriva, Puspadanta, the
demon, the (presidting deity of) water (should be worshipped)
in the west. The pulmonary disease that emaciates (men) and
Nagaraja (the king of the serpents) (should be worshipped in
the north). (The gods) Mukhya, Bhallata, Moon, Aditi, Ku¬
bera, Naga, Fire (god), the excellent Indra and Sun (god)
(should be worshipped) in the east. Grhaksata and puspa
(are worshipped) in the south, the outstanding Sugriva in the
west and Puspadanta and Bhallata at the northern door.
1 6-23. A stoneslab or a brick should be laid on the ground
and worshipped with the mystic syllables (as follows) and the
celestials should be worshipped. O Daughter of (the sage)
Vasistha ! Gladden us with wealth and progeny. O Victo¬
rious one ! Heir of sage Bhargava (ParajSurama) ! Bring
victory to the progeny. O Heir of (sage) Ahgirasa ! The
Satisfied one ! Fulfil my desires. O Auspicious one ! Heir
of sage Ka^yapa ! Make my mind good. O One endowed
with all seeds ! One surrounded by all gems and herbs !
O Bright one ! Rejoicing one (Daughter of (sage) Vasistha !
Be pleased here. O Daughter of Prajapati ! Goddess on
the quadrangle on the earth. O Goddess of Good fortune and
Good demeanour ! Auspicious one ! Daughter of (sage)
Kasyapa ! Be pleased in (this house). O One worshipped by
great masters and adorned with incense and flowers ! O
Goddess that makes one get prosperous ! O Daughter of
(sage) Bhargava ! May you be pleased in this house. One not
mutilated ! Unbroken one ! Complete one ! Daughter of the
sage Angirasa ! I establish you on this brick. Confer on me
the desired (things). One that is held by sovereigns, chieftains
and owners of houses ! May you be one that increases the pro¬
geny, wealth, elephants, horses and cows. (A brick or) stone
should similaily be laid at the entrance to the house (for the first
time).
24-31. A plak$a tree would be auspicious on the north and
the vata (tree) on the east of the house. Udumbara on the south
and the aivattha on the west are excellent. A garden should be
laid on the left (of the house). Dwelling in such a house is good.
The trees planted and grown should be watered morning, and
evening in the summer, alternate days in the winter and each

Agni Purity
night in the rainy season if the ground gets dried. They should
be sprinkled with cold water mixed with the paste of vidaUga
(a medicinal herb used as a vermifuge). If the fruits get des¬
troyed, (the trees should be sprinkled with water mixed) with
(the paste of) horse-beans, black-gram, green gram, sesamum
and barley. Sprinkling of cold water together with ghee is always
(beneficial) for (the trees bearing) fruits and flowers. Sprink¬
ling water with fish makes the trees grow. The powdered excre¬
ment of the sheep and goat (mixed with) the powdered barley
and sesamum, beef and water should be buried in the ground for
seven nights and then sprinkling that would make all the trees
bear fruits and flowers abundantly. Sprinkling mango trees
with cold water mixed with fish is commended. The gentle
kick of the aioka (tree) by women with their feet is also commen¬
ded- Date palms, coconut and other trees grow well by (add¬
ing) salt. Sprinkling with water mixed with vidaAga (herb) and
fish would be beneficial for all trees.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT
Benefit of worshipping lord Vi§^u with flowers and leaves
Fire-god said :
1-6. (Lord) Visnu would confer success in all ventures by
worshipping (him) with flowers. (The flowers for worship are) :
mdlatl, mallikd, yuthi, pdlald, karaoirakay pdvantiy atimukta,karriikSray
kuranfakay kubjakuy tagara, nipuy vdnay barbara, mallikdy aiokay tilakay
kunda (and) tamdlaka would be good for worship. The leaves
of bilva, iamiy bhrhgardjay tulasiy and vdsaka (are deemed good )
for worship. The ketaki leaf and flower, lotus and red lotus
and others (are also good). But the arka, unmattakay kdHcly
girimallikdy kaufajay Sdlmali and kanfakdri flowers are not at all
good for the worship. The bathing of lord Vi9nu with Aprasiha
( measure) of ghee would be equal) to the benefit (of making
a gift) of a crore of cows. (By doing so) with ddhaka one would
become a king. One would ascend heavens (by bathing)
with ghee and milk. *

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE
The science of archery
Fire-god said :
1-5. O Brahmin I I shall describe the science of archery
in four sections. It is said to be of five kinds resting on the
warriors on chariots, elephant, cavalry and infantry. It is said to
be of five kinds such as those projected by a machine, thrown by
the hand, those cast (by hands) and retained, those permanently
retained (in the hand) and boxing. (The weapons) are said
to be of two kinds — ordinary weapons and missiles. They are
again stated to be of two kinds by the divisions (such as) curved
and conceit. (The weapons projected) by means of a sling or
bow or other such contrivances are said to be projected by a
machine. Stones and weapons such as the iron clubs are stated
to be (weapons) thrown by the hand. (Weapons) such as the
prdsa (dart) would be known as (the weapons) cast and retain¬
ed. Swords and other (weapons) are those permanently retain¬
ed. Personal combat without weapons (is the last one).
6-8. After surmounting the dilficulties, (the king) desiring
to fight should engage fit men (for the purpose) . Battles (fought)
with the bows (and arrows) are excellent, those with
darts are mediocre, those with swords are inferior and
those fought with hands are still inferior to them. A
brahmin is said to be the preceptor in archery for two castes.
A iudra has the right to fight in case of an emergency if he had
undergone training. The people of mixed castes belonging
to that country should render assistance to the king in the battle.
9-19. If the thumbs, calves, palms and feet are kept closely
pressed against each other, the position (is said to be) samapada
from its characteristic feature. Itis said to be vaiSdkha if one stands
on the outer toes and the two knees are held in a straight and
motionless posture and the distance (between the two soles)
is three vitastis (twelve aiigulas). It is known as ma^d^io if the
two knees look like a row o£harhsas and (the feet are) four vitastis
apart. It is stated to be dliddia when the right thigh and knee
are held motionless and (appear) like the plough and are
five vitastis apart. If the same is clianged (to the left) it is known
to be pratyiUiiha, If the left leg would be curved and the right

Agni Fwrit!}a
would be straight and the two calves and the legs remain fifteen
angulas apart, the posture would be (known as) jata •(on the
whole) extending to twelve angulas. If the left knee would be
straight and the right knee extended well or tlie right knee is
curved and motionless and the feet together with the knee are
four cubits apart, it is said to be vika^a extending to two cubits.
If the knees (are kept down) twice (as much) and the two legs
are raised, that posture is said to be vikata. The feet are a
little turned round, iirin and equal to four cubits. It is properly
seen to extend to sixteen angulas. O Hralimin ! With this
posture (known as) svastika one should lirst bow down holding
the bow by the left hand and the arrow by the right hand.
20-29. One tliat loves his bow siiould remain in the (pos¬
tures) vaisdkha or jdla or lirin or extended and put tiie string on
the bow. i'he lower tip of the bow and the striking pai t of the
arrow should be fixea on the giound. O Otie practising good
austerities ! it siiould be raised with the hands by means of the
curved lore-arms. I'liat bow and arrow of a person is excellent
wliich has a space of twelve inches between the bow and the
featiiered part of the arrow. The string siiould be made neither
too long nor too short. Holding the bow (in line ) with the navel
and the quiver on the back, the bow should be raised
with the left hand between the eye and the car. 'rhe arrow
should be taken with the right fist to the edge of tiie breast.
(Then the string) should be put on and quickly drawn to its
full capacity. (It should not be stretched so much as to be)
witliin or beyond or above or below or curbed or raised or shak¬
ing or extremely obstructed. It should be parallel, firm and
straight like a rod. After having covered the mark with the right
fist, the archer (should stand) with liis chest raised and
bent in the shape of a triangle, the shoulders stooping, the neck
without motion, and the liead poised erect as a peacock. The
space between the fore head, nose, face, shoulder and the elbow
should be equal. The space between the chin and shoulder is
known Ho be three angulas.
30-37. The interval between tlie chin and shoulder is said
to be three angulas in the first, two angulas in the second and one
aiigu/ar in the third (kind of bow) 1 After having taken the fea¬
thered end of an arrow with the thumb and the index finger and
then with the ring and middle (finger of the right hand).

it should be drawn fully such that the arrow gets completely
stretched. After having begun in this way, the arrow should
be released in the proper manner. O Man of good conduct !
The target that has been seen (by the eyes) and covered by the
fist should be split with the arrow. After releasing (the arrow)
the left hand should be thrown back quickly. O Brahmin I
It is known as excision. It should be known by you. An expert
in the archery should keep the elbow down while drawing (an
arrow), above while releasing and be in line with the target in
the middle (state) . Those who are well- versed in (the science of)
archery know it as the excellent. The superior kind of arrow is
known to be twelve musfis'^, the mediocre of eleven mu§tis and
the inferior one of ten musfis. A bow of four cubits is excellent,
tliat of three and a half cubits is mediocre and that of three
cubits is said to be inferior always by the infantry men. The
same is said to be excellent in (the case of) cavalry, chariot
and elephant.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY
The science of archery
Fire-god said :
1-7. Then a brahmin should get ready the weapons such as
the mace, bow etc., wash them well free from flesh and place
them on the sacrificial ground. Then after having collected the
arrow, furnishing himself with an armour and remaining
composed he should get the quiver and bind it firmly on the
right shoulder. Even though there may not be any definite aim,
that arrow that has been placed in it in that position should be
lifted from the quiver with the right hand. Then the arrow to¬
gether with the hand that be lifled should be pIacedt(on the bow)
and held. The middle-part of the bow should be held with the
left hand. After having made his mind diverted of all anxieties,
the feathered end of the arrow should be placed on the strinqg
1. The breadth of the clenched fist.

Agni PurS^
After holding firmly in the (position known as) sirhhakar^ evenly
with the feathered end, the fruit of the left that rested on tfie left
ear should be borne (?) The covers should be borne with the
left middle finger. One who knows the procedure should fix
his mind on the target and (hold the arrow) with (the right)
fist on the right side of the body and discharge covers.
8-12. (One that practises to shoot an arrow) should place
a pole as the target in line with the fold on the forehead. The
circular mark (of the extent) of sixteen angulas should be struck
after pulling (the arrow). After having discharged such an
arrow, one should then practise (discharging) fire-brands with
tliat. One should place the arrow again and again with the mid¬
dle finger. One should strike from the quiver at the target per¬
ceived by the eye (imagining) as a square on the right. One
tltat is in the first stage should practise to pierce (the target)
in a square. Then he should practise to aim quickly, turning
round and to pierce that below or above. When (the targets
are) at the position of being pierced the bow (should be lifted)
from its position and the hands should threaten with varied
sounds of invincible (nature) (?)
13-19. O Brahmin ! Among those (objects) to be struck
(by a bow-man), two (kinds) are known to be dr^ha (requiring
firm hand), two are known as Du^kara (difficult to hit) and
two as citradufkara (extremely dilficult to hit). That which
is not below and liai'd is stated to be requiring firm hand. That
which is below as well as that which is above is said to be dufkara.
That which is between the head and the zenith is known as citradufkara. Thus after having known the position of the objects to
be hit with the right and left, a hero (archer) should first make
progress. Then one would be the conqueror of the target. This is
said to be the rule that has been laid by those well-versed in that.
It is said that one would have more mobility from that practice.
The target that comes within the purview of the arrow should
be aimed at firmly. One should strike at once, break, pierce
and cause distress to that which is whirling round, that which
is moving and that which is extremely steady. One who is wellversed in the performance of actions should practise this way
after knowing that. One that has learnt the application would
conquer (the lord of) death by means of his mind, eye» and look.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTYONE
The method of using a noose
Fire-god said :
1-6. One that has controlled the hand, conquered the mind
and obtained proficiency in (hitting) the target perceived should
board the chariot after getting the specified perfection. A noose
should be ten cubits (long), round and such as to be held in the
hand. The thread (of the noose) should be made cither of cotton
or munja (grass), tendon, arka (plant) or hide. It may be made
of any other strong (material) well twined with thirty (pieces).
A wiseman should make the noose well-rounded. The instruc¬
tors should always provide a place for that on the sides. Having
gathered it with the left hand it should be lifted with the
right-hand. After having made (the noose) into a loop, it should
be whirled round the head and thrown quickly on a person cover¬
ed by the armour and quiver. One that is well-trained should
be employed after having made him proficient to use the noose
on the (horsemen) galloping, capering and running away.
7-12. After having conquered the enemy, he should be
made a captive in the proper manner. The sword should be
hanging on the left side on the waist. (The sheath) should be
held firmly by the left (hand) and (the sword) should be drawn
out (from the scabbard) with the right hand. The circum¬
ference of a dart should be six angulas, its height seven hastas
and it (be made) of iron. Armours are of different kinds. It
should be half the hasta, equal, spreading across and upwards.
It should be fitted in the proper manner. Listen to me as I
describe. After having made the person stand with the quiver
and armour on his body, one should take the new, strong club
in the right hand, move nine aAgulas and strike. By this (blow)
the head (of the enemy) would certainly be destroyed. (Other¬
wise) he may be struck down with both hands. After having
done thus without strain, one is said to accomplish the death
of the person. I have already described how to cause the distress
of the arms for die sake of the movement.
