READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: the_agni_purana_part_1.json
Dataset number: 387 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 636,564 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: The Agni Purana, Part 1
Creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
Date: 1954
Description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-4-parts-in-set-aitm-vol-27-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-4-parts-in-set-aitm-vol-27-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: The Agni Purana, Part 1
  • creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
  • date: 1954
  • description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-4-parts-in-set-aitm-vol-27-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/the-agni-purana-4-parts-in-set-aitm-vol-27-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>
  • subject: West Bengal Public Library
  • identifier: dli.bengal.10689.12915
  • source_folder: dli.bengal.10689.12915
  • total_pages: 322
  • total_words: 108460
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.941
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE
AGNI-PURANA
PARTI
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI

First Edition: Delhi, 195 A
Reprint: Delhi, 1998
Also available at:
iVIOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 1 10 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026
120 Royapeiiah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
Sanas Plaza, Subhash Nagar, Pune 411 002
16 St. Mark's Road, Bangalore 560 001
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 01 7
Ashok Rajpaih, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI JAINENDRA PRI-SS,
A-45 NARAINA INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110 02K
AND PUBLISHED BY NARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED,
BUNGALOW ROAD. DELHI 110 007

CONTENTS
PART I
CHAPTERS
1 . Introductory I
2. Manifestation of Visnu as Fish S
3. Manifestation of Visnu as Tortoise 5
4. - Manifestation of Visnu as Boar 7
5. Manifestation of Vi§nu as Rama 9
6. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 1 1
7. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 15
8. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 17
9. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 19
10. Manifestation of Visnu as Rama 21
11. Manifestation of Vi$nu as Rama 24
12. Manifestation of Vi;nu as Kfsna 25
13. Origin of Kauravas and Pandavas 31
14. Story of the Mahabharata 34
15. Ascendance of Pandavas to heaven 36
16. Manifestation of Visnu as Buddha and Kalki 38
1 7. Creation 39
18. Genealogy of Svayambhuva Manu 41
19. Secondary Creation : the progeny of Kasyapa 45
20. Primary Creation 48
21. Method of worshipping Visnu and other gods 50
22. Bath prior to a religious rite 53
23. Mode of performing worship 54
24. Mode of constructing the sacrificial pit and the
oblations unto fire 56
25. Mode of worshipping Vasudeva, Sahkar^^
Pradyumna and Aniruddha 62
26. Positions of fingers in Worship 66
27. Initiation rite 67
28. Mode of anointment for the preceptor 74

Contents
29. Mode of Worshipping Hari in Sarvatobhadra 75
30. Mode of worshipping gods in lotus figures 79
31. Mode of cleansing oneself and others 82
32. Purificatory rites 85
33. Investiture of the sacred thread for the deity and the
installation of the deity 87
34. Mode of performing oblation 92
35. Mode of consecration of an image 96
36. Mode of performing the investiture of sacred thread 98
37. Mode of investiture of sacred thread for all gods 100
38. Benefits of constructing temples 101
39. Preparations of ground for constructing temples 106
40. Mode of making the respectful offering to the god 107
41. Mode of performing Consecration 110
42. Construction of a temple 113
43. Installation of deities in temples 116
44. Characteristics of the image of Vasudeva 118
45. Characteristics of pedestals and details relating to
images 123
46. Characteristics of different Salagrama stones 124
47. Mode of worshipping Salagrama 126
48. Adoration of twentyfour forms of Visnu 127
49. Characteristics of forms of Fish etc of Visnu 129
50. Characteristics of an image of the goddess 132
51. Characteristics of images of Sun and other
planets 1 36
52. Characteristics of images of different forms
of goddesses 1 38
53. Characteristics of Lihga (parabolic repre¬
sentation of Siva) 139
54. The dimensions of different varieties of Lifiga 141
55. Characteristics of the pedestal 146
56. Five divisions of installation 147
57. Consecration of pitchers 149
58. Consecration of the idol 152
59. Preliminary consecration of an image 155
60. Mode of installation of image of Vasudeva 161
61. Consecration of the door of the temple and the
erection of banner 164

Contents
62. Mode of installation of image of Goddess Laksm! 169
63. Mode of installation of other gods and Goddesses, the
Sudarlana disc and the writing of books and their
installations 1 7 1
64. Mode of consecration of tanks and ponds 173
65. Building pavilions in front of temples 178
66. Mode of consecration of other gods 180
67. Renovation of decayed images 184
68. Mode of taking out a procession and celebration
of festivals after fixing the new image 184
69. Mode of conducting the bathing festival 186
70. Mode of planting trees 188
71. Mode of Worshipping Ganesa 186
72. Mode of bathing and daily worship 190
73. Mode of worshipping Sun 195
74. Mode of worshipping !§iva 197
75. Mode of installation of fire 205
76. Mode of Worshipping Can^a (attendant of Siva) 211
77. Mode of Worshipping Kapila 212
78. Mode of investiture of the sacred thread for the deity 215
79. Investiture of the Sacred thread 221
80. Mode of investiture with the fibres of Damanaka 225
81. Mode of spiritual initiation 226
82. Mode of performing purificatory initiation 235
83. Mode of spiritual Initiation that removes one’s bondage 238
84. Mode of Initiation for Emancipation 243
85. Mode of purifying the Beatific principle of establish¬
ment 248
86. Mode of purification of Scriptural knowledge 252
87. Mode of purification of the principle of peace 254
88. Mode of initiation for attaining liberation 257
89. Initiation of principles 262
90. Anointing the disciple after worshipping Siva 263
91. Mantras for worshipping gods 265

Contents
92. Mode of installing the image of Siva 266
93. Mode of worshipping the presiding deity of a
ground 272"
94. Mode of placing the stone slabs 276
95. Mode of installation of Linga 278
96. Mode of initial consecration of an image 283
97. Mode of installation of lord Siva 294
98. Mode of installation of the image of goddess Gauri 302
99. Mode of installation of the image of sun-god 303
100. Rites of Consecration of doors of a temple 304

CHAPTER ONE
Introductory
1. I bow to (goddesses) Sri (Lak^mi), Sarasvati, Gauri
(Parvati) and gods Ganesa, Skanda, Hvara (Siva), Brahma,
Vahni, Indra and other celestials and Vasudeva (Krsna).
2. Saunaka and other sages (staying at the sacred forest)
of Naimisa, conducting a sacrifice devoted to Hari (Vi^nu),
welcomed Suta (the reciter of ancient lores) on his arrival there
after a pilgrimage.
The sages said :
3. O Suta ! You are adored by us. Tell us the quintessence
of all things, by knowing which alone one gets omniscience.
Suta said :
4. The illustrious Visnu (who is) the Supreme Being (and)
the Creator, is the quintessence. By know ng that T BmBrahman\
one gets omniscience.
5. Two Brahmans are to be known, the Scdfdabrahman (the
Vedas) and Parabrahman (the Supreme Spirit). The Atharva^t
Sruti (Mutjidakopanifad) refers to this as the two (kinds of) knowU
edge to be learnt.
6. Myself, (sage) Suka (son of sa^e Vyasa), (sage) Paila.
(disciple of sage Vy^sa) and others bowed Vyasa having resort¬
ed to the hermitz^e at (holy) Badarika^rama. He imparted,
to us the quintessence (of all things).
Vydsa said :
7. O suta, listen in the company of l§uka and others what
Vasi9t:ba has said to me about the excellent quintessence of the
Brahman^ when he was requested by the sages.
Vasiffha said :
&. O Vyisa, Iditen^ in ofttirety, to the two (kinds <^) hiKlwi^

2 Agni Purina
edge, which (god) Agni narrated to me in the company of the
sages and the celestials.
9. The excellent Purdna (known as) the Agneya (or Agni)
and the two (kinds of) knowledge, Pard (the superior) and
Apard (the inferior) signifying respectively the knowledge about
the Brahman and the knowledge about the Bgveda and so on, which
satisfies all the celestials (will be narrated to you).
10. The Purdr^a spoken by Agni and designated as the Agneya
by Brahma and which gives bhukti (enjoyment) and mukti (re¬
lease from mundane existence) for those who read it or hear it
(will be narrated to you).
1 1 . Being requested by the sages (I will also describe) (god)
Visnu in the form of the destructive Fire at the end of the world
(who is) the effulgent Brahman (and) the most Supreme Being
(who is) worshipped by means of knowledge and action (reli¬
gious rites and so on).
Vasiftha said :
12. O Brahman (Agni), point out to me the masterly way
of crossing the ocean of mundane existence, by knowing the
quintessence of which knowledge one becomes omniscient.
Agni said :
13. Visnu is the destructive Fire at the end of the world (in
the form of)Rudra (Siva). I shall tell you the essence of knowl¬
edge (in the form of) this Purd^, which represents all learning
and is the cause of all things.
14. (Lord) Visnu, who assumes the form of a fish, a tortoise
(and other beings), is the cause of the primary creation, the
secondary creation, the genealogy of the sages, the cycles of
Manu-periods and the genealogy of the kings.
15-17. O Twice-born ! (Lord) Visnu (is the cause of) the
two kinds of knowledge Pard (the superior) and Apard (the in¬
ferior). Here the Apard is represented by the htgveda^ Tajurveda,
Sdmavedoy Atharvaveda^ the six supplementary texts, (namely) —
^ik^d (phonetics), Kalpa (rules governing rituals), Vydkara^a
(grammar), hfirukta (etymolc^ical science), (thescience dealing
with) the movement of the luminary bodies, Ckandovidhdna
(metrics), Mimdthsd (investigation of the interpretation of the
ritual of the Vedas), Dkarmaidstra (law -books), Purd^ (18 in

number), Nydya (logical philosophical system), Vaidya (medical
science), G&ndharva (science of music), and Arthaidstra (polity).
The Pari-Vidyd (superior knowledge) is that through which the
Brahman is known.
18. I shall narrate to you (that Purdr^a) which was told to
me by Vi^nu and the celestials by Brahm& and which deals with
that invisible, incomprehensible, not having a cause for itself
and eternal (form of Vi?nu) which is the cause of the forms such
as the fish and others.
CHAPTER TWO
Manifestation of Vi^u as Fish
Vasiffha said :
1. O Brahma ! Describe unto me the manifestations of
Vi^nu, such as the Fish etc., which are the cause of creation. Also
narrate to me the PurJna as heard from Visnu in the days of
yore.
Agni said :
2. O Vasi^tha ! I shall describe to you the manifestation
of Hari as a Fish. Listen. The manifestations are for the
destruction of the wicked and for the protection of the pious.
3. At the end of the past kalpa (of 432 million years) , there
was a periodical dissolution. Brahma was its instrumental cause.
O sage ! the earth and the people were submerged under the ris¬
ing water.
4-5. Vaivasvata Manu was practising penance for gaining
objects of enjoyment and for release from mundane existence.
Once when he was offering waters of libation in the (river)
Krtamali, a small fish came in the waters in his folded palms.
As he desired to throw it into the waters, it said “O excellent
man I do not t^ow me away.
6. Now I have fear from the crocodiles (and others).**
Having heard this (Vaivasvata Manu) put it into a vessel. When

4 Agni Pur(^
it had grown there in size, it requested him, “Get me a bigger
vessel”.
7. Having heard these words, the king put the fish in a
bigger vessel. Growing there again in size it requested the
king, “O Manu ! Get me a bigger place”.
8. When it was put into a tank, it soon grew in size as big
as it (the tank) and said, “Get me to a bigger place”. Then.
(Manu) put it into the ocean.
9. In a moment, it grew in size extending to a lakh of yojanas-
(one yojana 8 or 9 miles). Seeing that wonderful fish, Manui
got surprised and said :
10. “Who are you, but Visnu ? O Narayana (Visnu) I
salute you. Why do you stupefy me with your illusory power, O
Janardana (Visnu)”.
1 1 . Having heard the words of Manu, the Fish replied Manu
who had been engaged in the protection (of the world), “I have
manifested for the protection of this universe and for the destruo
tion of the wicked.”
12-13. On the seventh day, the ocean would flood the earth.
Having put the seeds (of creation) etc. in the boat that would
approach you, you would spend the night (of 1 000 mortal years )
of Brahma on it being encircled by the seven sages. (You) bind
this boat to my horn with the big serpent.”.
14. Saying thus, the fish disappeared. Manu, who was
waiting for the appointed hour, boarded the boat as the ocean
commenced to swell.
15. The fish now appeared with a single golden horn of one
million yojanas in length. He tied the boat to its horn.
16-17. After having praised it with adoration, he heard from
the fish the PurUaia known as the Matsya which is capable of des>
troying the sins. Ke^ava (Vijnu) killed the demon Hayagriva,^
the destroyer of the Vedas of Brahman and thus protected the
vedic mantras. And when the Vardhakalpa (one of the periods
of time) set in, Hari (Vi^nu) assumed the form of a tortoise.
1. Hays^ivawasdienameof apowerftil demoa, wito carried aw«y the
VhUu during Deluge. He was killed by Viyau uuutifeitbig a fiA tad (heFMsf were rescued. Bkag» P. VIIL xiuv. 8 aid 57 P, Mix 742.

CHAPTER THREE
Manifestation of Vi§i}U as a Tortoise
^gni said :
1. I shall describe unto you (now) about the manifestation
(of Visnu) as a tortoise, by hearing which one’s sins will be
•destroyed. In days of yore the celestial gods were defeated by the
-demons in a battle between them.
2. On account of the curse of sage Durvasas,^ the celes¬
tials were deprived of all their prosperity. Then they praised
Visnu who was (reclining) in the milky ocean and said, “Protect
us from the demons”.
3. Hari said to Brahma and others, “You make a treaty of
peace with the demons for churning the ocean for securing amb¬
rosia.
4. In the interest of an important work even the enemies
'should be sought for union. I will make you get the ambrosia
•and not the demons.
5. Making the (Mount) Mandara as the churning rod and
(the serpent) Vasuki as the rope, you vigilantly churn the milky
ocean with my help”.
6. Concluding an agreement with the demons as suggested
by Visnu; (the celestials) came to the milky ocean. The celes¬
tials began to churn the ocean (from that side) where the tail of
the serpent was.
7. The celestials who were afflicted by the sighs of the ser¬
pent, were comforted by Hari (Vi^^u ) . As the ocean was being
churned the mountain being unsupported entered into the water.
8. Then Vifnu assumed the form of a tortoise and supported
the (Mount) Mandara. From the milky ocean which was being
churned, first came out the poison known as Hdldhala.
9. That poison being retained by Hara (Siva) in his neck,
Siva became (known to be) Nilaka^^a (blue-necked).
Then the goddess Varuni (The female energy of the celestial god
1. Name of an irascible sage, sonofS:^ AtriandAnasQ.y&. Oncehemet
■a Vidyftdhara maid widi a garland. He took that garland and presented it to
Indra. Indra put it on his elephant, which in turn threw it on the ground and
trampled upon it. Enraged at this the sage cursed him that he would lose all
his fortune. See Vi.P. I. ix. 1 ff. ; P. Indtx II. p. 106.

6 Agni PurO^
Vanina), th.^ Pdrij&ta (tree) and \h^ Kanstxibha (gem) came out
of the ocean.
10. Then came out the (celestial) kine and the nymphs.
Then came out LaksmI, who became the consort of Hari (Vi|nu) .
Beholding her and adoring her all the celestials regained their
lost prosperity.
11. Then Dhanvantari, (a form of Visnu) and founder of
the (science of) Ayurveda rose up holding a water-pot full of
ambrosia.
12. Taking the ambrosia from his hands the demons Jambha
and others having given half of it to the celestials went away with
the other half. Then Visnu assumed the form of beautiful
damsel.
13. Having seen that beautiful form, the demons became
fascinated and said, “O fair-faced one ! Be our wife, take this
ambrosia and make us drink it.”
14-15. Hari (Vi?nu) said, “Let it be so”, and took it from
them and made the celestials drink it. As Rahu assumed the
form of the Moon and drank a portion, he was detected by the
Sun and the Moon and was brought to the notice of (Vi^nu).
His head was severed by his enemy Hari (Vi^nu). That severed
head of Rahu then said to Hari, the bestower of gifts (by
whose grace) it had attained immortality.
16. “When the intoxicated Rahu would seize the Sun and
the Moon, may the charities made on that occasion be imperi¬
shable.”
17. Visnu in the company of all the inunortals said, “Be
it so” and cast off his female form. He was then requested by
Hara to show that form (again).
18. (Lord) Hari (Vi^^u) showed the feminine form to
Rudra (Siva). Sambhu (Siva) being captivated by the illusory
power, renouncing Gauri (P4rvati) sought that feminine form.
19. Becoming nude and behaving like a mad man, he held
the damsel by her hair. She got herself freed and ran away.
He too followed her.
20. Wherever the seminal fluid of Hara dropped, there
came into being sacred places of lingas and gold.
21. Then knowing her as illusory, Hara (Siva) assumed his
original form. Then Hari (Vi^nu) told Siva, “O Rudra (Siva)
My illusory power has been conquered by you. ^

22-23. There is no other male on the earth besides you,
who is capable of conquering this illusory power of mine.” Then
the demons, who had not got the ambrosia were defeated by the
celestials in battle. The celestials got back to their celestial home.
One who reads this account goes to the celestial region.
CHAPTER FOUR
Manifestations of Vif^u as the Boar
1 . I describe (unto thee) the manifestation as a Boar (which)
removes (one’s) sins. Hiranyaksa^ was a demon chief. He con¬
quered the celestials and got established in the heavens.
2. Visnu being praised by the celestials (who had) gone
(to him), (he) assumed the form as Yajftavaraha (boar). Hav¬
ing killed that demon along with the (other) demons (he made
the earth) devoid of thorns (difEculties).
3-4. (That) Hari, the protector of righteousness and the
celestials (then) disappeared. Then (the demon) Hiranyakalipu,* brother of Hiranyaksa after conquering the celestials (was
grabbing a share of the offerings) exercised control over all the
celestials. (Visnu) assumed the form of Narasiihha (human
body with lion’s face) (and) killed him along with the (other)
demons.
1 . Hirai;>yak$a, a demon, was one of the sons of Kaiyapa and Diti. He'
waxed eloquent and entered the underworld in search of Vi;i;iu. Vi^u
assumed the form of a boar and after severe combat slew the demon. See P.
Index III. C. 774.
2. Hirapyakaiipu, a demon, was the other son of Kafyapa and Diti.
He had got a boon that he could not be killed either by a man or by a beast
or during the day or the night or inside or outside the house. He conquered
the celestials. His son Prahl^a was a devotee of Vi^QU. All the attempts of
Hira^yakaiipu to wean Prahl&da from his devotion to Vi$ou were of no - avail.
Hiratjiyakajipu subjected Prahl&da to many ordeals. Prahl&da emerged uns¬
cathed. The desperate Hira^yakajipu challenged Prahl&da whether that
Vifou would be present everywhere and Prahl&da could show him in the pillar
in front of them and kicked the pillar. Vi^^u manifested in the form of a man
with lion's face from that pillar and killed Hirat;kyakaiipu plsu:ing him on his
lap and at the thresh-hold during the twilight. See P. Index III. pp. 769-70.

Agni Purdffa
Z
5-7. (He) re-established the celestials in their original places
and was praised by the celestials. Once in the battle between the
celestials and the demons, the celestials were defeated by (demon)
Bali' and other demons (and) were driven away from the heaven
(and) sought refuge in Hari (Visnu). Having given refuge to
the devas he being praised by Aditi (wife of the latter) (and
mother of the celestials) and Kasyapa (a sage) became a Dwarf
(as a son) of Aditi (and) went to the sacrifice (performed by
Bali) (and) recited the Vedas at the royal gates of Bali the sacrificer.
8-9. Having heard him reciting the Vedas^ the bestower of
the wanted things (Bali) said to the Dwarf in spite of being
obstructed by Sukra (the preceptor of the demons), “Whatever
(you) desire I shall give (you)*’. The Dwarf asked Bali,
^‘Get (me) three feet of space for the sake of the preceptor. (Bali)
said to him, “I shall give (you)”.
10-11. When the water was poured on the hand the Dwarf
Became a Giant (and) measured the worlds ofBAS^, Bhuvah and
Svar with the three strides and (sent) Bali to Sutala (a nether
ivorld) and (then) Hari (Visnu)gave the worlds to l^akra (Indra).
Sakra (Indra) praised Hari (Vi?nu) along with the celestials
(and) remained happy as the ruler of the world.
12-13. “I shall describe (unto you) the manifestation as
Paraiurama.” “Hear, O twice-born” ! Considering the k^atriyas
(ruling clan) as haughty, Hari (Visnu), the protector of the cele¬
stials and the brahmins manifested as Bhargava, son of Jamadagni and Renuka and proficient in arms for removing the pre¬
ssure on the earth and for the sake of peace. [Manifestation of
Vi§inu as Paraiurama]
14. Kartavirya became a king by the grace of Dattatreya
(considered as a manifestation of the Trinity as son of Atri and
Anasuya). He had thousand arms. He was the lord of the
entire world. (Once) he went for hunting.
I . Bali was a powerful demon. He was a son of Virocana and grandson
of PrahlSda. Being oppressed by him, the celestials sought refuge in Vi;nu.
In deference to their wishes, Vifou assumed the form of a dwarf and
approached Bali and requested him to give as much earth as he could cover in
three steps. Bali readily conceded to his request. The dwarf soon grew into a
mighty form, covered the earth and heaven in two strides and as the third
stride placed his foot on the head of Bali and subdued him. See Jtdm. I.
xxvii.; P. Index II. pp. 469-70 ^

15. (He) being tired, was invited by the sage Jamadagni.
The king was fed along with his retinue (by the sage) by the grace
of the KOmadhenu (divine cow).
16-20. (The king) sought for the Kdmadhem, When he
(the s£^e) did not give (the- cow) the king took it away. Then
IR^a (Paraiurama) cut off (the king’s) head with his axe in
the battle. The cow returned to the hermitage. Jamadagni was
killed by the sons of Kartavirya on account of revenge, when
(Para^u) Rama had gone to the forest. Seeing his father slain
(and) getting angry on account of the loss of his father the great
man made the earth devoid of the warrior clan for 2 1 generations.
Making out five pits {kw^4<i) Kimik^etra and satisfying his
manes, having given the earth to Kalyapa, (he) stationed him¬
self at the Mahendra mountains. (One) who hears (the story
of) the manifestations as a Fish, a Boar, a Lion and R^a (Paraiur^a) goes to the celestial regions.
CHAPTER FIVE
Manifestation of Vif^ as ROma :
-Agni said :
1. I shall describe (unto you) the (story of) Rlunayaj^,
■as it (was) once described byNirada to V&lmiki (and which)
if read in that manner yields enjoyment and release (from mun¬
dane existence).
Mdrada said :
2. Brahma (was bom) from the lotus in the navel of Vifi;iu.
(S^e) Marici (was) the son of Brahma. (Sage) Kaiayapa
(was) then (born) from Maiici. The Sun (god) (and)
Vaivasvata Manu (were bom successively in the line).
3. Then frcnn him (Vaivasvata Manu), Ik^v&ku (was
bom). Kakutstha (was bom) in his line. Raghu (was the
son) of Kakutstha. AJa (was b<^n) to him. Then Daiaratha
<wa$ bom).

A^i Purd^
4-7. Hari (Vi^nu) manifested himself in the four (forms)
for the sake of the annihilation of Ravajgia and others. Rama
was bom from DaiSaratha to KauiSalya, Bharata to Kaikeyi and
Lak^mana and iSatrughna to Sumitri simultaneously from parta¬
king of the sweet gruel obtained from (the performance) of the
sacrifice of the father. The king being requested by (the sage)
Visvamitra for the annihilation of those who impede (the
performance) of the sacrifices sent Rama and Lak^mana
along with the sage. R^a who had gone (with the sage) (and)
was taught in the use of the weapons (astra^ and foj/ra)* (became)
the killer of (the demoness) Ta(aka.*
8. (Rama) made (demon) M&rica* stupefied by the missile
(known as) Mdnava and led him far away. The valiant killed
also (the demon) Subahu, the destroyer of sacrifices along with
his army.
9. Residing at the (place) Siddha^rama*^ along with (the
sages) Viivamitra and others, (R^a) went along with his
brother to see the sacrifice (test for prowess) of Maithila (King
Janaka).
10-12. At the instance of (the sage) 8atananda* and on acco¬
unt of the glory of Vi^v^mitra, that sage being shown due res¬
pects by the king at the sacrifice and R^a beii^ informed
sportively pulled the bow and broke it. (King) Janaka gave
Sita, the girl not born of the womb, and associated with a prize
bid, to R^a. And when the parents had come, Rama also
1 -2 . The word astro denotes a weapdn discharged along with the repetition,
of the mystic syllables, whereas *iastra' is any ordinary missile.
3. Tataki was a female fiend, daughter of Suketu. She was the wife of
Sunda and mother of Marica. She had been changed into a fiend by the sage
Agastya when she had disturbed his austerities.
Although R&ma was at first reluctant to raise his bow against a woman,
she was later killed by him, at the instance of Vifv&mitra, when she disturbed
the sacrificial performances of Vifvamitra. See Rdm. I.xxv>xxvi.
4. Mkrica was a demon, son of Sunda and Tktnkk. He was die unde of'
R&vat>a. RSm. I.xxiv. 26-27
5. Siddhkframa was the place where Vif^u manifested as the Dwarf to
subdue the demon Bali, and dso where the aspirants realized dieir ambitions.
See Rdm, I. xxix.
6. Satinandawasthesonof sage Gautama and Ahalyk and was the family'
priest of Janaka. See Rdm. I.^i.!.

married that J&naki (Sit4). In the same way Lak$mana (also
married) Urmila.
13-14. Then l§atrughna and Bharata married l§rutakirti
and the two daughters of the brother of Janaka.
Rama after conquering J^ad^ni (Paralur^a, son of Jamadagni) went to Ayodhya with (sage) Vasi^dia- others and
Bharata with l3atrughna went towards (the country of) Yudhajit (uncle of Bharata).
CHAPTER SIX
Manifestation of Vifiju as RSma {continued) :
Ndrada said :
1-2. After Bharata had gone, Rama saluted the parents and
others. King Dalaratha said to R&ma, **Raghava (Rai^) !
listen to me, you have been anointed mentally by the ptet^le as
ruler on account of (your) qualities. I shall make you the heirapparent (next) morning.”
3-4. “In the night you observe (the necessary) rites (vows)
along with Sita.” And the eight ministers* of the king — Sr?ti>
Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Ra$(ravardhana, A;$oka, Dharmapala and Sumantra and also Vasi$(ha spoke.
5. After hearing the words of the father and others, Ragha^^
said that he will do accordingly. He worshipped the gods and
informed the news to Kauialya.
6. The king told Vasi$(ha and others to gather the materials
required for the coronation of R&ma and went to Kaikeyi.
7* After seeing the decoration of the city of AyodhyS and
knowing that the coronation of R^a is to take place, Manthara
informed her friend Kaikeyi (accordingly).
8. Having been pulled by Rama by the foot by mistake^
on account of that enmity she desired of Rama’s sojourn to the
forest.
1. Some of the names of tlie ministers are little d^erent from those found
in the RJMfjvttu. Instead of the name Drsti. ArthasAdhaka and MantrapAla
in the we have Srfti* R&nravardhana add Dliarmap&la here. See
Rim. I. vii.3.

Agni Purina
9. “O !Kaikeyi ! you get up (and see) the anointment of
Rama. There is no doubt (that it is) death (itself) for^our son,
to me and to you” (said Manthara).
10-1 1 . She (Kaikeyi) heard the words of the (hunch¬
backed) (Manthara) and gave her an ornament. She said
**Just as Rama is (my son ) so also Bharata is my son. I do not
find any plan, by which Bharata may get the kingdom.” The
■angry Manthara after rejecting the ornament (given by Kaikeyi)
said to Kaikeyi :
12. “O ! stupid girl you protect Bharata, yourself and me
from Raghava. Raghava will be the king in future and then
his son.”
13-15. O Kaikeyi, “The royal lineage will be taken away
from Bharata. Once when the people were persecuted by Sambara^ at the time of the battle between the gods and demons, when
the king went there for (rendering help), you protected him by
your art and skill. Then the king gave you two boons. (You)
nsk for them now from the king. (The boons arc) the stay of
Rama in the forest for fourteen years and the conferment of the
lieir-apparentship on Bharata. These (the king) will give.”
16. She (Kaikeyi) being encouraged by the deformed lady
(Manthara), who saw meaning in the worthless thing, said (to
her), ” (Tell) me a good plan which would make it work.”
17-18. (Kaikeyi) having entered the anger apartment
(remained) in a swoon fallen to the ground. Then the king Daiaratha having honoured the twice-borns (came there and) saw
the angry Kaikeyi (and) said, “How (is) she such ? Is she sick
or agitated by fear,” (and said) “I shall do as you wish”.
19. “Without which R&ma, I cannot live (even) a moment,
I swear by him that I will do as you wish O beautiful woman I”
20-22. “Speak the truth”, said she to the king (and added),
■“The two boons (you) granted me formerly, you give me (now)
(as you swear) by truth, O King ! Let R&ma live in the forest
for fourteen years being self-controlled (and) with these prepa¬
rations let Bharata be installed here this day itself (and) if you
1 . Sambara was a datnon cbief, aon of Kaiyapa and Danu. At the time
of the battle between the celestiali and ^ demons Sambarawaa harassing the
people. Indra soti|^ ll^> flrom Daiaratha. Dafaratfaa who lost Ids eonsetottiness in the battle was safely charioted back by Kadw)i. Seclflbn. I.bt.HST.

do not grant (these boons) O King ! I shall die (after) drink¬
ing poison.'* Having heard these (words) the (king) fell into a
swoon on the earth as if struck by a mace.
23-25. After a moment he regained his consciousness and
said, “What (harm) was done to you by Rama or by me, O
lady, determined to do sins ! What you tell me in this manner
is unpleasant to all the people. By merely doing (something)
pleasing to you, I will be censured. What a kind of wife (you
are) like the night of destruction' at the end of the world.
Bharata is not such a kind of son. (You) rule the kingdom as
a widower after I have died and the son has gone."
26-29. Being bound by the noose of truth, (he) called Rama
and said (to him), “O ! R^a, I have been cheated by Kaikeyi; restraining me (you) rule the kingdom. You have to live
in the forest and Bharata, (the son of) Kaikeyl (is to be) the
king." Having saluted his father and Kaikeyl, after doing a circumambulation, and bowing down to Kauialya and having
consoled her and with Laksmana, with (his) wife Slta and with
Sumantra in the chariot and having made the gifts for the
brahmins, poor and destitutes, he left the city with the
mothers, brahmins and others stricken with grief.
30. Having spent the night on the banks of the (river)
Tamasa (he went away) leaving the people. Not finding him in
the morning" they all returned to Ayodhyi again.
31. The lamenting king also went to the apartments of
Kau^alya extremely grief-stricken. Being separated from the
king all the citizens and women wept.
32. R&ma, being seated in the chariot and wearing the barkgarments went to Srhgaberapura. Being entertained by Guha*
there, he resorted to the foot of the Indgudi (tree).
33-34. And durii^ the nights Laksmana and Guhakept
awake. Leaving Sumantra together with the chariot in the morn¬
ing, R&ma, Lakfmana and Sita crossed the river Jahnavi (Ganges)
by boat and reached Pray&ga. (They) paid their obeisance to
(the sage) Bharadv&ja (and then) reached the Citraku^a i^ountain.
1 . Kilardtrty the aight of dettruction at the end of the world is identified
with the Goddess Durgft.
2. Guha, a htmter chkf was reign^ at Srhgaberapura. He was an ad¬
mirer of Rima. See Rim. 11.1.33.

Agni PurSija
35. Then (they) having performed the Vdstupujd (propitia¬
tory rites at the house site), stayed on the banks of the
kini (Ganges). And (then) Raghava showed the Citrakuta
(mountain) to Sita.
36. With an arrow (Rama) plucked one of the eyes of the
crow which was tearing her (Sita) with (its) nails. Then the
crow sought refuge in the celestials.
37-40. On the sixth day after Rama had gone to the forest,
the king told KauiSalya in the night the past story of how in (his)
youth he had killed unknowingly with (his) Sabdabheda^ (wea¬
pon) the ascetic youth Yajfiadatta as (he was filling) the pot
raising asound. Lamenting his father cursed (Dalaratha).
His mother felt grief-stricken and wept again and again and
the (two) said, “We will die without the son. You will also die
of g^ief.” “O Kau^alya ! without the son and remembering
(the past) my death (will come off now) on account of grief.’*
After narrating this story and uttering (the words) “Alas !
Rama !*’, the king passed away.
41-42. Thinking that the king was sleeping, Kaulalya also
slept on accoimt of pangs of grief. Early in the morning the sin¬
gers and bards such as the sUtas^ mUgadhaSy the awakeners attempt
ed to wake him up. He did not wake up and was dead. Know¬
ing him as dead, Kauialya said, “O I have been ruined.”
43. The men and women then wept. Then Bharata along
with Satrughna was hurriedly brought to the city from the
royal palace by Vasi^^ha and others.
44. Having seen the grief-stricken Kaikeyd he reproached
(her) out of grief. “ (You) have made censure fall on the head”
and praised Kaulalya.
45-46. Having done the funeral rites of his father (whose
body was kept preserved) in oil in oval vessel on the banks of the
river Sarayu, when (he) was asked by Vasi$tha and others to
rule the kingdom, he said, “I go now to bring back Riuna.
Rama is the king stronger than myself”. (He went) to Sfngavera
and to Prayaga where he was entertained by Bharadv&ja.
47-48. Having saluted Bharadv&ja, (Bharata) came to
1. was a ijausUe capable reaching a mark merely by the
sound associated with the marie, the ol^t itself not being peroeivoi.

Rima and Lak$mana (and said), “O R&ma ! Our father
has reached the heaven. You become the king of Ayodhya. 1
will go to the forest adhering to your command.** Having heard
this, Rama (after) giving him water asked him to go (back)
taking the sandals.
49. (Bharata said), “I will not go to the city. I swear, I
will be remaining with matted locks.*’ On being urged by R^a,
Bharata returned to Nandigrama and stationed there with his
army, leaving the sandal at Ayodhya and worshipping it ruled
over the kingdom.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Manifestation of Vi^r^u as Rdma {continued) :
Ndrada said :
1-2. Rama bowed to Vasi?tha, the mothers, (sage) Atri
and his wife Anasuya, (sages) Sarabhanga^ and Sutiksna, the
brother of Agastya and Agastya and reached the Dan^aka forest
having obtained the bow and sword by the grace of (Agastya).
3. He was staying at Paficavati in the Janasthana on the
banks of the (river) Godavari. The awful (demoness) Surpanakhi* came there to devour them all.
4-5. Seeing the beautiful form of R^a, that lustful (wo¬
man) said to him, “Who are you? Whence have you come?
You become my husband being entreated by me. I shall eat
these two.** So saying to him she approached them. On the
words of Rama, Laksma^a cut off her nose and ears.
6-7. She returned to her brother Khara with blood oozing
out (and) said, “I shall die without a nose. I would live, O
Khara ! only when you would make me drink the hot blood of
Sita, the wife of RSma and Lak^mana, his brother.
8. Khara said to her that he will do so and went there with
1 . SarabhaAga was a sage who entered the fire in the presence of R&ma
and ascended heavens with a glowing body by the merits of his austerities.
On his advke R&ma met another sage Sutlkn^a. Rim. III. v. and vii.
2. .6arpans^& was the sister of lUlva^af the king ofLahki and of Khara,
the ru^ m Janasth&na.

16 Agni Pttrd^
Du^ana, Triiiras and 14000 demons in order to fight (witir
Rama).
9-10. R&ma also fought well and killed the demons with his.
arrows and led the army consisting of the elephants, cavalry,,
chariots and infantry together with the fighting Triliras, Khara.
and Du$ana^ to death. I§urpanakha went to Lanka and fell down
on the earth in front of Ravana.
11-13. (And) said to Ravana angrily, *‘You are neither a
king, nor a protector. You abduct Sita, the wife of Rama, the
killer of Khara and others. I will live only after drinking the blood
of Rama and Laksmana and not by anything else.’* Having
heard her Ravana also said yes and said to Marica, “You move
in front of Sita in the form of a golden deer drawing Rama and
Laksmana away. I will carry her away. Otherwise you will
be dead.”
14-15. Marica* said to Ravana, “Rama with his bow is
verily the god of death himself.” “Either I have to die at the
hands of Ravana or at the hands ofRaghava (Rama). If 1 have
to die, it is better (to die at the hands of) Riuna than Ravana.
Having thought so (Marica) became a deer and roamed in front
of Sita again and again.
16. Being entreated by Sita, Rama (ran after that deer and)
then killed that with an arrow. As it was dying, the deer said
“O Sit4 and O Laksma^.”*
17-20. Then Saumitri (Laksmana) being told inconsistent
(words) by Sita went (in search) of Rama. Rkva^ also abduct¬
ed Slt&, having wounded the vulture Ja(ilyu,* and being wounded
byjafayu, carrying Sita on the lap reached Lafik&, kept (her)
guarded in the Aioka (grove) and said (to her), “You become
my wife. You will be kept as the foremost.” Having killed M&-
rica, Rima saw Lak^mania and said (to him), “O Saumitri !
this is a phantom deer. By the time you had come here, SitS.
1. DOfaqia and Triliras were the eommanden of Khara.
2. M&r!ca remembered his past miserable experience at the sacrificial
site o£ Vilv&mitra. See V. 8 above.
3. M&rica imitated the voice of R&ma while crying aloud.
4. JafAyn, tihe vulture was an intimate firie^ of Idng Dalaratha. He
obstructed the padt <d'R&vatta <m hearing die wails of SttA, and was fatally
wounded and died after beii^ seen by R&ma and Lrikimauas

would have been taken away certainly.” Then he did not find
her as he returned (to that place).
21. He lamented with grief (and said), “Where have you
(Sita) gone discarding me ?” Being comforted by Lak^mana,
Rama began to search for Janaki (Sita).
22. Having seen him, Ja^ayu told that Ravana had carried
her away. He (Jatayu) then died. (Rama) performed his
obsequies. He then killed (the demon) Kabandha.^ Getting
free from a curse, he (Kabandha) said to Rama, “You go to
Sugriva.”
CHAPTER EIGHT
Manifestation of Vifau as Rdma {continued)
Ndrada said :
1 . Having gone to the lake of Pampa, R^a stayed there
(that) night thinking (of what to do). Then he was (met and)
taken to Sugriva by Hanumat. Rama made friendship (with
Sugriva).
2. After having pierced the seven T&la trees with a single
arrow and (even as others) were seeing, threw away the body
of Dundubhi* by his foot to a distance of ten yojanas.
3-4. Having killed Valin,* his (Sugriva’s) enemy, who had.
been the cause of enmity, he bestowed on him the monkey-king¬
dom of Ki^kindha (as well as) Ruma and Tara on the ]^?ya1 . Kabandha was a heavenly being at first and was later cursed by the
sage Sthaiaiiras and Indra to become an ugly-shaped demon as he tormented
the other ascetics and was told that, he would regain his original form
after he met Rfima and died at his hands. See /2An. III. Ixxi. 1-16.
2. DundubhiwasapowerfuldemonslainbyV&Un, the brother of Sugriva.
When Sugriva showed to RAma the skeleton of this demon to show how
powerful V&lin was, RAma gently kicked it and threw it many miles away.
See Ram. IV. xi. 24 ff.
3. When Miy&vin, the eldest son ot Dundubhi, a demon, challenged
VAUn, VAlin chased him. M&y&vin entoed a cave and VAlin also foilovred
suit. Sugriva, who had gone with his brother and wm asked by his brother to

Agni PurO^
muka (mountains). That ruler of Kiskindha (Sugriva) told
(Rama),*T will do in such a way, O Rama ! by which
you will be getting back Sita”. *
5-7. Having heard that, he (Rama) spent the four months
on the Malyavat (mountain). As Sugriva had not come to
Kiskindha to see (R^a), Laksmana (met him and) spoke
to him the words of RSma, “ (Y ou) go to Raghava. The way in
which Valin was killed is not yet closed. O Sugriva ! You
stand by at this juncture. Do not take to the course of Valin.”
Sugriva said, “I did not realize the elapse of time on account of
my preoccupation.”
8-9. Saying so, he (Laksmana) went away. The lord of
the monkeys (Sugriva) (approached) Rama, bowed and said,
“All the monkeys have been brought in order to search for Sita.
As desired by you, I shall send them. Let them search for Janaki
in the (direction of) east etc. Let them return in a month. (If
they come) after a month I will kill them.”
10. So saying (he sent monkeys in all directions).
The monkeys sent towards the eastern, western and northern
routes came (back) to R^a and Sugriva not finding Janaki.
11. Having taken the signet ring of Rama, Hanumat to¬
gether with other monkeys searched in the south in the caves
of Suprabha (mountain).
12-16. And being engaged for more than a month and not
being able to find Janaki, they said, “We will die in vain. Jatayu
is fortunate. For the sake of Sita, he gave his life being wounded
by Ravana in the battle.” Having heard this, (the eagle) Sampati, abandoning (his intention of) eatir^ the monkeys (said),
“This brother of mine, Jatayu, was protected by me from the heat
of the Sun as he was flying in the solar region. Hence, I had my
wings burnt as I was flying in the clouds. On accoimt of hearing
the story of Rama, the wings have grown again. I see Janaki
guard at the entrance to the cave, took his brother to have been slain when he
had not returned even after a long time. Sugriva closed the entrance to the
cave with stones, returned to Ki$kindh& and assumed cliarge. V&lin return¬
ed, the entreaties of Sugriva were of no avail . Sugriva retreated to
muka mountains to escape the wrath of V&lin as V&Hn dreaded to enter that
region on account of a curse. T&r&, the wife of Sugriva, was also taken away
by Vftlin, but was restored to her husband after Vfthn was slabs by RSma. See
Jlim. IV. UC.X

gone to ASoka grove in Lanka in the Triku(aka (mountain) in
(the middle of) the salt ocean of an extent of hundred yojanas.
Knowing this let the monkeys tell Rama and Sugriva.”
CHAPTER NINE
The Story of Rdma {continued) :
Jidrada said :
1 . Having heard the words of Sampati, Hanumat, Angada^
(son of Valin) and others having seen the ocean said, “Who
may cross the ocean and make us live ?”
2. For the survival of monkeys and accomplishing the
task of Rama, that Maruti (Hanumat) crossed the ocean
extending to hundred
3-5. Having seen the rise of Mainaka (mountain), having
killed (the demon) Siihhika and having seen Lanka and search¬
ing the houses of the demons and those of the women and the
houses of the tenheaded (Ravana), Kumbha, Kumbhakarna,
Vibhlsa^a, Indrajit, and other demons, he did not find (Sita)
(also) in the place for drinking wine. Becoming anxious and
having gone to the Aioka grove he found Sita at the foot of the
9imi$apa tree.
6. Remaining on the Siihsapa tree he saw Sita being
guarded by the demonesses, (and) Ravana asking her to become
his wife and Sita replying him that she could not.
7-9. The monkey (also saw) the demonesses asking Sita to
become the wife of Ravana, After Ravana had gone he said,
“Daiaratha was a king. His sons Rama and Lak^mai^a, the two
excellent brothers came to the forest. You, Janaki, the wife of
Rama were forcibly taken away by Ravana. Rama became a
friend of Sugriva, sent me to search for you, (and)
(you) take this signet ring of identification given by Rama.**
10-12. Sit& received the ring. Having seen Maruti seated
on the tree and again in front of her, (she) asked him, “If (he)
lives, how Rama does-^tot take me away ?** The monkey said to
hor who was doubthil, “O S!t& i Riima does not know. Know-

Agni PurH^a
ing now he will take you away after killing R^vana along with
his army. O Devi (queen) ! Do not worry. You get me an
identity.” Sita gave the crest jewel to the monkey. *
13. (And) said, “You do in such a way that Rima would
take me away quickly. O dispeller of grief I You retell him
the story of the removal of the eye of the crow.”
14-15. Getting the jewel and (listening to) the story, Hanumat said, “The Lord will be taking you away. Otherwise, if
you feel some hurry, O auspicious one !’ You get on to my
back. I shall show you Sugriva and Raghava today.” Sita said
to Hanumat, “Let Raghava take me away.”
16-18. Then Hanumat made a stratagem in order to
see DaiSagriva (R&va^).He destroyed the grove, having killed
the guards (of the grove) with his teeth and nails, and all the:
attendants, the sons of seven ministers, prince Ak$a. Sakrajit
(Indrajit) (son of Ravana) boimd him with the NigapaSa and
took him to the red-eyed R&vana.
19. Rlivana asked him, “Who you are”. Maruti (Hanu¬
mat) said to RAvana, “I am the messenger of R^a. You return.
SiyL to him. Otherwise you will certainly die along with
the other demons in Lanka being hit by the arrows of Rama.”
20-25. (Hearing these words) Ravana was intent on killing:
(Hanumat) but was prevented by Vibhi^a. He (R&va^a)
made his (Hanumat*s) tail set fire to. Having burnt LadldL
and the demons with the blazing flames Maruti, met SitA
again and saluted her. He crossed the ocean and informed
Angada and others that he had seen Sit&. Having drunk
honey in the honey-garden along with Angada and others, over¬
powering Dadhimukha and other guards, they met Rlma
and told him that Sita was seen. R§ma also being happy asked
Miiruti, “How Sita was seen by you ? And what (message) did
she send for me ? Sprinkle me who am tormented by the fire of
passion, with the nectar of the story of Sita. Hanumat said to<
Rama (how) he had come after crossing the ocean and seeing:
Sita, burning the city (of Lanka) and taking jewel from Sita.
“O Rama ! Do not worry. You will get back Sita after having
killed Ravana.”
26-28. Receiving that jewel Rama being grief-stricken wept
and said, *Tlaving seen this jewel (I feel) 1 i^veseen my janaki.
(Sita) ! (You) take nie (there). I cannot live without her.**'

Being consoled by Sugriva and others (R&ma) reached the banks
of ocean. Vibhiijana who was forsaken by his wicked bro¬
ther Riivana for having advised him to return Sit^ to R&ma,
•came there alone to Rama.
29-31. Rama anointed his friend Vibhi^na as the ruler
of Lanka. He requested ocean for (making) a way. When
he had not come, then he split the (ocean) with an
arrow. And the (king of the) ocean who had appeared before
Rama, said, “by building a bridge in the ocean by Nala you
reach Lanka. I have been made great by you in the past.”
R^a also reached the other banks of the mighty ocean by means
of the bridge constructed by Nala with trees and rocks. Along
with the monkeys he saw Lanka, himself remaining on the
Suvela moimtain.
CHAPTER TEN
Manifestation of Vif^u as RSma {continued) :
Mrada said :
1. Being asked by Rama, Ahgada went to R&vaM (and)
said, “Let Janald be returned to Raghava immediately,
otherwise you will die.”
2. Riva^ was intent on killing (Ahgada). The ten-headed^demon who was ready to fight sent words to Rama that war
was the only way thought of.
3-5. After hearing these words, R&ma came to Lankh with
the monkeys for the sake of battle. The monkeys were Hanilmat,
Mainda, Dvivida, Jdmbavat, Naia, Nila, T&ra, Ahgada, Dhumra,
Sufe^a, Ke^aii, Gaya, Panasa, Vinata, Rambha, iSarabha,
Krathana the strong, Gavhk^, Dadhivaktra, Gandhamhdana
and others and Sugiiva. With these and other innumerable
memkeys (R&na came to Lm^).
6. There was a disorderly battle between the demons and
monkeys. The demons kUied die monkeys with arrows, qpears
and mace”.

Agni PurSoo
7. The monkeys killed demons with nails, teeth and
stones. The force of the demons consisting of elephants
cavalry, chariots and infantry was destroyed.
8. Hanumat killed the enemy Dhumr^$a with a big rock.
Nila killed the fighting Akampana and Prahasta.
9. Rama and Lak^mana fainted on account of the arrow dis¬
charged by Indrajit. Regaining their consciousness after per¬
ceiving Tarksya (the chief of the eagles), they killed the forces
of demons.
10. Rama made Ravana shattered in the battle by means
of arrows. And the grief-stricken Ravana woke up Kumbhakarna.
11-12. Then being awakened, Kumbhakarna, drinking
thousands of pots of wine, and having eaten buffaloes and other
(animals), said to Ravana, “You have done the sin of abducting
Sita and because (you are) my master, I shall go now for the war
and kill R^a along with the monkeys.”
13. So saying, Kumbhakarna crushed all the monkeys.
Being seized by him, Sugriva cut off his cars and nose.
14. Having lost ears and nose he was eating the monkeys,
then Rama cut off the arms of Kumbhakarna with the arrows.
15-17. Then having cut off the feet, (Rama) made (his)
head fall on the earth. And then the demons Kumbha, Nikumbha, Makar^sa, Mahodara and Mahapar^va, the arrogant,
Praghasa, Bhasakar^a, Virupaksa, Devantaka, Narantaka, Tri-
^iras, Atikaya (were killed ) in battle by Rama, Laksmana and
the monkeys in the company of Vibhisana.
18-21 . And other demons, as they were fighting were made
to fall down. Fighting by conceit, Indrajit bound Rama and
others with the Nag&stra got as a gift. After they were made secure
and free from wounds when Maruti had brought the mountain.
Hanumat bore him (Laksmapa) to that place where (Indrajit)
was doing horn a and offering ahuti-s unto the fire at Nikumbil^*
Lak^ana killed the valiant Indrajit in battle. Being burnt by
grief, Ravana was intent oit killing Sit4.
22. The king although obstructed by the women, went (to
fight) seated on a chariot and accompanied by the army. Be¬
ing directed by Indra, Matali^ made Rima seated on a chariot.
1. Matali is tiie charioteer of Indra.

23. The fight between R^a and Ravana was none the
second. Ravana attacked monkeys and Maniti and others
attacked Ravana.
24-26. Just as a cloud, Rama showered on him (Ravana)
arrows and weapons. He cut off his flagstaff along with his cha¬
riot, horses and charioteer as well as the bow, arms and heads.
The cut-off heads grew again (on his body) . Ravana was made to
fall down to the ground by R^a by piercing (his) heart
with the Brakmdstra (weapon of the Pitamaha). The {rdk^asa)
women wept along with other demons. After consoling them,
Vibhi$ana cremated him as directed by R^a.
27-28. Rama made the pure Sita to be brought (to him)
by Hanumat. He accepted her who was (declared) pure by her
entry into the fire and (he) was praised by Indra, Brahma,
Daiavatha and others as, ‘*You are Visnu, the killer of the de¬
mon.** Indra being propitiated, revived the monkeys by a shower
of nectar.
29-30. They all (Brahma and o hers) being worshipped by
Rama returned to heavens after witnessing the battle. R^a
entrusted Lanka to Vibhi^na. Having honoured the monkeys,
being seated in the (aerial chariot) Pu$paka in the company of
Sita, Rama returned by the same route by which he had gone
(to Lanka) showing the forests and mountains to Sita and having
a happy mind.
31. Having paid obeisance to Bharadvaja, he reached
Nandigr^a. Being revered by Bharata there, he reached
Ayodhya and settled there.
32. Having saluted Vasis^ha and other sages, KauiSalya,
Kaikeyi and Sumitra and having obtained the kingdom he
honoured the twice-born.
33. He worshipped V^udeva (Vi§nu), his own self, with
the Aivamdha (sacrifice). He conferred gifts on the deserv¬
ing men). He protected (the welfare) of his subjects.
34. (He protected) dhama (righteousness), kSma (desire
for worldly enjoyments) etc. just as his sons. (He) was bent
on subduing the wicked. The world was abound with all r^hteous activities. The earth was aboimd with all grains. As Rama
was ruling, there was no premature death.

Agni Pufib^a
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Manifestation of Vifnu as Rdma {continued) :
JiSrada said :
1. The well-honoured sages Agastya and others went to
Raghava, who was ruling the country (and said), “You are
fortunate and are victorious because you have killed Indrajit.
2. Pulastya was the son of Brahma. Visravas was (the son
of Pulastya). Kaikasi (was his wife). (His ) first (wife) was
Pu^potkata.^ The lord of wealth (Kubera) was her son.
3. Ravana was born to Kaikasi (possessing) 20 arms and
10 faces. By means of (his) penance he got a boon from Brahma
and conquered celestials.
4. Kumbhakarna was always sleeping, Vibhisana became
deep-rooted in dharma. Their sister (was) Surpanakhi, Meghan&da (was born) from Ravana.
5. Having conquered Indra, he became Indrajit. He
was stronger than Ravana. Desirous of welfare of the celes¬
tials, (he) was killed by you (and) Laksmana*’.
6-7. Having told (thus) those sages Agastya and others had
gone after being prostrated by (Rama). Satrughna directed by
Rama as per desires of celestials, became the killer of
Lavana at some place (known as) Mathura. Being directed by
Rama, Bharata killed three crores of sons of Sailfisa with
sharp arrows.
8-9. (Having killed) Sailu^,the wicked Gandharva, a resi¬
dent on the banks of (the river) Sindhu and having established
his sons Tak$a and Pu^kara in those countries, Bharata went to
R&ghava along with Laksma^a and remained worshipping him
after having killed the wicked in the battle and protected the
pious.
10. The two sons Kuia and Lava, the excellent brothers
were born in the hermitage of V&lmiki to Sita abandoned on
1. The name ofthe first wifieofVilravas is given as Devavangunl, dMighter
of lUiaradv&ja. See Jtim, VILii.
Viiravas blessed Kaikad, thedaufi^ter ofSum&lat, when she had onne to
him desirous of progeny. But the progeny would be dreadfiil as she had come
to him at twili^^t, said the sage. When she again entreated him, he blessed her
that her next son would be like himself pursuing righteous life. See JUm,
VII. ix. «

account of rumour among the people; and were known from the
hearing of (their) good episode.
1 1 . After having been anointed in the kingdom and being
bent on contemplation with (the attitude of) “I am brahman”,
(and then) the son of Sita after having ruled for 11,000 years
and after performing sacrifices went to heaven along with the
citizens and (his) brother, and being attended to by the people
and honoured by the celestials.
Agni said :
12. Valmiki composed the Ramayana in elaborate (form)
after hearing from Narada. One who hears this will go to heaven.
CHAPTER TWELVE
Manifestation of Vifnu as Kfpta
Agni said :
1. I shall describe the genealogy of Hari (Kn^a). Brahma
(was born) from the lotus in the navel of Vi?nu. (Sage) Atri
(was born) from Brahma. Then Soma (was born). Pururavas
was born from Soma.
2. Ayu was (born) from him (Pururavas). From him (was
born) Nahu§a and then Yayati. From whom Devayaui^ gave
birth to Yadu and Turvasu.
3. iSarmi^fha, the daughter of Vr?aparvan (gave birth to)
Druhyu, Anu and Puru (through Yayati). TheYadavas (came)
in the race of Yadu. Vasudeva was the foremost among these.
1. Devay&nl was die dau^iter of iSukra, the preceptor of denuuis.
When her love for Kaca, the pupil of her father was not reciprocated by hun,
she cursed him and he in turn cursed her that she would become the wife of
a warrior. Once when Devay&nl and her conopanion $armifth& were bathing,
their dresses got exchanged, and the irate 3armi9th& slapped Devay&nl and
threw her into the well. Devay&nl was later rescued from die well by Yay&U,
who married her with the consent of her father. As cursed by Devay&nl, l^armi9th& became her servant. See dpt$ SD. and M p. 151.

Agni Pur/tpa
4-7. From Vasudeva through DevakI (was born Krina) in
order to remove oppression on the earth. Once the sons of
Hiranyaka^ipu (became) the six embryos in the wontb of Devaki
being led by the meditative-sleep cast by Vi^^u. The seventh
child in the womb of Devaki that was strong was transferred to
(the womb of) Rohim and (was born) as the son of Rohim.^
Then Hari the four-armed (manifested) in the sky on the eighth
day of the dark fortnight and being adored by Devaki and Vasudeva (was born) as a child with two arms. Vasudeva took (the
child) to the couch of Ya^oda, being afraid of Kaihsa.
8-10. Yafoda carried the daughter (born to her) and left
it at the couch of Devaki. Having heard the cries of the child,
Kamsa (came there and carried the child) and smashed it on the
stone slab in spite of being obstructed by Devaki. Having heard
the voice in the heavens that, “My eighth birth would be your
death”, and being infuriated all the children born were killed
(by him) after they were left with him by Devaki as promised
(by Vasudeva) at the time of their marriage. The girl who was
thrown (on the slab) (bounced) to the sky and said:
1 1 . “O Karhsa ! What is the use of throwing me (to kill
me). One who would kill you, that lord of all the celestials had
born (already) for the removal of oppression on the earth.”
12-13. Having told so she (disappeared). And she having
killed Sumbha* and other demons and being praised by Indra
(was known differently as) the Arya, Durga, the source of the
Vedas, Ambika (the mother), Bhadrakali (beneficent Kali),
the beneficent, Ksemya (bestower of peace), propitious, (and)
multi-armed. I bow unto her. Whoever reads these names at
the three twilights will get all cherished desires fulfilled.
1 . Vasudeva had two wives — Devaki and Rohial. The six sons bom of
yogic sleep were carried off by Hiraoyaka^ipu’s yogic power. They were again
born to Devaki and were killed by Kaihsa. The seventh child in the womb of'
Devaki was transferred to the womb of RohiQl, hence was known as
Sahkari^ana a/tar Balariuna. See Bbdg. P. X.lxxxv. 46-49; Ki.P. V.i. 70; A
Index in. p. 769.
2. $umbha and his brother Niihimbha, the two demons, propitiated
Brahm& and requested him that they should have no death. When Brahm&.
declined to grant their request as impossible, they again requested that they
should not die at the hands of mortals, celestials, animals or birds. They ex¬
cluded women, as they thought that women are not so much powerful to fear
death at their hands. When they (^pressed all beings, the goddeu killed
them. See Devi Bk. P. V. xxi. xxx. xxxi.

14-15. Kamsa also sent Putani and others in order to kill
the boy. (Bala) Rama and Kr^ijia, being entrusted by Vasudeva
to the custody of Nanda, the husband of Yaloda, for their pro¬
tection from the fear of Kamsa and others, were living at Gokula
with the cows and shepherds.
16. They (two), the protectors of the entire world became
the protectors of cows. (Once the boy) Kr§na was tied to the
mortar with a rope by the bewildered Yaloda (to contain his
sportive mischiefs).
1 7-20. He went in between the two Arjuna- trees^ and up¬
rooted them. And the cart® was made to roll away by a kick of
the foot. Putana, who was intent on killing (him) was killed by
that seeker of the breast (milk) by sucking her breast. Kfsna,
who had gone to Vj-ndavana (grove of holy basil), drew out the
(serpent) Kaliya, resident in the waters, from the waters of
(the river) Yamuna and conquered it and was praised by (his
brother) Bala. (He) made the Talavana (palymyra grove)
secure after killing (the demon) Dhenuka (in the form of) an
ass (and) after having killed (the demons) Ari$(a (in the form
of) a bull (and) Keii in the form of a horse. Abandoning the
festivity for iSakra (Indra), the ritual of protecting the cows was
made to be observed.
21. The mountain was borne and the rain (caused to fall)
by Indra, was warded ofT. (Then) Govinda (Krs^a) was salut¬
ed by Inc’ "a and offered with the peacock (plumes).
22. Festivities for Indra were again caused to be done by
Kr$na, after being pleased. Riding a chariot he went to Ma¬
thura and was praised by Aknira, as directed by Kamsa.
23. Being attended to by the devoted and sportive shephe¬
rd women, he having killed the washerman who did not get
(the clothes), seized the clothes.
24-26. Wearing the garland along with Rama (Balarama)
he blessed the garland-maker. He made upright the hunch¬
backed woman who had given him unguent. He killed the
demon Kuvalay&pl^a (in the form of) an intoxicated elephant.
Even as Kaiiisa and others were looking on, he entered the
(wrestling) court and fought with those (wrestlers) on the dais.
1. Arjuna trees, later personiBed as two demons.
2. The name of a demon, who assumed the form of a cart.

Affu PurOifa
Much strength was shown by the wrestler Ganura and Mu^fika.
The wrestlers Cllnura and Mu^fika and others were killed by
them. •
27-28. Having killed Kaihsa, the ruler of Mathura, Hari
(K.r§ria) made his father as the ruler of Yadavas. Asti and
Prapti, the wives of Kamsa w:ere the two daughters of Jarasandha. Being entreated by them Jarasandha besieged Mathura
and fought with the Yadavas with arrows.
29-31. (Bala) Rama and Kf^na came to Gomantaka leav¬
ing Mathura. After conquering Jarasandha, the despiser of
V^udeva (Kr^na) and of Paundraka,^ he made Dvaraka as
his capital and stayed there being surrounded by Yadavas.
Having kill^ (the demon) Naraka, the son of the Earth, he
(Kr?na) brought 16000 daughters of the celestials, gandharVOS andyakfos (kinds of semi-divine bcii^s) and married them,
as well as the eight (girls) Rukmini and others.
32-34. (Then) the killer of Naraka, (seated) on the (bird)
Garuda, in the company of Satyabhama and with the jewelstore and other jewels aRer having conquered Indra in the hea¬
vens and brought the (divine tree) Parijata planted (it) in the
house of Satyabham^. Having learnt the (science of) astra and
Jastra (use of weapons) from Sandipani (rescued) his son and
brought him (to him) after conquering the demon Paflcajana
and was well-worshipped by Yama (the god of death) . He kill-
^ (the demon) Kalayavana* (by a ruse) and was worshipped
by (the king) Mucukimda.*
35. He worshipped Vasudeva and Devaki the devotees and
1 . PauQdfaka was the King of Kifl and the son of Vasudeva and Sutanu,
the daughter of Kflsir&ja. When he became the king, he asserted that he was
the real VAsudeva. Knva invaded K&fl and killed him. See Vi.P. V. xxxiv.
2. K&layavana was a king of the Yavanas. He was an enemy of Krftta
and an invincible foe of the Y&davas. Krfoa found it impossible to vanquish
him. He cunningly decoyed him to the caye where Mucukunda was sleeping.
Mucukunda’s sleep being disturbed, he burnt him down.
3. King Mucukunda, son of Mkndh&tr, assisted celestials in their
war against demons and got as a boon a long and unbroken sleep and that
whoever dared to disturb his sleep would be burnt to ashes. Accordingly when
K&layavana disturbed his sleep, he was burnt to ashes. See note 2 above and
Jpte SD.

brahmins. Ni^atha and Ulmuka were born to Revati through
Balabhadra.
36. S^ba (was born) through Jambavat! and other sons
were (born) through other (wives) to Kfsna.
37-39. Pradyumna was born through Rukmini (to Kr^na)
and was forcibly taken away on the sixth day by !$ambara^ and
thrown into the ocean. A fish seized him. A fisherman (caught)
that fish and brought it to l§ambara^ and Sambara (gave it) to
Maya vat! (the maid). Mayavati having found her husband
inside the fish, nourished him with respect. She also said to him,
“I am Rati. You are my husband. You are K^a (cupid)
and made bodiless by Sambhu (Siva). I was forcibly taken a
(captive). I am not his wife. You (are) knower of magic. You
kill Sambara.”
40. Having heard that Pradyumna killed Sambara and went
to Kr?na along with (his) wife Mayavati. Then Rukmi^ was
happy.
41-42. From Pradyumna Aniruddha was born, who was the
husband of U^a and was highly intelligent. Bana (was) the son
of Bali (and) his daughter (was) U^. (His city was known)
as Sonitapura. By (his) penance (he) was (treated as) son oT
Siva. “Bana ! You will be waging a war (as indicated) by the
fall of fis^stafT,” said Siva to B&na, becoming pleased.
43-44. Having seen Gauri (Parvati) sporting with Siva, U?i
was desirous of (getting) a husb^d. Gauri said to her, “The
person seen by you in your dream on the twelfth day in the month
of Vai^akha (the second month in the Hindu new year) will
become you husband**. U^a becoming happy on these words oT
Gauri, saw him (that person) (in dream) while she slept
in her house.
1 . Sambara waa a companion of Kaihsa. He took away the child Pradyumna a couple of days after the birth of the child, knowing that it would be
his slayer and threw him into the ocean. A giant fish swallowed it. Wlien
'the fishermen caught the fish and brought to Sambara, the fish was sent to
the kitchen. When the cooks cut the fish and found the beautiful Child, they
informed M&y&vati, the mistress of Sambara's household. Milyftvatl knewthat she was none other than Rati and K&ma was reborn as Pradyumna. She
nourished and broui^t up Pradyumn^. Aftet he grew up she revealed the truth
to him. The two got married. Atlast Sambara was killed by Pradyumna after
a severe battle. See P. X. xxxvi. 36 and Iv. 3-24.

Agni Purdf^
45-46. Knowing (that person )united with herself, she (identi¬
fied) Aniruddha from the drawn portraits (of princes J through
(the assistance of) her friend Citralekhii (and) brought that
grandson of Krsna from Dvaraka (to her place) by the daughter
of Kumbhanda, the minister of Bapa. Aniruddha went and made
marry with U?a.
47-48. (B^a was) informed (of this) by his mobile guards.
Aniruddha had a fierce fight with Bana.^ Having heard
this from N^ada, Kr^^a (went along) with Pradyumna (and)
Balabhadra (and) remaining on the Garuda (vehicle ofVi^nu)
conquered the fires and the fever related to MaheiSvara (Siva).
49. There was a fight between Hari and Safikara (Siva)
with arrows. Nandi, Vinayaka, Skanda and others were con¬
quered by Tark§ya (Garuda) and others.
50. When Sankara (Siva) yawned, Vi^nu (employed) the
missile JftrdthaiiM and cut the thousand arms (of Sankara).
Protection was sought by Rudra (Siva).
51-53. Bana was animated by Vi^nu. The two-armed
(Visnu) said to Siva, “What protection was offered by you to
B&na (is identical with) that (offered) by me. There is no differ¬
ence between us and one who (thinks of) any difference goes to
hell. Vi^nu was propitiated by Siva and others. Aniruddha
in the company of U§a and others, having gone to Dvaraka,
amused himself along with Ugrasena and other Yadavas. Vajra
(was) the son of Aniruddha. He learnt all knowledge from
Markandeya.
54-55. Balarama was the killer of (the demon) Pralamba^
(by whom) there was the dragging of the river Yamuna. The
destroyer of the monkey Dvivida® and the destroyer of the pride
1 . As was a devotee of Siva, the forces of Siva came to assist him in
the war. See verse 42 above. See Bh4g. P. X. Ixiii. 23.
2. Pralamba, an orura friend of Kaihsa went in the guise of a cowherd
to the place where Kr^na and Balar&ma were playing with their companions.
Being admitted to the games, while carrying Balar&ma cm his back, he gprew into
a huge form and was killed by Balarkma. See Dhig. P, X. xviii. 17-29; Af. Bh.-
3. Dvivida, a counsellor of Sugrlva and brother of Mainda, was also a
friend of the demon Naraka. In order to avenge the death of his friend, he
burnt the cities and villages and caused much havoc. He was finally killed by
jg^UrSTTi* afrer a hard combat. See BhOg, P, X. IxvU; KiJ^. V. xzxvi. 1-23

of Kauravas, Lord Hari amused himself in many forms along
with Rukmirii and others. He produced many sons and innume¬
rable Yadavas. Whoever reads the account of the lineage of
Hari, that person would have his desires fulfilled and attain
Hari.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Origin of the Kaurovas and P&ii^dovas :
Agni said :
1. I shall narrate the (story of) Bharata (which has) the
description of the greatness of Kr^^a. Vi§nu removed heavy
oppression on the earth having Pan^avas as the instrumental
cause.
2. Brahma was born of the lotus in the navel of Vi^^u.
(Sage) Atri was the son of Brahm^. From Atri was born
Soma. From Soma, Budha was born. From him (Budha)
was born Aila — Pururavas.
3-4. Ayu (was bom) from him. King Nahu$a was then
(born). Then Yayati, then Puru (were born successsively).
In his race (was born) Bharata. Then king Kum (was born).
In that race (was born) Santanu. From him (was born) Bhi$ma
(as) the son of the Ganges. (His) brothers Gitrangada and
Vicitra (>drya) were born to Santanu through Satyavatl.
5-8. After Santanu’s death, Bhi^ma who had no wife,
(governed and) protected his brother’s kingdom. The young
Gitriingada was killed by the Gandharva Gitrangada. The
two daughters of Kafiraja, Ambika and Amb^lika brought (as
captives) by Blu^ma, the conqueror of the foes, (became) the
wives of Vicitravirya,. He (Vicitravirya) died on account of
consumption. With the consent of Satyavatl, from Vy4sa,
filing Dhftara^fra was (born) through Ambika and Pai^du
through Amb&lika as sons. From Dhitari^pra through Gandhiri
hundred sons (were bom) with Buryodhana as the first.

Agni PurO^a
9. By the curse of a sage^ then he (Pan^u) died on account
of union with his wife at the hermitage of Satairhga, theft Yudhi^
thira (was bom) to Pandu through Kunti from Dharma (Yama).
10. (Similarly) Bhima from Vata (God of wind), Arjuna
from Sakra (were born) and through Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva from the Aivini kumara. Pandu died when (he was)
in union with Madri.^
1 1 . Karna, born to Kunti, when she was a virgin, became
a dependent of Duryodhana. By destiny there was enmity bet¬
ween the Kurus (Kauravas) and Pandavas.
12. The wicked Duryodhana burnt the Pandavas in the
lac house. The Pandavas escaped from the burnt house along
with their mother as the sixth.
13. Then at (the place) Ekacakra, in the house of a brah¬
min, they all remained in the attire of an ascetic after killing the
demon Baka.’
14. They went to the fair at Pahc&la and in the svayamvara (self-choice) of Draupadi. The well adorned Draupadi was
obtained by the five Pandavas.
15. Then (they) were known to have got half of the king¬
dom by Duryodhana and others. The divine bow Gandiva and
the excellent chariot were obtained from the Fire god.
16. And in the battle, Arjuna got Kr§na as the charioteer
and inexhaustible arrows and similarly the missiles (known as)
Brahma and other weapons (were obtained) from Droi^a. All
were proficient in (the use of) arms.
17-18. (Acting on the words of) Kr^na, Arjuna put out the
fire at the Khandava forest. And the P^dava (Arjuna) having
obstmcted rains (caused by Indra) with the shower of arrows,
conquered the countries in different) directions. Yudhi^thira
ruled the country along with the (other) Pandavas. (He per1 . The sage Kindama, who was sporting with his wife, both assiuning the
form of a deer, was hit along with his wife by the arrows of P&^du, who had
gone there for hunting. The sage cursed P&ndu that he would also die while
copulating with his wife. See M, Bh. I. esevii. 5-31.
2. Baka was a demon living in the city EkacakrA. Under an agreement
the residents were supplying his daily food consisting of a buffalo, a man etc.
from each family in turn. When the five Pki^avas were staying in that place
disguised as ascetics, Bhima killed the demon to relieve a poor brahmin rea^
dent, who was lamenting his fate as it was his turn diat day. M, Bh. 1. clxvi ff.

formed) the Rajasuya (sacrifice) (spending) plenty of gold.
Suyodhana (Duryodhana) could not bear that.
19-20. Being directed by brother Duh^asana and by Karna
who had been enriched by him, he won over Yudhisjhira in
dice, (being assisted) by Sakuni in playing the dice. His king¬
dom was also won by conceit. Those in the court laughed at
him. Yudhisthira being won, went to the forest along with the
brothers.
2 1 -24. He spent twelve years in the forest as promised (by
him) along with (the sage) Dhaumya and Draupadi as the sixth,
feeding 88000 twice-borns as before. Then (he) went to the King
of Virata, with the other names, the king (Yudhisthira) unre¬
cognised as the brahmin Kanka, Bhima as the cook, Arjuna as
Bfhannala, (their ) wife (Draupadi) as Sairandhri and the twins.
And Bhimasena killed Kicaka^ in the night as he was desirous of
winning over Draupadi. And Arjuna conquered the Kurus,
who were engaged in seizing and lifting the cows. (Hence)
they were recognised as Pandavas (by the Kurus).
25-28. (Then) Subhadra, the sister of Kr^^a, gave birth to
Abhimanyu, from Arjuna. And (King) Virata gave his daughter
Uttara to him. Dharmaraja (Yudhi?fhira), the master of seven.
akfauhirti^ was (ready) for the war. That Kfsna, the messenger,
having gone to the intolerant Duryodhana said to that lord of
eleven akfauhi^i, **Give half the kingdom or five villages to Yudhi9(hira. Or else (you) fight (with him).” Hearing (these) words,
Suyodhana (Duryodhana) said to will not give land
(even of the size) of a needle tip. I will fight engaged in seizing
it.”
Agni said :
29. Having shown the invincible omnipresent form (and)
being honoured by Vidura, (Kr9na) returned to Yudhisthira
and said to Yudhisthira, ”Fight with this Suyodhana (Duryo¬
dhana).”
1. Klcaka was the commander-in-chief and brother-in-law of King of
VirAta* Af. — ^am. pp. 68-69
2. The army consisted of 21,870 chariots, as many elephants, 65,610^
hones and 109,350 foot-soldiers. Apu SD.

Agni Puri^
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Stoiy of the Mahdbhdrata
Agni said :
1-3. The armies of Yudhi^^hira and Duryodhana went to
Kuruk$etra. Having seen Bhi$ma, Drona and others, (Arjuna
said) that he would not fight with his preceptors. The Lord
(Kr?na) said to Partha (Arjuna), *‘You need not worry about
Bhi^ma and prominent men. The bodies are perishable. But
the soul does not perish. This soul is the supreme Brahman. You
know that (by realizing that), ‘I am Brahman* Being neutral
towards success and defeat and as a.yogin you protect the duties
of a king.”
4-6. Being told thus by Krsna, Arjuna fought (the battle).
He sounded drums remaining in the chariot. Bhisma was the
first commander for the army of Duryodhana. And iSikhandi
(was the commander) for the Pandavas. There was a fight bet¬
ween these two armies. (The armies) of the son of DhrtarS^fra along with Bhi^a killed the armies of Pandavas.
The Pai^d^-vas in the company of iSikhandP and others killed (the
army) of the sons of Dhftarastra. The battle between the armies
of Kurus and Pandavas was similar (to the battle) between
devas and asuras.
7-10. It was (a cause) for the growth of delight of the devas
in the heavens who were watching it. For ten days Bhisma des¬
troyed the army of Pandavas with astras. On the tenth day Ar¬
juna showered arrows on the valiant Bhisma. On the words of
Drupada, Sikha^dl^ showered astras just as a cloud would do.
The elephants, horses, chariots and infantry were brought down
by the astras (of the two armies) mutually. Bhii^a, able to
die at his own will, after having shown the mode of war and
being told by the Vasus (a class of deities), was remaining in the
bed of arrows awaiting to reach Vasulokat and for the (com1. Sikhaqtd^, son of Drupada, was at first a woman known as Sikhap-
•dint and was later transformed into a man and was known as Sikhapdin. M.Bh.
V. xci.
2. Bhisma had pledged not to fight against eunuchs. As Arjuna had
Sikhandi as his charioteer, itwaseatyfbr him toldUBUpnaatBhlfnu would
not fi^t against fiikhapdh * woman transformed Into a matt

mencement of the) summer solstice all the while remaining con¬
templating on Vi$nu and praising Him.
11. As Duryodhana was grief-stricken, Dropa became the
Commander. As the army of Pandavas was jubilant, Dhr^tadyumna (was made) the Commander.
12. There was a fierce battle between the two which made
the domain of Yama (the god of death) extensive. VirSta,
Drupada and others were drowned in the ocean of (arrows
of) Dronia.
13. The huge army of Duryodhana (consisted of) ele¬
phant, horse, chariot and infantry. Drona beczune just like Kala
(death himself) for the (army) headed by Dhrs^adyumna.
14-15. When it was proclaimed that Aivatth^an was killed,
Drona abandoned his astras. Overcome by the arrow of Dhff^adyumna he fell on the earth on the fifth day, (himself being)
unassailable and after having killed many warriors.
As Duryodhana was grief-stricken, Kar^a became the
commander.
16. And Arjuna (became the commander) of the P&^d^va
forces. There was combat between them, between weapons
and weapons, very fierce and resembling a war between
devas and asuras.
17. In the war known as the Karnarjuna, Karna killed the
enemies with his arrows. On the second day, Karna was killed
by Arjuna.
18. i§alya fought for a day and Yudhis^hira killed him.
Suyodhana (Duryodhana), whose army had been destroyed,
fought with Bhimasena.
19. Having killed many men (in their army) (he) challeng¬
ed Bhimasena. Bhimasena killed him, who was attacking with
the mace.
20-21. (Bhimasena) killed his brothers with his mace.
On that eighteenth day, in the night, the very strong Alvatthaman killed the sleeping army of P&ndavas of the extent of
an akfauM^f, the P&flcalas and the sons of Draupadi. He also
killed Dhrf(adyumna.
22. Then Aijuna seized his crest-jewel with an arrow (and
gave it) to that Draupadi who had lost her sons and was lamen¬
ting.

Agni PurOpa
23. Hari (Kr$na) revived (all of them) who were burnt
by the arrows of Asvatth^an. That embryo of Uttara bl^came
a king (known as) Parik^it.
24. Krtavarman, Krpa and Drauni (son of Drona) (A^vatthaman) survived in the battle. The five Paiidavas, Satyaki
and Kr^na survived and none else.
25-26. Then that Yudhi§thira having pacified the griefstricken women, in the company of Bhima and others, having
done the obsequies for the killed warriors and having offered,
waters and money and after having heard the peace-yielding
dharmaSy the royal duties, dharma relating to final emancipation,,
dharma relating to charity, became a king.
27. The destroyer of his enemy (Yudhis^hira) gave away
charities to the brahmins at the ASvamedha (sacrifice). Having
heard about the destruction of Yadavas^ caused by the club
and having installed Pariksit in the kingdom, (he) reached
heavens along with the brothers.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Ascendarue of Pdniavas to hgaven :
Agni said :
1 . O Brahmin ! When Yudhisthira was ruling the king¬
dom, Dhftarastra went to the forest along with Gandharl and
Prtha (Kunti) and passed from one stage of life to another.
2-5.. Vidura was burnt by the forest fire and ascended
heavens. Thus, Vi^nu removed the oppression of demons
and others on the earth, for the sake of dharma and for the destrucI. This alludes to the curse of sages when the Y&dava boys dressed
up S&mba, son of J&mbavatl, as a woman and requested sages to tell
what kind of child would be bom to her. The sages cursed that an iron mace
would be bom. When it happened accordingly, the mace was powdered and
thrown into the sea. They were washed ashore and later grew into reeds.
The Y&davas under the influence of liquor quarrelled with esudx other and
destroyed themselves by beating with the uprooted reeds. See Yi.P,W, xxvii.

tion of adharma and having the P^d^vas as an apparent cause.
Having the curse of a brahmin, as a pretext, he destroyed with
the club, the race of Yadavas who were oppressing (the world)
Then (he) installed Vajra (son of Aniruddha) in the kingdom.
On the directive of celestials, Hari himself having discarded
his body at Prabhasa, is being worshipped by the residents of
heavens at the worlds of Indra and Brahma. Balabhadra,
(who was) a form of Ananta, reached heavens in the nether
world.
6. Hari, the imperishable lord, is always to be contemplated
upon by those who meditate (on him). Without him (at Dvaraka), the ocean flooded the city of Dvaraka.
7-8. Partha (Arjuna), having performed the obs quies
of Yadavas, and having offered the waters of oblation and
money, felt grief-stricken when the women, who were the wives
of Visnu (Kr^^a), were carried away by the shepherds
(using) the clubs as weapons and defeating Arjuna on account
of the curse of A§tavakra.^
9-12. Being consoled by Vyasa, he thought, “My strength
remains only in the presence of Kr§na.“ Having come to Hastinapura, Partha then informed Yudhijfhira, his brothers and the
guards of the people. That bow, those weapons and the chariot
and those horses were lost in the absence of Kr^na, just as a cha¬
rity made to a person not well learned (would be lost). Having
heard that (news), the intelligent Dharmaraja (Yudhi^fhira),
having established Pariksit in the kingdom, set out on his final
journey to relinquish this world along with Draupadi and his
brothers, after having realized the transitory nature of the mimdane existence and repeating 108 (names) of Hari.
13. Draupadi, Sahadeva, Nakula, Phalguna* (Arjuna),
Bhima had fallen on the way (of their march). The king was
grief-stricken.
1 . Once when a brahmin Ai^t&vakra was doing penance standing in neckdeep water, the heavenly nymphs who happened to pass that way bowed to
him and sought his blessings to get a good husband. Being pleased he blessed
them that they would become the wives of the Lord when he manifested as
Kr^a. Later, when they began to mock at him, on seeing his crooked form as
be came out of waters, he got enraged and cursed them that they would
be forcibly taken away by thieves. See K(.P. V. xxxviii. 71-82.
2. On account of his birth on the Himalayan peaks as the moon was in
Mterism Uttark Phalgunl, Arjuna was known by this name.

Agni Purd^
14. Mounting the chariot brought by Jndra he reached
heavens along with his brothers, having seen Duryodhana
and others and Vasudeva and becoming happy. This is (the
story of) Bharata told to you. Whoever reads this, goes to
heaven.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
Manifestation of Visnu as Buddha and Kalki :
Agni said :
1. I am describing the manifestation (of Vi$nu) as
Buddha, by reading and hearing which one gets wealth. Once
in the battle between devas and asuras, devas were defeated by the
daityas (demons, sons of Diti).
2. They sought refuge in the lord saying, “Protect us !
Protect us !’*. He (Vi?^m), who is of the form of illusory delu¬
sion became the son of l^uddhodana.
3-4. He deluded those demons. Those, who had abandoned
the path laid down in the Vedas, became the Bauddhas and from
them others who had abandoned the Vedas. He then became
the Arhat (Jaina). He then made others as Arhats. Thus
the heretics came into being devoid of vedic dharmas.
5-6. They did such a work deserving hell (as reward ) . They
would receive even from the vile. All of them became mixed
Dasyus and devoid of good conduct at the end of Kaliyuga.
Of the Vdjasaneyaka oeda {Suklayajurveda) only fifteen sections will
be existing.
7. Non-aryans in the form of kings would devour
men who wear the costumes of righteousness and have a taste
for unrighteous thing.
8-9. Kalki, as the son of Vi^^uyalas, (and having) Y&jfiavalkya as the priest would destroy the non-Aryans, holding the
Continued from previous page
aiRft TO ^ to: ii

astra and having a weapon. He would establish moral law in
four-fold var^as in the suitable manner. The people (would be)
in the path of righteousness in all the stages of life.
10. Hari, after discarding the form of Kalki, would go to
heaven. Then would come the Kitayuga as before.
11-13. O Most virtuous person ! Men would remain
devoted to their respective duties of castes and stages of life.
Thus, in all theKalpas^ dsidi Manvantaras,* the manifestations (of
Vi§nu) are innumerable, some already past and some yet to
come off. Whoever reads or hears the stories of the manifesta¬
tions of Vi§nu would get all desired things, become
pure, and attain heaven along with his race. In this way, Hari
settles the righteousness and unrighteousness. Hari is the cause
of creation etc. and after manifesting (in different forms) he has
returned.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Description of Creation :
Agni said :
1. I shall describe now the creation of the universe,
which is the sport of Vi?nu.* He who creates heaven etc. is
the beginning of the creation and is endowed with qualities and
is without qualities.
2. Brahmii, the unmanifest, was the existent being. There
was no sky, neither the day nor the night etc. Visnu having
entered the nature (Prakfti) and the soul {Purufa)^ then agitated
them.
1. JCalpa u a day of Brahmfi or thousand (catur ) Tugas being a period of
432 xmllion years of mortab and measuring the duration of the world.
2. Manvantara is the age or the period of Manu, being equivalent to>
l/14th of a day of Brahm& or 71 eoittryttgas.
3. According to the S&Akhya system of philosophy the involuntary union
of soul and nature causes creation, while others hold creation as due to the sport
of BrahnUl*

Agni Pur0fa
3. At the time of creation, the intellect (Mahat) (emanated
first). The ego (Ahankara) came into being then, and then the
^volutes (VaikSrikas),^ the lustre {taijasa)^ the elements etc. and
the darkness {tSmasa).*
4. Then emanated the ether, the sound-principle from the
ego. Then the wind, the principle of feeling and the fire, the
colour-principle came into being from it.
5. The water, the taste-principle (came into being) from
this. The earth is known as the smell-principle. From the dark¬
ness (born of) ego, the senses (came into being) (which)
are lustrous.
6. The evolutes are the ten celestials and the mind, the ele¬
venth sense. Then the lord Svayambhu® Brahma became
desirous of creating different types of beings.
7. He created waters first. The waters are referred to
as nSrdfi because they are the creation of the Supreme spirit.
8. Since his motion was first in them, he is known as Narayana. That egg lying in the water was golden in colour.
9-10. From that, Brahma was born of his own accord, whom
we know as the self-born (Svayambhu). Having lived (in it)
for one full year, the Hiranyagarbha,* made that egg into two,
the heaven and the earth. Between those two pieces, the lord
created the sky.
11-13. The ten directions supported the earth floating on
the waters. Then the lord of the beings (Prajapati) desirous of
creation, created time, mind, speech, desire, anger, attach¬
ment and other counter-parts. From the lightning he created
thunder and clouds, the rain-bow and birds. He first
created Parjanya (Indra). Then he created the ^ hymns
{Bca^)y Yajur hymns {Tajuthfi) and the Saman hymns {Sdmdni)
for accomplishing the sacrifice.
14. Those who want to accomplish, worship devas with
these (hymns). The higher and lower beings (were created)
from the arms. He created Sanatkumara and Rudra, born of
anger.
1 . Vaikdrikas are the first creation from the natural state.
2. Tdmasa is the creation of ignorance.
3. Brahmi is known as Svayambbfl, as he was self-botn. See verses 9-10
below.
4. Hiranyagarbha denotes Brahm&, as he was bom from, the golden egg.

15. He then created the sages Marlci, Atri, Arigirasa,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasistha, who are regarded as the
•seven mind-born sons of Brahma.
16. O ! Excellent one ! these seven (sages) procreated
(many) beings and the Rudras. Having divided his body into
two, he became a male with one half and a female with another.
Then Brahma procreated children through her (the female half) .
CFIAPTER EIGHTEEN
Genealogy oj Svdyambhuva Manu
Agni said :
1. I§atarupa of ascetic disposition (becoming) desirous
gave birth to two sons Priyavrata and Uttanapada and a
beautiful daughter* from Svayambhuva Manu.
2-3 From (Devahuti) the wife ofKardama, (were born)
(two daughters) Samrat and Kuksi.
Uttama was born as the son of Uttanapada through Suruci.
And Dhruva* was born as the son (of Uttanapada) through
Suniti. O Sage ! Dhruva did penance for three thousand
celestial years for gaining fame.
4. Becoming pleased (with him) Hari conferred on him a
firm position* above the sages. Having seen his progress
Usanas* recited the (following) verse :
1 . An qsithet of the first Manu was Sv&yambhuva Manu, as he was a son
of Brahma.
2. The BhSg. P. specifies the name of the daughter of Sv&yambhuva Manu
as DevahCLti and describes in detail her marriage with Kardama. See ibid.
III. xxi-xxii.
* For a detailed account of the story of Dhruva see Vi.P. I. Ghs. 11-12.
3. The yoimg boy Dhruva was one day contemptuously treated by his
step>mother as he tried to sit on his father’s lap. On the advice of his mother
he retired to the forest and did penance steadfastly devoted to Vifuu. At last
he was raised to the status of a pole-star. See Vi, P. 1. xt-xii,
4. Ufanas also known as SukrAc&rya or K&vya was the preceptor of
Asuras.

Agni PurS^A
5. O what a strcngfth his penance had ! How well-heard
of ! What a wonderful thing that the seven sages^ are situated,
placing Dhruva in front of them.
6-7. Sambhu gave birth to iSisti and Bhav^’a from Dhruva.
Succhaya bore five blemishless sons from Sisti, (namely), Ripu,
Ripufljaya, Ripra, Vrkala, Vrkatejasa. Brhati bore the brilliant
Caksu$a from Ripu.
8. Cakfu^a begot Manu through Pu§karini (also known as
Virinl) (daughter of Virana Prajapati). Ten excellent sons were
born to Manu through Nadvala.
9. (They were) Dm,® Puru, Satadyumna, Tapasvin, Satyavak,® Kavi*, Agnistu®, Atiratra, Sudyumna, and Abhimanyu.
10. Agneyi bore six great sons to Dru — Anga, Sumanas,
Khyati, Kratu, Angiras, (and) Gaya*.
1 1 . Sunitha bore only Vena’ from Anga. He, who was not
a protector, and was delighted in doing sins was killed by the
sages with their kuSa grass.
12. Then for the sake of progeny, the sages churned his
right hand. When the hand of Vena was churned King Prthu
came into being.
13. Having seen him, the sages said, “This person will make
the subjects happy and will attain great valour and fame.
1 4. He was born with a bow and an armour as if consuming
(everything) by his lustre. Prthu, the son of Vena, the predeces¬
sor of the ksatriyasy protected the subjects.
15. That lord of the earth is the first among those coronated
after the Rajasuya (sacrifice). From that (ceremony) were
born the clever (singers) sUta and migadha.
1. The seven sages are Marlci, Atri, Ahgiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu.
and Vasistha.
2. Kuni, see Vi. P. I. xiii.5.
3. Satyavat, see Hid.
4. $uci, see Hid.
5. Agniftoma, see Hid.
6. Sibi, see Vi. P. I. xiii.7.
7. Vena bom to SunithS, the daughter of Mrtyu was of wicked naturesince childhood. When he becsime the king he proclaimed himself as the lord,
of sacrifices and did not allow sages to propitiate Vif^u by doing sacrifices*
Their entreaties being of no avail they killed him by employing kuJa grasa
purified by the chant of mystic syllables. Vi.P. I. xiii. 11 ^

16-17. The two heroes praised him. He became a king by
pleasing the people. For the sake of (getting) grains and for the
existence of the subjects, the cow (earth) was milked by him
along with the celestials, sages, gandharvas, nymphs, manes,
demons, snakes, plants, mountains and people.
18. The earth being milked in their respective vessels gave
milk as much as (they) wished. (All) sustained their lives with
that.
19. Antardh^a and Palita^, the two righteous sons were
born to Prthu. From Antardhana, SikhandinI begot Havirdh^a.
20. Dhisa^, of the family of Agni gave birth to the six
sons — Pracinabarhis, Sukra, Gaya, Krsna, Vraja and Ajina from
Havirdhana.
21. (He was known as Pracinabarhis) because the kuSa
grass were facing the east as he was praying on the earth.* The
lord Pracinabarhis was a great progenitor.
22. Savarna, the daughter of Samudra (the lord of the ocean)
bore ten Pracinabarhis. All of them were known as Pracetas.
and were proficient in archery.
23. Practising the same religious austerities, they all did
severe penance, remaining in the waters of the ocean for ten
thousand years.
24. Having got the status of a progenitor and pleased Vi§nu,
they came out (of waters) (and found) that the earth and
the sky were overspread with trees. They burnt them down.
25. Beholding the destruction of trees by the fire and
wind produced from their mouths, Soma, the king (of plants)
approached these progenitors and said :
26-27. “Renounce (your) anger, I will get you this most
excellent maiden Marisk, (born to) (the nymph) Pramlock
and the ascetic sage Kan<^u (who was nourished) by me. Hav¬
ing known the future (I have) created (her). Let (she) be
your wife, capable of multiplying the family. Daksa will be born
to her who will multiply progen v.“
28-30. The Pracetas married her and Dak$a was born
through her. That Dak$a, having mentally created the immov1. Vadi, see Ft’./*. I. xiv. I
2. i.c., the sacrifices were peif ormed all over the earth.

Agni PurHoa
ables, movables, bi-footed beings and the quadrupeds, then crea¬
ted the (sixty) daughters (of whom) he gave' ten to Dharma,
thirteen to Ka^yapa, twenty-seven to Soma, four to Arisfanemin,
two to Bahuputra, two to Ahgiras.
31. By mental intercourse the celestials, serpents and others
(were born) to them in the past. I shall describe (you) the crea¬
tion of Dharma through his ten wives.
32. The Vilvedevas (were born) to Visva, Sadhya gave
birth to the Sadhyas. The Maruts came into being from the
Marut and the Vasus from Vasu.
33. The Bhanus (were) the sons of Bhanu and the Muhurtas (were born) to Muhurta. Gho$a (was born) to Dharma
through Lamba. Nagavithi was born of Yami.
34. All that belonged to the earth were born of Arundhati.
Sahkalpa (was born) from Sahkalpa. The stars were the sons of
moon.
35. The eight Vasus* are known by the names — -Apa, Dhruva
Soma, Dhara*, Anila, Anala, Pratyu^ and Prabhasa.
36. Vaitandya, Srama, Santa, and Muni* (were) the sons
of Apa. Kala, the destroyer of the Universe (was the son) of
Dhruva. Varca was the son of Soma.
37. Dhara had the sons Dravina, Hutahavyavaha, Sisira,
Prana and Rama^ through Manohara.
38. Purojava* was (the son ) of Anila and Avijfiata of Anala.
Kumara, the son of Agni, was born in a clump of reeds.
39. S^ha, Viiakha and Naigameya were his younger bro¬
thers. (He was known as) Karttikeya (as he was the son) of
Krttika. (He is also known as) the ascetic Sanatkiunara.
40. Devala was born from Pratyu^a. Vi^vakarman (was
bom) from Prabha, and was the architect of thousands of
sculptiu'es and the architect of celestials.
41 . Men earn their livelihood by this art of architecture and
of (making) ornaments. Surabhi begot eleven Rudras* from
Ka^apa.
1 . For a detailed account see Vi.P. I. xv. 103b ff.
2. Vasus are a class of semi-divine being^.
3. Dharma, see Vi.P. I.xv. 111a.
4. Dhvani, see Vi.P. I. xv. 112a.
5. Manojava, see Vi.P. I. xv. 1 14b.
6. Following the BrahmAoda P. narration, Rv^jiras are given here as
-sons of Surabhi and Kalyi^a.

42. O Most pious man ! By the favour of Mahadeva
(Siva) (who was) thought of (by her) in her ascetic observances
Sati gave birth to Ajaikapad, Ahirbudhnya, Tvasfr and Rudra.
43-44. Viivarupa, the great illustrious and fortunate (was)
the son of Tvastr* Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka, Aparajita,
Vr^akapi, Sambhu, Kapardin, Raivata, Mrgavyadha, Sarpa
and Kapalin were the eleven forms by which the entire world,
both movable and immovable were pervaded by hundreds and
thousands of Rudras.^
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Description of secondary creation : the progeny of KaSyapa
Agni said :
1-3. O Sage ! I describe the creation (made) by Kalyapa
through Aditi and others. Those devas who were (known) as
Tu^ita in the Caksusa manvantara, again became (the sons)
of Kaiyapa through Aditi in the Vaivasvata manvantara as the
twelve Adityas (with the names) Vi$nu, Sakra, Tvastr, Dhatf,
Aryaman, Pusan, Vivasvat, Savitr, Mitra, Vanina, Bhaga, and
Aih^u. The progeny of the wives of Aris^anemi were sixteen.
4. The four lighmings were the daughters of the learned
Bahuputra. Those born of Ahgiras were excellent. (The pro¬
geny) of Kf^a^va were the celestial weapons.*
5. Just as the sun rises and sets, similarly these (do) in every
yuga. From KaSyapa, Hiranyakaiipu and Hiranyak^a (were
born) through Diti.
6. Simhika was also their daughter, who was married by
Vipracitti. Rahu and others born to her were known as Saimhikeyas.
1 . The names of Eleven Rudras are not the same in the enumerations in
different Purd^as. On the Eleven Rudras see Annals of Ori. Rts. XXIV. Pt^I
2. According to the science of fyoti fa, these four lightnings are kapUi,
atUokitd, p!t4 and asiti indicating respectively wind, heat, rain and famine.

Agni Purd^a
7-8. The four sons of HiranyakaJipu (were) very effulgent.
(They were) Anuhrada, Hrada, Prahrada a stauneh devotee of
Vi§nu; and Saihhrada was the fourth (son). Hrada (was)
the son of Hrada. Ayu§mat, Sibi, and Baskala (were) the sons
of Hrada.
9. Virocana (was) the son of Prahrada. Bali was born to
Virocana. Bali had hundred sons. Bana was the foremost among
them, O great sage !
10. Having propitiated the consort of Uma (Siva) in the
past kalpa, a boon was obtained by Bana from the lord that he
would always wander by the side (of the lord).
1 1 . The sons of Hiranyaksa were five.^ Sambara, Sakuni®,
Dvimurddhan, Sahkurarya* were (the prominent among)
the hundred sons of Danu.
12. Suprabha was the daughter of Svarbhanu (a son of
Danu). Saci was known as the daughter of Puloman (a son of
Danu). Upadanavl, Haya^ira, and Sarmistha (were) the daugh¬
ters of Vrsaparvan (a son of Danu).
13. Puloma and Kalaka were the two daughters of Vai^vanara. They both married Ka^yapa and they had crores of
^ons.
14-16. In the family of Prahrada (were born) four crores
(of sons) (known as) the nivdtakavaca (protected by armour).
Tamra had six daughters — ^Kaki, Syenl, Bh^i, Gfdhrika, Suci
and Sugriva. The crows and (other birds) were born
from them. The horses and camels (were born in the line)
of Tamxa. Aruna and Garuda (were born) from Vinata. Thou¬
sands of serpents (were) born of Surasa. Thousands of serpents
(such as) Sesa, Vasuki, Tak§aka and others were born of Kadru.
1 7. Animals having tusks, other earthly beings and the aqu¬
atic birds were born to Krodha. The cows, buffaloes and other
animals (were bom) from Surabhi. The grass and other things
were the production of Ira.
1. They are Utkura, iSakuni, Bhdtasanf&pana, Mah&n&bha, Mahabahu
and K&lan&bha. See Vi.P, I, xxi. 1-3,.
2. Given as the son of HtranySkfa. See ibid.
3. l^aAkufir&h* See ibid.
The reading given in the text here mixes the prc^^eny of Hiranyikya and
that of Danu.

18. The Yaksas (semi-divine beings) and the demons (were
born) of Khasa. The nymphs came into being from Muni. The
Gandharvas (a class of semi-divine beings) (were born) to
Ari§ta. Thus the stationary as well as the movable are born of
Ka^yapa.
1 9-2 1 . Innumerable are the offspring of these. The Danavas
(the progeny of Danu) (the demons) were conquered by the
celestials. Diti, who had lost her offspring, propitiated Ka^yapa,
desirous of (getting) a son capable of destroying Indra. (She)
achieved (her object) from Kasyapa. Indra, seeking to find a
fault (found out that she) had slept without washing her feet*
and destroyed (cut off) the embryo. They became celestials
(known as) Maruts, fifty one (in number) radiant with lustre
and the allies of Sakra (Indra).*
22. All these (are) forms of Hari. Having installed
Prthu as the ruler, Hari duly set apart kingdoms for others.
23. The moon (was made the king) of the twicc-bom and
the plants, Varuna (as) the king of waters, Vaisravana (Kubera)
(as) the king of kings, Vi§nu (as) the lord of Suns.
24. Pavaka (fire) as the king of Vasus; Vasava (Indra)
(as) the lord of Maruts and then Dak§a (as the king) of
Prajapatis (patriarchs), Prahlada (as) the ruler of demons.
25. Yama (was made) the king of manes, Hara (Siva)
(as) the lord of goblins, Himavat (as the ruler) of moun¬
tains, the ocean (as) the lord of rivers.
26. Gitraratha (was made the ruler) of Gandharvas,
and then Vasuki (as the ruler) of Nagas, Taksaka (as) the
king of serpents, and then Garu<Ja, among the birds.
27. The Airavata (was made the ruler) among the lords
of elephants, bull of the kine and the tiger, of the animals,
(and) Plakfa (the Indian fig-tree) (as) the lord of trees.
28. And Uccaih^ravas (was made the ruler) among the
horses.* Sudhanvan (son ofVairajaPrajapati)became the regent
of the east, Sankhapad (the son of Kardama Prajapati) (the
1 . Failure to observe the necessary hygiene deprived her desire to get a
var quisher bf Indra. For a detailed account of this episode see Ft.F. I. xxi.

Agm Puribfa
regent) of the south, Ketumat (son of Rajas) as the protector
of the waters (on the west), Hiranyaromaka (son (5f Parjanya
Prajapati) on the Saumya (the north).
CHAPTER TWENTY
Primary creation
Agni said :
1. The intellect (mahat) is the first creation of Brahma.
The second (creation) is that of the subtle principles (fanma/r/Sj),^
known as the bhutasarga (creation of elements).
2. The third is the creation of evolutes iyaikdrikas)
known as the sense-organs. These are the primary creation
(prdkrtasarga) produced out of the intellect.
3. The fourth, is the main creation (mukhyasarga) . The
immobile things are known as the main (creation). That (crea¬
tion) which is spoken as (the creation of) the lower order (tirya--
ksrotas) is known as that of the sub-humm beings (animals,
birds etc.).
4. Then the sixth creation is that of the higher orders {iirdhvasrotas)f known as the creation of the celestials. Then the seventh
creation is that of the middle orders (arvdksrotas), the man.
5-6. The eighth is the creation (known as) the anugraha (com¬
passionate divinities), composed of the qualities {sdttvika and
tdmasa. These (latter) five are known as the Vaikftasarga (crea¬
tion subject to transformation). The ninth creation is the Kaum^ra (the creation of Sanatkumara etc. ) These are the. nine
creations* of Brahma which arc the main cause for the universe.
7-8. Bhrgu and others married Khyati and other daughters
of Dak^. Creation has been described as three-fold by the people.
They are usual {nitya)^ subject to some cause {naimittika) , (and)
1 . The tawndlrds or the subtle principles are related to the sense-organs.
2. The puranic cosmology divides creations into nine classes. See ^iiMi P.
(English translation) p. 248 note 214.

daily {dainandini) ^ (The creation) after the intermediate dis¬
solution is known as the daily (dainandini). The constant
creation that takes place everyday is considered as nitya.
9. From Bhrgu, Khyati gave birth to the celestials Dhatr
and Vidhatr. Sri (Laksmi) (was) the consort of Visnu, and was
praised by Sakra (Indra) for multiplying the progeny.
10. The sons of Dhatr and Vidhatr were Prana and Mrkanduka successively. Vedasira gave birth to Markandeya from
Mrkandu.
11-12. A son (byname) Paurnamasa was born to Marici
through Sambhuti. Sinivali, Kuhu, Raka and Anumati were
the sons of Ahgiras through Smrti. With Atri, Anasuya gave
birth to Soma, Durvasas, and Dattatreyaj^o^in.
13. A son (by name) Dattoli was born to Priti, the wife of
Pulastya. Sahisnu and Kramapadika* were born to Ksama
from Pulaha.
14. The highly radiant Balakhilyas were born to Sannati®
from Kratu. They, who were 60000, were of the size of a joint of
the thumb.
15. To Urja from Vasistha (were born) Raja, Gatra, Urdhvabahu, Savana, Alaghu*, iSukra and Sutapah, the seven sages.
16. Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci were born of Agni and
Svaha. The manes Agnisvattah, devoid of fire and Barhisada, with fire (were born) from aja (Brahma, the unborn).
17. Mena and Dharini were the daughters of the manes
through Svadha. Hiihsa was the wife of Adharma. Then
Anfta was born to them.
18. Nikrti (was their) daughter. Bhaya and Naraka (were
born) from them, who had Maya and Vedana as their wives.
19. Of those two, Maya gave birth to Mftyu, the destroyer
of living beings. And also Vedana gave birth to a son Du^kha
from Raurava (Naraka).
20. Vyadhi, Jara, 3oka, Trsna and Krodha were born from
Mftyu. (Rudra) was born wailing from Brahma and (was
known as) Rudra by name on account of the wailing.
1 . The minor dissolution of the world after 1 5 years of Brahm&’s life is
known as the dainandina pralqya. MW. p. 497b.
2. Vi.P. I. X. 10 reads Kardama and Urvarilpa.
3. Santati. Ft.Al.x.ll.
4. Anagha. Kt.P. l.x.14.

Agni Pur&m
21. O twice-born ! the grandfather (Brahma) said to
(him) (called him as) Bhava, Sarva, I^ana, Pa^upati^Bhima,
Ugra (and) Mahadeva.
22. His wife Sati gave up her life on account of the wrath
of Daksa and having become the daughter of Himavat again
became the wife of Sambhu (Siva).
23. (I will now describe) the methods of worship of Visnu
etc., preceded by bathing and other (rites) and yielding enjoy¬
ment and emancipation, by doing which Svayambhuva (Manu)
(had the benefit), as told by Narada and others to the sages.
CHAPTER TWENTYONE
Method of worshipping Visnu and other gods
JVarada said :
1. I will (now) describe the general method of wor¬
shipping Visnu and others as well as the mantras {mystic formulae)
which yield good to all. One has to worship (him by saying)
“Salutations to Acyuta (Visnu) and to (his) entire family
(of gods).
2-4. (Salutation to) Dhatr, Vidhatr,^ Gahga, Yamuna,
the two nidhis (treasures), the fortune of Dvara(ka), theVastudeity (the presiding deity of the housesite), Sakti (female divi¬
nity), Kurma (tortoise), Ananta (the serpent), the Earth,
righteous knowledge, detachment from the world, the omni¬
potence (of the lord), the unrighteousness etc, the root, stalk,
filament and pericarp of the lotus, J^gveda and other (Vedas) ^
Kfta and other (jmgas), sattva and other (qualities), the solar
and other regions, the pure and elevating union of knowledge
and action. One has to worship these.
5. Joy, truth, the goddess benevolently placed, Dui^a
(Parvati), speech, goblins, field and Vasudeva and others are
worshipped.
1. Dh&tf and VidhAtr are the two sons of Brahmi.

6. The heart, head, coat of mail, eye and weapons,
conch, disc, mace, lotus, Srivatsa (sacred mark on Lord
Krsna’s chest) and the Kaustubha gem are worshipped,
7. The garland of wood-flowers (worn by Kr$na), Sri
(Laksmi), Pusfi (nourishment), Garu^a (vehicle of Visnu),
and the preceptor are worshipped. Indra, Agni, Yama, Raksa
(Nairfta), water, wind, lord of wealth (Kubera) (are
also worshipped ) .
8. That liana, the unborn, and weapons, vehicles,
Kumuda and others (are worshipped next). By the worship of
Visvaksena (all-pervasive) (Visnu) in a circle first, one gets
his desires accomplished.
9. Then the general worship of Siva (is described). One has
to worship Nandin at first. (Then) Mahakala (Siva), Ganga,
Yamuna, Ganas, and others (are worshipped).
10-11. (Then) the speech, the goddess of prosperity, the
preceptor, the Vastu (deity), the different female energies and
Dharma (the lord of death) and other gods (are worshipped).
(The female energies) Varna, Jyestha, RaudrI, Kali, Kalavikarini, BalavikarinI, Balapramathini, SarvabhutadamanI, Manoman! and Siva (are worshipped) in the due order.
12. (Saying) Ham, Hum, Ham (salutation) to the form of
Siva, Siva is worshipped along with his limbs and mouth.
Haum, (salutation) to Siva, Haum and Ham (salutations)
to liana (one of the Paficabrahman forms of Siva) and other
faced (forms of Siva).
13. Hrim (salutation) to Gauri (Parvati) , Gam (saluta¬
tion) to Gana, face of Sakra (Indra), Can(jla, heart and others.
The mystic syllables in the worship of the sun (are described
now). The tawny-coloured Dant^in is to be worshipped.
14. One should adore UccailjiSravas (the horse of Indra),
the very much pure Aruna (younger brother of the Sun-god).
The moon and the twilight, the other faces and Skanda (progeny
of Siva) in the middle are worshipped.
15. Then (the female divinities) Dipta, Suk^a, Jaya,
Bhadra, Vibhuti, Vimala, Amogha, Vidyuta and Sarvatomukhi
are worshipped.
16. Then the mantra Ham, Kham, Kham for the firebrand
(is used for the worship) of the seat of the sun and (his) form.
Hriun, Hrim, salutation to the sun, Am, salutation to the heart.

Agni Purd$a
17. (Salutation) to the (rays of the) sun, to his head, and
similarly to the flames reaching up the regions of demons,
wind, earth, ether, and heavens. Hum is remembered
as the mystic amulet.
18-19. (Salutations are made) to the lustre, eye, Hrah,
to the weapons of Sun, Raji, Sakti, and Ni^kubha. Then Soma
(Moon), Ahgaraka (Mars), Budha (Mercury), Jiva (Jupiter),
Sukra (Venus) and Sani (Saturn) as well as Rahu, Ketu,
tejas, Ganda are worshipped in order in brief. Then the worship¬
per (should worship) the seat of the image (of the deity) and
the heart etc.
20. (The mantra) for the seat of Visnu for the image of Visnu
(is) “Ram, Srim, Srim, Sridhara, Hari.’* Hrim (is) the mystic
syllable for the images (of all deities) which is capable of capti¬
vating the three worlds.
21. Hrim, Hj*§ikela (master of the senses) (Visnu), Klim,
Visnu. With long vowels (one should adore) the heart and other
things. (The performance) of worship on the fifth day (paftcami)
with all these (mystic syllables) yields victory in battles.
22-23. Worship of the disc, mace, conch, pestle, sword,
Sarnga (the bow), noose, goad, Srivatsa (mark on the
chest of the lord), with the garland of wood-flowers and with the
mantra Srim, worship of Sri, Mahalaksmi, Tarksya (vehicle of
Vi§nu), the preceptor, Indra etc. (are made) in order. With
the (mystic) syllable Aum, Hrim, Devi (goddess) Sarasvati
(one has to worship) the seat of (Goddess) Sarasvati.
24. The Hrt etc., Lak§mi, Medha, Kala, Tu§ti, Pu^tika,
Gauri, Prabhavati, (and) Durga (the different female divinities),
goblins, preceptor and the presiding deity of the field (are
worshipped).
25. Then (one has to say) Gam, (salutation) to the lord
of the garj-osy Hrim to Gauri, Srim to Sri, Hrim to Tvarita, Aim,
Klim, Saum to Tripura using the fourth declensional endings
and ending with salutations.
26. All the mystic syllables are pronounced preceded by the
Pranava (syllable Om), adding bindu (the nasal sound marked
by a dot), either while offering adorations or the performance
of repetition.
27. By the offer of a homa (offer unto the fire) with sesamum
and ghee and other things, (these mantras) become bisstowers of

dharma, kdma, artha and mokfa (four principal objects of human
life). Whoever reads these syllables of adoration reaches heaven
after enjoying pleasures.
CHAPTER TWENTYTWO
Procedure for bathing prior to a religious rite
Mirada said :
1. I will (now) describe the (mode of) bathing preceding
(any religious ) act. Having taken a clod of earth accompanied
by (meditation on) the man-lion form (of Visnu), and making
it into two parts, (one has to do) mental bathing with one part
of it.
2. Having immersed (one’s body in waters) and having
partaken (three drops of) water and assigning (on the body)
with the lion (man-lion) one has to get himself protected. Then
one has to do bathing as laid down, being preceded by the
control of the breath.
3. Meditating on Lord Hari in one’s heart with the eightsyllabled mantra (Om namo Vasudevaya, Om namo Narayanaya
or Oiii namo Narasimh^ya), the clod of earth (is made)
into three parts on the palm and protection in (all) the quarters
(is achieved) with the recitation of (the mantra) for the lion
(man-lion).
4-7. With the recitation (of the mantra) of Vasudcva, having
mentally resolved the sacred water and having rubbed
the body with vedic mantras and having adored the image of
deity and having remembered the aghamarfo^ {sOkta)
which destroys sins) and putting on a cloth, perform the
(following) rite. Putting water on the palm, accompanied
by mantras and wiping off waters on the palm, controlling
with the Naraya^ {mantra) ^ the air is inhaled and water is let
off. Then contemplating on Hari, offering waters (of oblation)
and reciting the twelve-syllabled (mantra), appeasing all others
with devotion commencing in order with the seat of meditation,
the mantras upto all the guardian deities of the quarters, the

54 Agni PurOna
sages, clans of manes, men, all beings and ending with the mobile
(beings) are placed. »
8. Then having assigned limbs (for the different deities),
withdrawing the mantras one has to go to the house for perform¬
ing rites. In this way, one has to bathe with the mulamantra^.
CHAPTER TWENTYTHREE
Mode of performing worship
Ndrada said :
1-2. I will now describe the mode of worship, O brahmins I
by doing which one gets all (objects of life). Having washed
feet, sipping waters, and controlling his speech and having
guarded (himself like this), facing the east, and having seated in
the svastika or padm&sana or other posture (one has to meditate)
on (the syllable) yam at the centre of the navel, having tawny
colour and of the form of terrible wind.
3. Then meditating on the syllable k^aum of abundant lustre
at the centre of the heart, burn down all impurities from the
body.
4-5. One has to burn the impurities with the flames surging
upwards and downwards. One has to meditate on the {mantra)
of the shape of the moon situated in the sky. An intelligent per¬
son has to sprinkle his own body with the nectar-like waters
pervading the lotus in the heart through (the zxttTy)sufumnd
and passing through the nerves.
6. Having purified materials (for worship) one has to
assign (them). Then (one has) to purify hands as well as
implements. Commencing with the thumb of the right hand,
(the fingers) of the two hands are made to rest on the principal
limbs.
7-8. (Then) with sixty two mantras (sacred syllables) one
has to assign to the body the twelve limbs — heart, head, tuft of
hair, armour, weapons, eyes, belly, hinder part, arms, thighs,
knees and feet. Having offered the mudrd (special posture of the
1. mQlamanira is the basic subtle mystic syllable.

arms and body ) , one has to meditate on Vi^nu, and having repeat¬
ed (his name) one hundred and eight times, one has to worship
him.
9. Having placed the water-jar on the left and the mate¬
rials for worship on the right and having washed (them) with the
implements and water offerings, they are placed together with
flowers and scents.
10-11. Having sprinkled the radiant (form) of con¬
sciousness and omnipresence with waters (purified) by the
repetition (of the mantra of the lord) eight times (and) having
sprinkled the hand with mantra ending with phaf and then having
meditated on Hari, with his face directed towards the (south¬
east) direction (presided over by) Agni, (one has to pray) for
virtue, knowledge, detachment, (and) supremacy. (Facing)
the east (and other directions), (one has to get rid) of his sins
and physical impurities remaining in yogic postures.
12. (Remaining) in Kurma (tortoise) posture, one should
adore Ananta, Yama, the solar and other luminous regions and
other planets (occupying) the filament and pericarp (of the
lotus ) .
13-14. Having first meditated (on them) in one’s heart and
having invoked and worshipped in a circle, (offerings) of waters
of respect, waters for washing feet, waters for rinsing, madhuparka^
(respectful offering), bath, cloth, sacred thread, scents, flowers,
incense, lamp and eatables (are made) (along) with the formula
(known as) Pundarlkaksa.
15. First, one has to worship the limbs and then Brahma
at the doorway in the eastern (direction), the disc and the club
in the southern (direction) ; the conch, and the bow have to be
assigned in the corner (governed by) the moon.
16. One should assign the quiver and sword to the left and
right side of the deity, the armour and nourishment on the left,
and the prosperity on the right in front.
17. One has to worship with respective sacred syllables, the
garland of wild-flowers, (the mark) (the gem) kaustubha
and the presiding deities of the quarters outside and all (the
attendant gods) of Vi§9u as well either partially or wholly.
18-19. One has to worship with the limbs with the sacred
1. It consisti of curd, clarified butter, water, honey and sandalpaste.

Agni Fwdjxa
syllables partially or wholly. After having repeated (the sacred
syllables ) , doing circumambulation and adoration and ^ojffering
waters of adoration and the offerings, one has to assign in the
heart and after having meditated, “I am the brahman and Hari”,
(one has to repeat the words) ‘come’ used in (the ceremony of)
invocation and “forgive me” in dismissal (at the conclusion).
20. Having worshipped in this msinner with the mantra
of eight letters (one becomes eligible) to get liberation. The
(mode of) worship of one form (of a deity) has been described.
Listen to the (mode of) worship in the structure of nine (apart¬
ments).
21-23. Having assigned Vasudeva, Balarama) and others
to the two thumbs and then at first to the fingers, then to the
body, head, forehead, face, heart, navel, organ of
generation, knees, (and) between the feet, one has to
worship in order, single seat of the deity consisting of nine parts
and then the nine seats and of the nine forms consisting of nine
parts in nine lotuses as before. Then in the midst of the lotus one
has to worship Vasudeva.
CHAPTER TWENTYFOUR
Mode of constructing the sacrificial pit and the oblations unto fire
N&rada said :
1-2. I shall describe the mode of oblation to fire, by
which (one) gets all his desires fulfilled. One has to dig a square
pit after having measured out with a thread, four times, twentyfour thumbs in length. Leaving a space of the breadth of two
thumbs a girdle is to be made (around) the pit.
3. (One seat) of twelve thumbs in length, and eight, two
and four thumbs respectively in extent (should be made) in the
east.
4. (One) beautiful (seat) of ten, six and four thumbs in
extent and with a mouth, two thumbs in width and tapering
gradually should be made in the west.
5. It should be of the form of a leaf of the hoty fig tree and

should enter a little into the pit. A drain, quarter of a thumb in
breadth and fifteen thumbs in length (should then be dug).
6. The base (of the drain) at the scat (will be) three thumbs
■and the fore part six. (This is) the characteristic (of a pit) of
one cubit (hand) . (The characteristic of a pit) of two cubits is
twice (this).
7. I have thus described to you (about) the pit surrounded
by three altars. I will now describe (about) the circular pit.
A thread is to be fixed in half of the pit, the remaining portion
being fixed at an intermediate point.
8-9. Having placed half the rope in the pit, if (the rope)
is moved around it would be a circle. After having marked out
the centre, (if one makes) a crescent-shaped pit east-west, and
away from the northern direction, half (the size) of the pit and
half the angular portion, it indicates auspiciousness.
10. (In pits of) circular (shape) the girdles would be of the
shape of the petals of a lotus. The ladle for the sake of oblation
is to be made of the size of an arm.
1 1 . Then one has to make (ready) a site (of the length)
'Of thirteen thumbs and four (in breadth). A pit of three-fourths
(of the site) is dug and a beautiful circle (is made).
12-13. One has to purify (the space) outside the pit evenly,
horizontally and ujjwards (to the extent of) half a thumb (and)
•one-fourth of a thumb. A beautiful boundary line is to be made
with the remaining (space) (around) the pit.
14-15. Or it may be half a thumb more. Hie mouth would
i>e at the front (having) a width of four or five thumbs. Its
central part might be three times two thumbs and beautifiil.
'The extent (on all sides) (might be) of equal (measurement)
(and) its central portion is lowered.
16. There must be a hole at the neck portion (of such a size)
that the little finger would enter. The other pit should be beauti¬
fully made according to one’s liking.
1 7. The (sacrificial) ladle should have a handle of the length
•of one hand. A beautiful spt^n (having) circumference of two
thumbs has to be made.
18-19. Just as the cow’s foot (would) sink in a little mud,
-SO also after having drawn a line (of the length) of a thumb
^(known as) pajraadsiki, (one has to draw) firu a line with a fine

Affii Pufd^
tip, (then) two lines between it and the east (and) then three
lines in the middle from the south onwards in order. ^
20. Having drawn (the lines), (and) consecrating, with the
syllable Om, one who knows the mantras^ has to make a seat in.
which the energy of Visnu rests.
21-22. Having adorned the incarnate form (of energy),
one has to throw fire after having remembered Hari. Having
offered twigs of the size of a span (between the thumb and the
fore-finger) and having sprinkled water and having spread around,
on the three sides in the east etc. with the darbha grass, the fire
from the fuel as well as the ladle for pouring clarified butter,
(sruk) and sacrificial ladle (sruva) are to be placed on the ground.
23-26. (One should then place) vessels (for keeping)
clarified butter, (and) {cam) (oblation of rice, barley and pulse
boiled together), kuia grass and clarified butter. The prokfafiPvessel being sprinkled with water with ihc pranitd* vessel, (and)
taken up and filled with water (and) that water being enclosed
in the hand with the pavitra {darbha grass) placed in between
and having taken the prokfoni vessel towards the east and having
placed it in front of the radiant fire (and) having sprinkled
(all the vessels) thrice with water and having placed the fuel in
front, (and) having meditated on Vi^nu in the pranitd vessel
containing a flower and having then filled vessel for (keeping)
clarified butter with clarified butter and having placed it
in front, the purification of the clarified butter is made by strain¬
ing and sprinkling clarified butter on the fire.
27. One should take up two kuSa grass with unbroken tips,
not being filled in, and of the measure of a span (between the
thumb and the fore-finger) with the thumb and the nameless
finger (ring-finger) of the palm facing upwards.
28-30. Having taken with them the clarified butter twice
and having carried them, (they) must be cast downwards thrice.
And again having taken the ladles {sruk and snwa) (and) having
sprinkled them with water with them (the kuSa grass) and having
heated and wiped them with the darbhas and again having sprink>
led (water) and burnt and having placed along with the syllable
1. Small vessel used at the time of religious rites.
2. Small vessel used at the time of reli^ous rites.

Om, the aspirant must perform fire oblation commencing
with the syllable Om and ending with salutation. (One has to
perform) garbh&dhdna and other rites as much as it is laid
down.
31. One has to do upto the naming ceremony, the under¬
taking of a vowed observance, observance marking the conclusion
of study of the student, (and) investiture of authority in due
manner.
32. The aspirant must everywhere do the worship with the
syllable Om. One has to do offering unto fire with the
auxiliaries befitting one’s means.
33-34. CarbhddhSnd}- is the first one. Then pwhsavana* is re¬
membered. Then the simantonnayana^, jdtakarmaPy ndma {karana)^^
annaprdSana*y cdidkfti^t vratabandha^t and many more are the vedic
observances. One who has the right to do these rites should per¬
form these in the company of his wife.
35. Having contemplated (on the deity) in the heart and
other limbs and worshipping him, one has to offer sixty-four
oblations for every one of the rites again.
36. The worshipper has to offer the final oblation with the
sacrificial ladle, chanting loudly with sweet intonation the mystic
formula ending with the word vaufaf.
37. After having purified the fire of Vi§nu, the food intended
for Visnu has to be boiled. After having worshipped Vis^iu in
the altar and remembering the mystic formulae one has to
seek his protection.
38-39. Having worshipped in order his seat and other things
along with the enclosures with fragrant flowers and contemplat¬
ing on the most excellent lord of all deities, and placing the
fuel and then the supp>ort, the oblations of clarified butter
1. One of the purificatory rites performed to ensure conception.
2. One of the puiificatory rites performed to get a male child when the
embryo has not yet begun to move.
S. The parting’ of hair, another purificatory rite performed on the
eighth montli after conception.
4. rite performed soon after the birth of a child.
5. rite performed to name the child.
6. first partaking of food by a child.
7. tonsure at the age of three.
8. Undertaking a teligious observance.

€0 Agnt jPurdfui
(should be poured) in order (on fires) placed in the south-east,
north-east, north-west and south-west. »
40. Then having poured portions of the clarified butter in
the south and north, one has to offer oblation in the middle
reciting the mystic formulae in the order of worship.
41-42. One has to offer oblation with clarified butter to the
deity and a tenth part to the limbs. (Having offered) oblations
of clarified butter and other things hundred times or thousand
times, or of the twigs or of the sesamum, and concluding the
worship ending with the oblation and calling the disciples who
are pure, and placing the fed beasts in front, (they are) sacri¬
ficed by means of weapons.
43-45. Having united the disciples with one’s own self with
the fetters of knowledge and action and the consciousness which
follows the and which is protected along with the liiiga,
having been consecrated by means of contemplation, (they)
have to be purified by the syllables of Vayu. Then the creation
of the whole egg (the universe), consumed by the fire (and)
reduced into a heap of fire is contemplated upon with the sylla¬
bles of the Fire god. (Then one should sprinkle ashes on the
water and meditate on the world.
46. Then one has to assign the creative power which is
known as the seed of the earth and which is enveloped by all the
subtle principles.
47. Then one has to nieditate on the egg produced out
of it, (which) is its base ahd identical with the self. Then one
has to meditate on the form of the puru^a (the Supreme Being)
identical with the prax^a (the syllable Om) at its centre (centre
of the egg).
48. The lifiga^ situated in one’s self, (and) (which) has been
purified earlier, is then to be transferred. Then the positions of
the different important organs are to be thought of.
49. Then, having remained for one year, the is split.
The heaven and earth (are placed) in a part. Prajapati (the
creator) (is placed) in between the parts.
50. Having meditated on his form and again
having consecrated that child with the profova (syllable
Om) and having made his body made up of the mystic for1. Situated in one's own self, representing die Supreme Bong

mulae, (one has to do) the assignment (of limbs to different
deities) as described before.
51-52. Then having placed the hand of Visnu on the head
and contemplated on one or many (forms) of Vi^pu in this way,
(and) having muttered mantras (remaining) in meditative
posture, (and) seizing the hands with the basic mystic formula,
one who knows the mystic formula having covered the eyes with,
a cloth (has to sprinkle) water with a new cloth.
53. After having performed worship, the preceptor,
who knows perfectly well the nature of the god of gods, should
make his disciples sit facing the east and with folded palms
holding flowers.
54-55. Having been instructed by the preceptor in this way,
they (the disciples) also must adore Hari. Having oflered thehandful of flowers there (and) then having offered worship with
flowers without (the recitation of) any mystic formula and
saluted the feet of the preceptor, (the disciples) must give (him)
the fee, either all his possession or half of them.
56. The preceptor has to instruct the disciples thoroughly.
Hari must be worshipped by them by (the recitation of his)
names. The Lord Vi^vaksena^ (whose powers go everywhere),
who bears the conch, disc and mace has to be worshipped.
57. (Then, that deity) stationed in a circular altar, (and
who is frightening) (is worshipped) with the fore-fii^er and is
requested to leave.
58-59. The entire remnants of offerings to Vi$pu, must
be offered to Vi^vaksena. Then having bowed down and sprink¬
led (with waters), (their own persons), (the disciples) having^
placed the fire of the pit on their own person, Vi$vaksena b
permitted to leave. One who is desirous of enjoyment gets all
things. One who b desirous of release from mundane eacbtence
gets merged in Hari.
I. A fomi of that deity tQ iidiam the fregmenti of a sacrifice are oSbred;.
aln used as an attribute of Vifqu. MW, p. 996. cob I

Agni Purity
CHAPTER TWENTYFIVE
The formulae and mode of worship relating to Vdsudeva^ Sahkarfa^a^
Pradyumna and Aniruddha
ffirada said :
1 . I shall now describe to you the characteristics of the
adorable formulae related to Vasudeva and others. Vasudeva,
Saiikar^ana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha (are the four forms).
2. (The words) salutations to the lord (are said) at first
along with the mystical letters a, a, am, a^. (Then) beginning
with the syllable ‘Om* (and) ending with (the word) salutations
and then (the words) salutations to Narayana (are uttered).
3. Om, salutations to the eternal Brahma, Om, salutations
to Vi^nu, Om, K^aum, Om, salutations to the Lord Narasimha
(arc uttered).
4-6. Om, bkUi^t salutations to lord Varaha. The lords of
men having the colour of japd (flower) (red), brown, yellow,
blue, black, red, the colour of a cloud, fire, honey, (and)
tawny, (are) the nine lords of vowels (and) mystical letters.
The heart and the different limbs are resolved in order along
with their respective names being well divided by those proficient
in the tantras (branch of literature dealing with the magical and
mystical worship of different deities). The characteristics of
those mystical letters which are consonants are different.
7. They are divided by long vowels ending with (the word)
^salutation*. The limbs situated in between yoked with short
(vowels) are described as minor limbs.
8. The mystic syllable situated at the end of the last letter
of the name which is divided is excellent. The principal
and minor limbs (are composed) of long and short vowels inorder.
9-10. This is the method (of use) of consonants for
arrangement in the heart (and) other (limbs). One has to repeat
according to his accomplishment (the mystic formula ) divided
into the mystic basic syllable and their ending names (along with)
the names of limbs, after having resolved the yoked twelve
(limbs) beginning with the heart etc.
11. The heart, head, tuft, armour, eye, weapons (are)
1. The mystical syllable rq)resentuif the earth.

the six limbs of the mystic basic syllables of the basic (mystic
formula) constituting twelve parts.
12. One should then assign in order to (the limbs) — the
heart, head, tuft, hands, eyes, belly, back, arms, thighs, knees,
shank, (and) feet, (the following syllables and gods).
13. (The letters) kam, ^am, pam, ^am are for Vainateya*^.
(The letters) kham, (ham, pham, sam (are) for the brother of
mace-bearer (Kf^na). (The letters) gam, d^tn, vam, sam
(form) the mystic formula for the nourishment. Gham, dham,
bham, ham salutations to !§ri (Gk)ddess of wealth).
14. (One has to worship) P^cajanya*, (with the mystic
letters) vam, iam, mam, k$am. (The mystic letters) cham, tarn,
pam (are for the worship of) iCaustubha (gem worn by
Vi^nu on his head), jam, kham, vam for the Sudarlana (the
disc in the hands of Vi^i^u), samj vam, dam, cam, lam for
Srivatsa (the mark on the chest of^Visnu).
15. Om, dham, vam salutations to the garland of wild
flowers (worn by Visnu) and to the great Ananta.^ The limbs
are set forth with the words of the mystic formula consisting of
words without the mystic letters.
16. Along with the names ending with the caste (names),
the heart and other (limbs) (are set forth). The pranava (letter
Om) (is repeated) five times. Then the heart and other (limbs)
are mentioned five times.
17. With the pratiava (one should adore) the heart first.
(With the word) ‘for the supreme*, the head (and) the tuft and
with one’s name, the armour (are adored). The end of the name
would be (to worship) the weapon.
18. Om, the supreme weapon is the first. (Then) one’s
own name ending in the fourth case (is to be said). Then (the
word) ‘salutations* (comes) at the end. This consists of one to
twentysix parts.
19. One should worship prakfti (nature) at the tips of
the little and other fingers of the arms in (one’s) body. (That
one) consisting of prakfti (nature) is the second form of the
supreme being consisting dpmufa (soul).
1. Ganidat the eagle vehicle of bora to VinatS and Kaiyapa.
2. The name of the conch of Krnut.
3. Without end; may denote Wfuu as well as Seia Nftga.

Agni Pwrd^
20-21. Om (salutation) to the supreme being, the foremost
or the first soul. The air and the sun (are his) two forms. The
fire the third form having been assigned to pervade hands and
the body, wind and the sun in the fingers of hand, this
is embodied in the three parts in the two arms, left and the
other arm, in the heart, in the body forming the fourth state.
22. The p,goeda (is made) to pervade hand. The Yajm
{Tajurveda) is assigned to fingers. The form of Atharva (is
assigned) to two palms. Thus (assignments are made) in
(different limbs) head, heart, upto the feet.
23. As before having assigned the extensive sky to his arm
and body, wind and other (elements), to fingers, head, heart,
generative organ and the feet.
24. The wind, fire, water, earth (and sky or ether)
are spoken as his five forms. The mind, ear, skin, eye, tongue
(and) nose are said to be the six forms.
25-28. The extensive mind is assigned from the thumb
onwards to the head, mouth, generative organ and the
organ of excretion. The prime form is said to be consisting of
compassion. It is known as the jiva (life) (which is) all perva¬
sive. The seven (words), earth, ether, heaven, mahaSy januy
tapa and satyc^ are assigned duly to hands and the body begin¬
ning with thumb. The Lord of the world, the seventh one
and existing in the palm (is taken) gradually to the body, head,
forehead, mouth, heart, generative organ and feet. This is said
to be the Agniffoma.* (Next follows the description of) the* Vdja~
ptycP (and) the rites.
29-32. Atirdtra* and Aptorydma* (rites will also be described) .
The soul of the sacrifice which has seven forms extending to the
intellect, ego, mind, sound, touch, colour, taste, smell, comprehension, should be assigned duly to the fingers and the body.
A person has to assign it to the teeth, palms, head, forehead,
1. The seven woridieartb etc. are situated CHie above die other successively.
2. A sacrificial rite lasting for several days in qiring forming part c£ the
Jyotiftoma, a soma sacrifice.
S. One of the soma sacrifices performed by kings or by a brahmin a^iring
for higher position.
4. A rite forming part the soma sacrifice.
5. An optional part of the Jyotittoma sacrifice.
6. A partkttlar uny ot ofihriag the toms lacrifioe. ^

face, heart, navel, the generative organ and the feet. These are
remembered as the eight VyUhas (parts). The life which consists
of nine parts — life, intellect, ego, mind, sound, quality,
wind, colour, and taste, is assigned to two thumbs. They
(are placed) in order on the left hand by means of the forefinger
and other fingers.
33. Indra remains pervading the ten (limbs) consisting of
body, head, forehead, mouth, lieart, navel, the generative
organ, two knees and feet.
34-35. The fire (is assigned) to two thumbs. Mind
consisting of eleven parts — ear, skin, eye, tongue, smell,
speech, hand, foot, anus is assigned to head, forehead, face,
heart, navel, the generative organ, two knees and feet with
the forefinger.
36. The mind is made to pervade the male organ. The
two thumbs (are made to pervade) the ear. Commencing with
the fore-finger in order, the eight fingers (are assigned). The
(two fingers) left over are assigned to palm.
37. The head, forehead, month, heart, navel (are assigned)
in order to generative organ, two thighs, shanks, ankles and
feet.
38-39. Visnu, Madhuhara (killer of the demon Madhu),
Trivikrama, Vamana, 8ridliara, Hfsike^a, Padmanabha, Damodara, Ke^ava, Narayana, Madhava, Govinda (are the names of
Visnu). Visnu is made to pervade.
40. The thumb (and other fingers), palms, feet, two
knees, waist are assigned to head, crown of head, waist, knees
and feet.
41-43. There are twelve, twentyfive or twenty six parts —
the supreme being, intellect, ego, mind, thinkir^, touch, taste,,
colour, smell, ears, skin, eyes, tongue, nose, speech, hand, feet,,
anus, generative organ, earth, water, light, wind and sky.
The pervasive Supreme Being is assigned and then in the thumbsand other fingers.
44-46. The remnant are assigned in the palm, head, or fore¬
head and then face, heart, navel, generative mgan, thi^, knee,,
and feet are assigned to feet, kne^ thing, generative organ,
heart and head in order. A wise man has to meditate upon the
great soul of the Supreme Being in these twentysax thinga

Agni Purd^
as before and then the nature has to be worshipped in a circular
(altar). The heart and other (limbs) have to be worshipped in
the east^ south, west and north.
47. As before the weapons (of Visnu, Vainateya (the
vehicle bird of Vi?nu) (are adored) in the comers of south-east
etc. (One should adore) the guardian deities of the quarters
also. In (the worship of) three parts, the fire (will be) at the
centre.
48. The directions east etc. are decorated with the strength,
abode and kingdom.
49-50. The omnipresent form (of Vi?nu), endowed with all
parts and the five constituents Garuda etc. as well as Indra
and others, should be adored (by one) for conquering kingdoms
and for firmness of all (objects). One may get all desires
(fulfilled). Vi§vaksena (an epithet of Vi^nu) is worshipped by
(his) name, the mystic letter being placed in the ether.
CHAPTER TWENTYSIX
A description of different positions of fingers in worship
1. (I now) describe the characteristic of (the different)
positions of fingers (mudrS) (which) bring (the worshipper)
nearer (to the object of worship). Ahjali (folding of hands)
is the first mudrd. (The second) is the Vandani (fingers inter¬
locked) to be placed near the heart.
2. With the lefi; fist folded and the thumb erect, the right
thumb interwoven with the erect left thumb is said to be (the
third one).
3. (These are) the three common formations. The (follow¬
ing are) not common. By the unyoking of the smallest and other
fingers eight positions (are formed) in order.
4. The first eight basic syllables are repeated in order. One
has to bend the three fingers commencing with the little finger,
with the thumb.
5. One has to raise up the hand to the face ^ the ninth

mystic syllable. Then the left hand is raised up and bent half
slowly.
6. These are the mudrSs of the limbs of VarSha^ in order.
Then the left fist having been kept closed, the fingers are released
one by one.
7. The same position is held by the right hand also and
the previous position is bent down. The left fist (is held) with
the thumb erect. This results in the accomplishment of the
mudrd.
CHAPTER TWENTYSEVEN
Mode of performing the initiation rite :
Pfirada said :
1<2. I shall describe the initiation rite, which yields every¬
thing. Hari should be worshipped in the lotus in a circle. Hav¬
ing gathered the articles (required) for the sacrifice on the
tenth (lunar) day, assigning and consecrating hundred times
with the (basic syllables) of the man-lion {Narasirhha) (form)^
one should scatter on all sides the mustard seeds, destructive of
demons, ending (the act) with the syllable phaf,
3. The female energy, contained in every beir^, in the form
of grace is assigned there. Having collected all the herbs and
spread, they are consecrated.
4. A worshipper has to accomplish the five products* of the
cow hundred times in pure vessels by means of the five basic
forms.
5. Having sprinkled the earth (with the basic syllable)
ending with (the word) NarSyapa, with the tips oikuia (grass),
those scattered (things) are thrown with the raised hand with
the (basic syllable of) Vi^sudeva.
1. If the ttvo palms are placed together so as to form a cavity it rq>resents
the Varika Mudri.
2. Milk, curd, butter and the solid and liquid excreta.

Agni PurS$a
6. Then standing with the face facing the east one has to
meditate on Visnu in the heart. One has to worship Visnu4n the
waterpot along with the vardhanP.
7. Having recited hundred times the sacred syllables for
the weapon and having sprinkled the Vardhani (vessel) with a
continuous shower (of water) it should be taken to the north¬
east quarter.
8. Taking the jar on his back one has to place it on the
scattered (mustard seeds) , Then having gathered them by means,
of the Kuia (grass) one has to adore the presiding deity of the
jar and the karkari*.
9. One has to worship Hari adorned with clothes (and)
five jewels, on a piece of ground (made ready), offering oblations
to fire (for his sake) and reciting the sacred syllables, as before.
10. Sprinkling with a lotus and anointing with unguents
the worshipper has to fill the boiling vessel with clarified butter
and cow’s milk.
1 1 . Having looked at it with the V^udeva and the Sanghar-
$ana (basic syllables), rice mixed with clarified butter should
be thrown into milk well-cooked.
12. After stirring it with the (basic syllable of) Pradyunuia
the worshipper has to mix it slowly with the ladle and then the
cooked food is lifted with the (basic syllable of) Aniruddha.
13. Having washed him and besmearing (with sandals)^
the vertical mark is made on the forehead with the ashes. The
food thus prepared well is placed by the side with the (basic
syllable of) Nirayana.
14. A part of it has to be offered to the deity, the second part
to the jar, and with the third part he should offer three oblations.
15-17. The preceptor has to partake of the fourth part in.
the company of his disciples for the sake of purification. Havii^
consecrated seven times (the stick) got from the milky tree, the
piece of wood for cleaning the tree being made use of and dis¬
carded and being conscious of one’s tins and having offered obla¬
tions to the hundred auspicious and most excellent lions lying in
1. A wmter>jar of a particular shape.
2. A water-jar with tmall holes at the liottosn as in a skve.^

the north, northeast, east and southeast, having done the Ocamanc?"
and having entered the chamber of worship, the knower of the
mystic syllables should assign Vi$nu in the east and do circumambulation.
18. You are, alone, O Lord ! the refuge of the beings immer¬
sed in the ocean of mundane existence, for the release from the
fetters. You are always kind towards your worshippers.
19. “O Lord of Lords ! (you) permit (me). (I will) free
these beings by your grace from their earlier fetters by which they
are bound**.
20-21. Having submitted thus to the lord of the celestials
and having made the animals enter (the place), (they) have to
be purified then by holding them as before and to be consecrated
with the fire. Having yoked them with the deity their eyes should
be closed. Their eyes are covered. Handful offlowers are offered
there and their names are added.
22. Worship is made duly as before without reciting any
basic syllable (mantra). That particular name of the idol on
which the flower falls that is pointed out.
23. One should then take up a red thread spun by a maiden
•and measure it six times from the tuft of the hair to the toe and
again multiply it three times.
24. Then one should meditate on the Prakfti in which the
universe lies and from which the universe is born, as being pre¬
sent there,.
25. Having tied the nooses of Prakfti proportional to the
number of principles, that thread is placed on an earthen vessel
near the pit.
26. Then having meditated upon the principles commenoing with the Prakfti to the earth, following the order of creation,
the spiritual teacher should assign them to the body of the dis¬
ciple.
27. Those (principles), one, five, ten or twelve* may be
tied individually and given by those who devote their thought
on the principles.
1. Acemana consists of sipping three drops of water, followed by touching
of different parts of body reciting the different names of Vispu.
2. /Voiftt is represented by tme, the subtle principles by five, the organs
of perception and action by ten, and these ten togttixtr with Prakj^ and mind
by twelve.

Agni PurUtfa
28-29. With the five organs of action (one has to create)
the entire universe in the order of evolution. Having drawn the
subtle principles into one’s self and (having placed) the rope of
illusion on the animal, the nature is taken as the creative power,
the intellect or the mind as the agent, the five subtle principles
as born of intellect and the five elements from the organs of
action.
30-31. One has to meditate on these twelve principles in
the rope as well as in the body according to his desire. Having^
made oblations with the residue of offerings according to the
order of creation, and hundred oblations to each and every
(principle) and then the final oblation, the earthen vessel is
covered and is dedicated to the presiding deity of the pot.
32-33. Having duly performed the initial consecration, the
devoted disciple is initiated. Then in a place where the wind
blows, an arrow of a particular shape and a knife made either of
silver or iron as well as all necessary materials are placed; and
touched with the principal mystic syllable he should perform the
initial consecration ceremony.
34. He should then say “Salutations,. (I offer) the food to
the goblins on the Arufa grass”. Then having contemplated upon
Hari, the sacrificial yard is adorned with multitudes of vessels
of sweet meats.
35. Visnu is then worshipped in a circular altar. Then after
offering oblations to the fire, the pupils who are seated in the
Padmdsana}^ posture are called upon and are initiated.
36-37. Having sprinkled water on Visnu, and touching the
head gradually, all the principles from the primordial down to
the transformations as well as their presiding deities, the entire
divine creation is conceived in the heart and all the subtle princi¬
ples which have become one with the soul are absorbed gradually
38-40. Then the preceptor has to pray the presiding deity
of the pitcher and draw the thread. Then having come near the
fire and placing it (the thread) by the side of the fire, he (should
offer) hundred oblations to the passive Lord of creation with the
principal mystic syllable. Then the preceptor having reached
1. Sitting with crossed legs, the feet placed over the thigh of the opposite

him, and having offered the final oblation, has to collect the white
dust and strike the heart with that sanctified by the basic mystic
syllable and ending with the syllables hum and phaf^
41. Then oblations are separately offered in order to the
earth and other principles with mystic syllables made up by
subtractii^ syllables.
42. When Hari has been uttered unto the fire which is the
abode of all principles, the wiseman has to remember the
method that is being followed there.
43. Separating by means of beating and collecting (them)
one has to remain quiet. Then after collecting by the Prim¬
ordial, an offering is made into the fire as instructed.
44. After offering eight oblations each (in favour) of (Garbddhdna^y Jdtakarma^y enjoyment and dissolution, he should offer
them for purification.
45. The preceptor should take up pure materials and bring
together the two excellent principles in order in such a way they
are not broken.
46. Then the soul, freed from fetters is immersed in the
supreme soul in the supreme undecaying position.
47. A learned person has to think of the peaceful, supreme,
blissful, pure intellect and ofier the completing oblation. Thus
ends the (rite of) initiation.
48. I shall describe the mystic syllables for the applica¬
tion with which the oblation (relating to) the initiation is.
closely associated:
Otfi^ Yamy the goblins, the pure Aam, pha^. By this one should
strike and separate the two.
49. Om,ycmi I destroy the goblins. After having seized this
(syllable) (you) hear (the mode of) yoking it with the nature.
0«, am, the goblins and the males. I shall describe the mystic
syllable for the oblation as well as the final oblation.
50. Om, destroy the gobliriS; oblations. Om, am, Om, salu¬
tations to the Lord VSsudeva, vaufap. After the final oblation the
disciple has to be accomplished. In this way the wiseman has
to purify the principles.
1 . The rite pOformed for facilitating conception.
2. TTie ceremony performed at the birth of a child.

Agni Purd^
51. Ending with (the word) salutation and with the basic
syllable sva and preceded by beating (one has to say) ,0m, vdm,
the organs of action, Om, dem, the org^ans of intellect (sense).
With the syllable j'om simileu: beating etc. are done.
52. Om, sum, to the principle of smell, separate, hum, phaf.
Om, protect, hd. Om, svam, svam, unite with the primordial.
Om, sum, hum, to the principle of smell, destroy oblations. Then
the final oblation is to be applied in the northern direction as
follows: Om, rdm, to the principle of taste. Om, bhem, to the
principle of colour. Om, ram, the principle of touch. Om, em, to the
principle of sound. Om, bham, salutations. Om, som, egoism.
Om, nam, to intellect. Om, Om, to the primordial. This method
of initiation has been described in brief in the case of the deity
of a single form. The procedure for the nine-vyuhas etc. are also
remembered to be of the same kind.
53. A person after having consumed (all the things) should
consign the primordial thing to eternal bliss. Then a person has
to consign the primordial thing to the Lord devoid of transfor¬
mation.
54. Then having purified the elements, one has to purify
the instnunents of action, the intellect, the principles, mind,
luiowledge and egoism.
55-56. After having purified the soul of the body, he should
again purify the primordial principle at the end. The supreme
being and the pure primordial principle stationed in the Lord
(which is) held under control and has been rendered an abode
after being freed from bondage is contemplated upon and the
final oblation is offered. This is the (mode of) initiation for a
person (who is) fit.
57-58. Having worshipped with the constituents of the
mystic syllables, the principles are imiformly carried and gradu¬
ally purified. Having meditated (on the Lord) endowed with
all accomplishments, the final oblation is made. This is the (mode
of) initiation for an aspirant in case if there is no abundance of
articles and no capacity for a person.
59. Having worshipped the lord as before endowed with
all the materials, the excellent preceptor has to initiate (the
disciple) on the dsj&doH (the 12th day) from the beginning of the
rite.

60. The disciple must be devoted, humble, endowed with
all physical qualities, not very rich. Such a person is initiated
■after the worship of the deity irt the altar.
61-62. Having contemplated the entire path, divine, pertain¬
ing to the elements or to the self, in the order of their creation in
the body of the disciple, the preceptor, desirous of creation,
having offered first sixteen oblations to Vasudcva and other
(gods) who are radiant, with their respective mystic syllables,
(they are) allowed to go.
63-65. Then purification is made by oblation in the order of
destniction. Having released all the fetters of deeds, the precep¬
tor, has to purify the principles, having drawn them in order
from the body of the disciple. Having dissolved in the fire, the
primordial Visnu and the Supreme Spirit, the pure principle
is accomplished by (offering) final oblation with impure prin¬
ciple. After the disciple had attained his natural state, he has
to consume all the qualities of the primordial being.
66. The preceptor has to release or bind the children. Or
the preceptor remaining in his natural state has to perform a
different kind of initiation (called) ^aktidik^a^.
67-69. Having worshipped Vi§nu placed nearby with the
lad in an altar and (who) is being adored with the devotion of
ascetics and mendicants, the pupil remains facing the deity, the
self (preceptor) facing obliquely. After having contemplated
upon the entire course which has been resolved by him (the
preceptor) according to the phases of the moon, (the preceptor)
has to think deeply with contemplation on the Lord, the supreme
spirit, stationed in the body of the disciple.
70. As before all the principles have to be purified gradually
by beating etc. on the altar of Hari. Then (he) who is bent on
the inquiry of the self has to set them aside after having taken
them, and beating.
71 . He should purify them befitting their nature and unite
them with the deity. They are then collected with pure mental
disposition and yoked in order.
72-73. By means of contemplative mood and the pose of
knowledge (jfidnamudra) (they) are all purified. When all the
1 . Initiation rite rdating to the female mergy or goddess.

Agni PurdJfa
principles have been thus purified and the Supreme lord remains
as the main, the principles have to be burnt and (the ffre) extin¬
guished and the disciples have to be engaged in the service of the
Lord. Then the excellent preceptor should conduct the aspirant
on the path of accomplishment.
74. In the same manner, a householder becomes qualified
by remaining vigilant in (the performance of) the rites. One
has to remain purifying his self until there is dissipation of anger.
75. After having known himself as shorn of anger and puri¬
fied from sins, a self-control led person should confer the right on
(his) son or the disciple.
76. After having burnt the noose composed of illusion, renou¬
ncing and remaining in (the contemplation) of the self, he, who
possesses the unmanifest form, should remain waiting for the
decay of his body.
CHAPTER TWENTYEIGHT
Mode of anointment for the preceptor
1-2. I shall describe the anointment of the preceptor as
the son would do and by which an aspirant would become accom¬
plished and a diseased would get rid of the disease, the king
(would get his) kingdom, a woman would get a child and also
destruction of impurity. Pictures made of earth and endowed
with gems are to be placed in the middle, the east etc.
3. Thousands or hundreds (of them are placed) in a circular
form and Vi$nu in the east and north-east at an elevated place in
an altar.
4. Having placed all of them the aspirant (should assign)
his son in parts. Afiier having worshipped well the anointment
should be performed preceded by songs etc.
5. Men should offer yogic seats etc. requesting his favour.
The preceptor also should announce the terms and the pupil
(initiated) into the secrets then becomes the recipient of all (that
he wants). «

CHAPTER TWENTY-NINE
Mode of worshipping Hart in the figure called Sarvatobhadra
Ndrada said :
1 . The aspirant has to accomplish the mystic syllable in the
temple of the deity after having worshipped the Lord Hari in a
circular figure in a purified ground.
2. One has to draw circles etc. in a square piece of ground,
the Sarvatobhadra}- is drawn in the compartments of rora, bSsiM
and akfi.
3. A lotus seat containing thirty-six apartments should be
outside in a row. Among these two (squares are set apart) for
the path-way and two for the doors in the quarters.
4. A lotus figure is drawn in front outside and a circle is
drawn around it. Half of the lotus is divided into twelve compart¬
ments.
5. Having thus divided it one should draw four circles, one
around the other. The first one is that of the pericarp and the
second, that of the filaments.
6-7. The third (is) that of the joints of the petals and the
fourth, that of the tips of the petals. The joints of the petals are
marked by stretching the threads from the angular points upto
the middle of the side facing the angle and placing them on the
tips of the hlaments. Then the threads are made to lie (fall) and
then an eight-petalled lotus is drawn.
8. Having allowed a measure (equal to) the space between
the joints of the petals, the tops of the petals are drawn in front
of it and afterwards.
9. Having allowed in the middle a measure of space (equal
to that) of the interstices between the petals, two filaments are
drawn in between every two petals.
10. This is the ordinary lotus circle said to be of twelve pe¬
tals. Circles are drawn in order in the cast of the measure of half
the pericarp.
11. By this drawing there will be six circles on its side. In
this way there will be twelve fish and twelve petals.
1. It is so caUed because it brings about all round hairiness.

Api.i PurO^a
12. Having drawn a fish with five petals of a lotus for the
sake of success, the skyline (is made) outside the s<%t (altar).
The compartments are (cleanly) swept.
13. Four other places for the feet (are made ready) in the
angular points. Besmeared vessels are kept in the four quarters.
14. Two rows are marked in the quarters for the sake of
pathway. Doors are made in all the four quarters.
15. A wise man has to make eight ornaments of graceful
expressions by the side of the doors. An equal number of orna¬
ments are also to be made by their side.
16. Then corners of ornaments should be made. In each
■one of the middle compartments in all the four directions, two
figures are drawn.
1 7. The four outer compartments are cleansed, as well as
one on each side. Three figures are drawn on each side of the
petal for beautifying it.
18. Similarly, three ornaments are to be drawn on the oppo-
-site direction inside the angular point as well as outside without
any difference between the two.
19. In this way, sixteen compartments are formed and in the
same manner another circle is formed. In the (figure having)
twelve compartments a lotus figure with thirtysix petals (is
drawn) .
20. As before one line is drawn at each door for beautifica¬
tion. In the circular altar of one cubit a lotus should be drawn
(having) twelve finger-breadth.
21. A door should be drawn of the measure of two cubits
by one cubit. The altar should be a square. The disc of the lotus
should be of two cubits.
22. Half the lotus is drawn with nine (finger breadth), the
navel with three, the radius with eight (breadth), the circumfe¬
rence with four.
23. Having divided the ground into three parts, an inner
figure is marked with two (breadth). For the sake of accompli¬
shing (onc*s object) one has to mark the five vowels inside and
the radii.
24. Then according to his desire, one has to draw figures of
the petals of lotus or citron leaves or of the shaj^e of lotus leaves.

25. Having fixed at the junction of the radius and having
moved around the outer circumference and having stationed in
the middle link line one has to move upto the root of the radius.
26. The middle fire-producing stick is moved equally station¬
ing in the middle of the radius. Some more figures resembling
citron leaves are drawn in this way for the sake of accomplish¬
ment.
27-29. Then the ground should be divided into seven parts
each of them measuring equally of fourteen cubits. There should
be two hundred and ninety-six apartments. (The word) Bhadra
(welfare is written in four (compartments) in the middle. All
around that (space) is set apart for pathway. Then lotus (figures)
are drawn in all directions. Having swept clean around the
pathway, four central quarters in all directions are set apart
for (providing) the neck.
30. ‘Four (apartments) are set apart outside and then three
in each row. By the side of the neck there should be (an apart¬
ment) outside known as the ornament.
31-32. Among the outer angles leaving off seven, (the rest)
and three inside are sprinkled (with water). An altar of nine
divisions is formed in this way consisting of nine parts. (This
is) the circular (altar) of twentyfive compartments (in which)
the universal form of Hari is worshipped. Thirty-two cubits of
ground should be equally divided into thirty-two (compart¬
ments).
33-34. When it is done in this way, there would be one thou¬
sand and twenty-four compartments. Having written the (word)
bhadraka (welfare) in the sixteen middle squares and having
sprinkled water on the adjacent rows (of compartments), the
eight are written in sixteen apartments in all direc¬
tions.
35. Then having sprinkled the rows (of compartments)
and writing sixteen bhadrakas the rows all around are sprinkled
and allotment is made.
36-38. Twelve doors (arc drawn) in the usual order in each
quarter. Having omitted the six (compartments) inside and
having sprinkled for beautification the four at the centre, the four
on the sides and two inside and outside, and having cleansed
three inside and five outside for accomplishing additional doors,.

78 Agni Pur&t^i
as before beautification is made. Seven of the corners outside
and three apartments inside are cleansed. •
39. The supreme brahman is to be worshipped in the auspi¬
cious twenty-five (compartment) formation. Then in the lotus
(drawn) in the middle commencing with east, Vasudeva and
other deities are worshipped in order.
40. Having worshipped the boar-form in the lotus in the
east the formation is worshipped in order until the thirty-six
(forms are finished).
41. With the effort that it has to be worshipped, (one has
to worship) all formations in the order in the single lotus as
described. The progenitor is regarded as the sacrifice.
42. Acyuta divided into mziny forms is regarded as ‘truth*.
Forty cubits of the ground in the north has to be divided in order.
43-44. Each one (of these divisions) are again (first) divided
into seven parts and then into two. Then of one thousand seven
hundred and sixty-four apartments we will have a bhadraka
(figure) (formed) by the central sixteen apartments. There will
be a pathway on the side, then eight bhadra apartments and a
pathway.
45-46. Then sixteen (figures) of lotuses and twenty-four
lotuses for the rows and thirty-two for the pathway and forty
rows and a passage with the remaining three rows (are drawn).
The doors are provided with ornaments and minor beautifica¬
tions in the directions, omitting the centre.
47. For accomplishing, two, four and six doors (space) is
cut off in the four directions and five, three and one outside (are
set s^art) for accomplishing the adornment of the doors.
f
48. In the same manner, six or four (compartments) are
omitted outside the door and four inside. There will be six minor
adornments.
49-50. There should be four doors on one side or three doors
specifically in each direction. One has to draw five apartments
at the angular points (as well as) in the rows in order. An auspi¬
cious altar dear to a mortal has to be (drawn) in this manner.

CHAPTER THIRTY
Mode of worship of different gods in specially drawn lotus figures
J/drada said :
1 . One has to worship Brahma in the lotus at the centre,
the lotus-navelled (Vijnu) with all his retinue in the east, the
nature (primordial matter) in the lotus in the south-east and
the supreme spirit in the lotus in the south.
2, (One has to worship) the fire-god (in the lotus) at the
south of the supreme spirit, the wind-god in the south-west and
west, the sun in the lotus of the moon, the Rg- (Veda) and Yajur-
(Veda) in the lotus of the lord.
3-4. Indra and other gods are to be worshipped in the six¬
teen (lotuses) in the second (row) then, (along with) the Sama-
(veda), Atharva (veda), sky, wind, lustre, water, earth,
mind, ear, skin, (and) eye. One should also worship the tongue,
nose, (the worlds) Bhu, (and) Bhuva.
5-7. Having worshipped (the worlds) Mahas, Janas, Tapas
(and) Satya and (also the sacrifices) Agni|{:oma, Atyagnis(oma,
Uktha, $o^a$I, Vajapeya, Atiratra, one has to worship Aptoryama, mind, intellect, ego, sound, touch, colour, taste, (and)
smell in order in twenty-four lotuses. (One has to worship) the
soul, ego, the lord of the mind, (and) the sound principle of the
primordial matter.
8-9. (One should then worship) the images of Vasudeva
and others, having worshipped the (following) ten — the soul,
mind, ear, skin, eye, tongue, nose, speech, hand, (and) foot in
thirty- two lotuses. One has to worship these in the fourth enclo¬
sure along with their attendants and retinue.
10. Having worshipped the anus and penis one has to wor¬
ship the lords of the twelve months as well as the twentysix forms
commencing with Puru$ottama in the external enclosure.
1 1 . Among these the Lords of the months are to be worshipp¬
ed in the lotus of the disc. Then the eight, six, five or four (total
twenty three) principles of the primordial matter (are to be
worshipped) in another (lotus).
12-13. Then one has to dust in a drawn circular altar. (You)
hear. The pericarp should be of yellow colour, and all the lines

Agni PurO^a
equal and white. (They) should be two cubits long and one
thumb in breadth. Half the length are white. The joints ^(should
be coloured) white, black or dark-blue.
14. The filaments should be red and yellow-coloured. The
corners should be filled with red. The yogic seat should be bedec¬
ked with any of the colours according to one’s own desire.
15. The pathway is decorated with canopy of creepers and
leaves. The entrance to the altar (should be painted) white,
bright-red and yellow.
16. Ornamentation of all the white corners (is done) with
blue (colour). It has been said that the altar bhadraka should be
filled (with the colours) and in this way the other (altars) are
filled.
1 7. The three corners should be decorated with pale, red
and black, the two corners with red and yellow (and) the centre
of the circle by black.
18. The black (coloured) radii (should be decorated) by
yellow and red, the circumference with red, the lines outside
(being drawn) in white, brown, red, black and yellow.
19. The powder of rice (is) white. The dust of saffron is
red. It (becomes) yellow with turmeric. From burnt grains
(we get) black (colour).
20. (It becomes ) black with iami leaves and other (leaves ) .
By the repetition of the basic mystic letters lakh times and of the
basic syllables four lakh times, a lakh of mystic learning is
accomplished.
2 1 . Ten thousand times of the science of intellect and thou¬
sand times of the hymns (are repeated). The purification of the
self by means of a lakh of the basic syllables is done prior to this.
22. Then with another lakh, the basic syllable would get
established. It has been well advocated that oblation of the
mystic letters is similar to the prior service.
23. The prior service has been advocated to be performed
with a tenth part of the mystic syllables. The monthly austerity
has to be performed with the preparatory mystic syllable.
24. The left foot should be placed on the ground and the
donation should not be accepted. In this way by the repetition,
twice or thrice (one gets) mediocre and excellent accomplish¬
ments.

25. I shall describe the (mode of) contemplation of the
mystic syllable, by which (one gets) the benefits got from the
basic syllable. The gross form is composed of sound and is laid
down as the outward deity.
26. The subtle form composed of lustre becomes the mental
(figure) made up of thoughts in the heart. That (form) which is
beyond thinking, is declared as the supreme.
27. The potential of the bear, lion and other forms are
principally gross. The form of Vasudeva is declared as that be¬
yond the reach of thought.
28. The other forms are remembered always as existing in
the thoughts of the heart. The gross (form) is said to be
vairaja (belonging to Brahman) and the subtle form would be
marked.
29-32. The form beyond thought is declared as that of
I^vara (the lord). One has to contemplate on the lustrous,
undecaying consciousness residing in the lotus of the heart,
(namely) the basic letter, the soul of the basic letter of the shape
of a kadamba flower. Just a lamp lies obstructed inside the pitcher,
so also the lord of the mystic syllable lies restrained in the heart.
There are many holes in the pitcher. The beams of the light come
out through them. In the same way the beams of the mystic
letters come out through the tubular organs. Then uniting
themselves with the power of the deity they exist in the body.
33. The tubular organs, having come out from the heart,
come within the ken of the sense of sight. Among those (tubular
organs) the two tubular organs Agni and Soma are (those which)
remain at the tip of the nose.
34. Then having conquered the wind in the body the reci¬
ter of the basic syllable engaged in the repetition and contemp¬
lation enjoys the benefits of the basic syllable.
35. With the gross elements and subtle principles purified,
contented (and) practising (one) gets animd!- etc. (Remain¬
ing) detached and depending on the lord of the soul one gets
free from the gross elements and subtle principles and seizure
of the organs.
1. The first among the eight kinds of superhuman poweis by which one
is able to become very minute.

S2
Agni Purina
CHAPTER THIRTYONE
Mode of cleansing oneself and others
Agni said :
1. I will now describe (the rite) known as the cleansing
for the protection of one’s self and others, by which a man would
become freed of miseries and get happiness.
2-3. Om, salutations to the greatest object, the soul, the
great soul, the formless and many-formed, the all-pervading,
supreme soul, blemishless, pure and (person) engaged in medi¬
tative contemplation. Having saluted I shall expound. May my
words prove true.
4. (Salutations) to the Boar, Man-lion and Dwarf (forms of
Visnu), the great sage. Having saluted I shall expound. May
my words prove true.
5. (Salutations) to Trivikrama (a form of Visnu, as he
measured the three steps and removed the pride of the demon
Bali), Rama, Vaikuntha (abode of Vi§nu), the (Supreme) man.
Having saluted I shall expound. May my words become true.
6. O Boar, Lord as Man-lion, Lord as Dwarf, Trivikrama,
Hayagrivesa (Lord as Horse-necked), Lord of all beings, Hrsikesa (Vi^nu) (the Lord of all senses) destroy my impurity.
7. With these four most excellent weapons, the ever victo¬
rious disc and others of unbroken power, you become destroyer
of all wicked things.
8. You remove the calamity of such a person and do (him)
all good and also (remove) the fear of distress due to fetters
of death which is the fruit of sins.
9. (You) destroy the magical incantations set up by others
with meditation for working evils, causing diseases and decrepi¬
tude.
10. Om, salutations to V^udeva, Kr^i^a, bearer of sword.
Salutations to lotus-eyed, Kelava(and) the first holder of the
disc.
1 1 . Salutations to the wearer of clean dress made yellow by
the filaments of lotuses (and) the disc (of Vi^^u) hurled on the
shoulders of the enemies at the great battle, (and) the wielder
of the same.

12. Salutations to the one who lifted the earth on his tusk^,
who has the three forms embodied in him, the great Yajfiavaraha,* and the one who reclines on the hood of (the
serpent) Sesa.
13. Salutations to you, the divine lion having manes of the
hue of molten gold, eyes bright like the burning fire, (and) claws
(harder) than thunder-bolt to touch.
14. Salutations again and again to you, Kasyapa, the short¬
est statured, adorned with the Tajur and Sama (veda) (and)
the Dwarf form which covered the earth.
15. O Boar, One with huge tusks, you crush all evils
completely, their effects and also the effects of sins.
16. O Man-lion, having a dreadful face (and) the burning
fire in between the teeth, the destroyer of distress, you break¬
down all evils by your cry.
1 7. May Janardana (Visnu) , the one who assumed the form
of a Dwarf, dispel all grief of this person by words embedded
with thej^lj', Tajur and Sdma (veda).
18-19. O Govinda ! (You) destroy quickly this person’s
sufferings. Destroy fevers — quotidian occurring on alternate
days, tertian, quartan and also the terrible satata^ those arising
out of derangement (of humours), sannipdta (caused by the
derangement of three humours ) , as well as accidental.
20-24. The diseases of the eye, the afflictions of the head,
diseases pertaining to the stomach, (difficulty) in breathing in,
excessive breathing, burning (sensation) in the body along with
trembling, diseases in the anus, nose, feet, leprosy as well as con¬
sumption, and diseases like jaundice and very dreadful urinary
disease, fistula, all kinds of dysentry, disejises of the mouth,
chest (diseases), stone in the bladder, strangury, and other dread¬
ful diseases, diseases caused by wind, biles and phlegm and
others like sannipdta, accidentally afflicting diseases, (poison
due to) spiders and boils etc.
25. May all these be destroyed by the recitation of (the
name of) Visipu. Being struck down by the disc of Hari, may all
these (ailments) be completely destroyed.
1 . This refers to the lifting of earth from waters assuming the form of a
boar by Vi^^u.
2. The boar-form of Vi^u.

Agni PurSna
26. I am uttering verily the truth. Being scared by the reci¬
tation of the names Acyuta (undecaying), Ananta (unending),
Govinda (cowherd) (all are synonyms of Visnu), all the
diseases are destroyed.
27-28. On his (name) being recited, may Janardana des¬
troy the poisons of animate and inanimate objects, as well as
artificially made, those caused by teeth, by nails and those arising^
from the sky as well as those caused by (insects like) spider and
others which cause grief.
29-31. May the life of boyhood of Visnu (Kfsna) des¬
troy the evil forces which afflict mothers and children^
such as, planets, evil spirits, female goblins, vampires, ghosts,.
gandharvaSy yaksas, demons, the impeding forces such as 8akuni
Putana and others, (the female forces such as) Mukhamandi,
Revati and the terrible Vfddharevati, and the fierce forces known
as Vfddhaka.
32. May these evil forces which afflict at the old age, and
the children and the youth be scorched by the looks of the Manlion.
33. May the dreadful face of the Man-lion of enormous stren¬
gth destroy these evil forces completely for the welfare of the
world.
34. O Man-lion, O Great lion, possessor of garland of
flames, Fiery-mouthed, Possessor of fiery eyes. Lord of all, devour
the evil forces completely.
35-37. May the Lord of all (beings). Supreme Lord, Janar¬
dana destroy diseases, great portents, poisons, great evil
forces, the fierce beings, the afflictions due to the planets which¬
ever is cruel, the injuries caused by weapons, and jvdlagarda’’
bhaka^ etc., assuming any one of the forms of Vasudeva and hur¬
ling the Sudar^ana disc which is dreadful like a garland of fire.
O Acyuta, the foremost among gods (you) destroy the evil
forces.
38. O Sudarsana, the huge fire and great sound (you)
destroy (all evils). O Vibhi^ana (one who frightens) ! may
all the evil demons get destroyed.
1. a kind of disease in which pimples appear on tlie body. See MW.

39. May the Man-lion (deity) , the soul of all beings, possess¬
ing terrihc roars protect me in the east, west, south and north.
40. May Lord Janardana of manifold forms protect me
in heavens, on the earth, in the sky, behind me, on the sides and
in front of me.
41. As Visnu (protects) the entire universe (consisting of)
the celestials, demons and mortals, may the evils of this person
be put down by that truth.
42. As the sins get destroyed atonce by the remembrance of
Visnu, may all evil of this person get destroyed by that truth.
43. As the Supreme Lord Visnu has been extolled in the
veddnta (the philosophical inquiry is known as it forms the con¬
cluding portion of the Vedas) may all the evils of this person get
destroyed by that truth.
44. As Visnu, the lord of sacrifices is exolled among the
celestials, may what all has been uttered by me become so by
that truth.
45-46. May there be peace. May there be good. May the
evil of this man get destroyed, being agitated by me with the
kuia (grass) originating from the body of Vasudeva. May Govinda, the Nara-Narayana^ cleanse me. May there be remo. 1
of all miseries by the chant (of the names) of Hari in the same
manner.
47. This is the weapon which cleans and which wards
off all diseases. I am Hari. The kuia grass is Visnu. Your
diseases have been destroyed by me.
CHAPTER THIRTYTWO
Narration about the purificatory rites
Agni said :
1. An intelligent man has to do forty-eight purificatory
1. Form of Krfo^! originally cemceived as identical; spoken as re¬
presenting Kr^pa and Aijuna in later epics and katyoj. See Apte SD. p. 281.

8$ 4gni Purdtfa
rites^ among the initiatory rites for attaining liberation. You
hear them, by which one may become a celestial. ,
2. One has to perform garbhddhana as soon as the con¬
ception takes place, then the purhsavanar rite, the simantonnayana^,
the jdtakarma*, and the naming ceremony.
3. (One has to perform the rites of) giving food (to the new
born child), then the tonsure, and the brahmacarya (the life of
celibacy practised by a boy while studying the Vedas). (One has
to perform) the four (rites) — the vaifnavt, pdrthi, bhautiki and
Srauti^y and making a gift of cows, entering the life of a house¬
holder after completing one’s vedic studies.
4-7. The seven kinds of Pdkayajnas^ are astakd, pdrvanairdddha
irdvani, dgrayani, caitri and divayuji. The Haviryajnas'’ are seven.
(You) hear them. (They) are (agni) ddhdna, agnihotra, darSapUrnamdsa, cdturmdsya, paiubandha, and saulrdmani. (You) hear
the seven kinds of Somasamsihds^ agniffoma the excellent sacrifice
atyagnisfoma, uktha, sodafi, vdjapeya, atirdtra and aptorydma. These
are of thousand kinds.
8-9. They are hiranydnghri, hiratiydk^a, hiranyamiira, hiranyapdni, hemdksa, hemdnga, hemasutraka, hiranydsya, hiranydfiga, hemajihva, and hiratiyavat. The aSvamedha is the excellent among them.
Now you hear the eight virtues.
10-11. They are — compassion towards all beings, forbear¬
ance, sincerity, purity, ease, wishing the welfare of all, liberality
and freedom from avarice. A hundred oblations are to be offered
with the basic mystic syllable. The same procedure is to be
followed in the initiation (ceremony) related to Saura, Sakti
(the female deity) and Visnu.
1. The purificatory rites are referred to as twelve. See Mam 2.27.
2. The rite performed after the conception of a child to ensure tlte birth
of a son.
3. The rite of parting the hair performed on the fourth, sixth and
eighth month of pregnancy.
4 . The rite performed soon after the birth of a child.
5. These are special rites performed as a mark of respect to the four
sages who are like the guardian deities for the different kiifdas of the Vedas.
6. This is a simple or domestic sacrifice. Tlie text has omitted the
sthdlipdka and names only six.
7. Sacrifices in which oblations of clarified butter are offered.
8. Sacrifices in which soma is pressed for oblation. ^

12. Being purified by these purificatory rites, one may get
enjoyment, release (from bondage). Such a man becoming free
from diseases remains like a god. By the recitation (of the names
of god), by offering oblations and by worship and meditation on
the deity one gets his cherished desire.
CHAPTER THIRTYTHREE
Mode of investiture of the sacred thread for the deity and the installa¬
tion of the deity
Agni said :
1 . I shall describe the (mode of) installation of Hari and
the benefits of worship for a year. The first day (of the lunar
fortnight ) at the commencement of (the month of) dfd^ha and the
concluding part (of the month) of Kdrtiika yields riches.
2-3. Commencing with the second day (of the lunar fort¬
night) (the installation) of Sri, Gauri, Gane^a, Sarasvati, Guha
(son of Siva), Martanda (Sun), the divine mothers, Durga,
Siva and Brahma are performed in order. To which deity one is
devoted, the lunar day of that deity is sacred to him.
4-5 . The mode of installation is the same (for all the deities ) .
Only the sacred syllables are different. A thread spun by a brah¬
min woman (made of ) gold, silver, copper, silk or cotton etc.
or in its absence a purified one is made into nine folds. The
investiture is done with that.
6-7. It is excellent if it is longer than one hundred and eight
(finger-length) or half of it. “Whatever has been prescribed by
you, O Lord, for the warding off of the discontinuance of the
rite, that is being done by me O Lord. May there be no impe¬
diment here in the pavitraka rite. O Lord of undiminbhing
success ! Grant me this”.
8-10. Having prayed (in this way), one has to tie it to the
circular altar at first with the G^yatrP OtA n&r&yat^ya vidmahe
1. The G;\yatri is a vcdic metre consisting of 24 letters. Sacred syllables
consisting of 24 letters in the form of a G&yatrl and addressed to a particular
deity is known as the Gftyatrl of that deity and 24 such G&yatrlmantras are
reckoned.

^ Agni PurSiia
v&sudev&ya dhimahi tamo vi^^uli pracoday&t. A garland made of one
thousand and eight wood-flowers is consecrated to th» Lord of
lords extending upto the feet and the pavitraka (sacred thread)
upto the knees, thighs, and navel of the idol befitting him. The
garland should be made thirty-two fingers length.
k
11. In the circular lotus of one finger (breadth) the peri¬
carp, filament, leaf, the first basic syllable and the outer circum¬
ference of the circle are consecrated.
12-13. By the measure of one’s fingers the threads for the
preceptors (are consecrated) on the models of the parents on
the ground. Twelve knots made fragrant are consecrated to
the end of the navel. Then two garlands arc made ready at first
containing one hundred and eight flowers.
14. O twice born one ! Otherwise twenty-four or thirty-six
garlands should be consecrated to the sun with the ring and
middle fingers by those who desire for a daughter.
15. There may be twelve knots in the sacred thread for the
pot of the Sun, and the fire as in the case of Visnu.
16. According to one’s ability the knots of the sacred thread
should be placed in the midst of the articles for the worship
of Visnu on the altar in the pit encircled by a girdle.
17-18. One who has bathed and performed the twilight
worship should dye the seventeen strings divided into three
parts, with rocand (yellow pigment), agallochum, camphor,
turmeric, saffron or sandal. Then one has to worship Hari on
the eleventh lunar day at the sacrificial yard.
19. One has to offer food to all the subordinate deities
at the altar. Ksaum, to the guardian deity at the end of the door.
And (one should then worship) Sri on the garland.
20. (Adorations) to Dhata, Vidhata (names of Bralima),
(the rivers) Ganges, Yamuna. And after having worshipped the
two nidhis^ iadkha and padma at the middle, the vdstu* is removed.
(Adorations) to Sdrnga (the bow of Vi§nu). Then one has to
perform the purificatory rites for the elements remaining
standing.
1 . Tlie nine treasures of Kubera, the lord of wealth.
2. Evidently the vOstupurufa governing the site of a dwelling place.

Om, hrUmt hafi,phafj hfum^ I absorb the subtle principle of smell.
Salutations. O/n, hrUm^ hahy phaf, hrum. I absorb the subtle
principle of taste. Salutations. Om, hrum, hah, phaf, hrUm I
absorb the subtle principle of touch. Salutations. Om, hrUm,
hah, phaf, hrum I absorb the subtle principle of sound. Salu¬
tations.
21-22. With the five incantations (as above) one has to
meditate on the yellow-coloured, hard quadrangle of earth of the
form of subtle principle of smell and governed by Indra with
the mark of holding the thunder-bolt in between his feet. Then
the worshipper has to spread the pure subtle principle of taste
and absorb the subtle principles of taste and colour in this way.
Om, hrim, hah, phap, hrum, I absorb the subtle principle of
taste, SalutsLtions.Om, hrim, hah, phap, hriim,! absorb the subtle
principle of colour. Salutations, Om, hrim, hah, phap, hrum, I
absorb the subtle principle of touch. Salutations. Om, hrim, hah,
phap, hrim I absorb the subtle principle of sound. Salutations.
23. One has to meditate on the presiding deity Varuna
placed in between the two thighs, holding a white lotus jar,
white-hued and crescent-shaped,
24. With the four incantations (as above) one has to absorb
the pure subtle principle of taste in the subtle principle of colour.
The subtle principle of colour is absorbed.
Om, hrum, hah, phap, hrum. I absorb the subtle principle of
colour. Salutations. Om, hrum, hah, phap, hrUm. I absorb the
subtle principle of touch. Salutations. Om, hrUm, hafy, phaP,
hrum I absorb the subtle principle of sound. Salutations.
25. Having meditated on the Fire, the presiding deity
which is red triangular fire-column pervading the space bet¬
ween the navel and neck and having the mark of a svastika, that
pure (sound principle) is absorbed in the principle of touch
with these three incantations.
Om, hrim, hahy phap, hrUm I absorb the subtle principle of
touch. Salutations. Om, hrim, hah, phap, hrUm I absorb the
subtle principle of sound. Salutations.
26-27. One has to meditate on the grey-coloured circular
column of air pervading the space between the neck and nose,
and bearing the mark of the pure moon with the two incantations

90 Agni PurSna
(as above). The subtle principle of touch has to be absorbed
in the principle of sound by meditative yuga.
28. Om, hriniy hafy, phaf, hrum I absorb the subtle sound
principle. Salutations, with the single incantation one has to
absorb the etherial space of the colour of pure crystal and
pervading the space in between the nose and tuft.
29. One has to perform purification of the body by
desiccation etc. Then the dry body from the foot to the tuft has
to be meditated upon.
30-31. After having meditated upon the drop which has
come out of the cavity of brain with the syllable ram and on
the body covered by a garland of flames with the syllables yam
and vam^ one has to besmear the body with the ambrosia of ashes.
Then with the syllable /am, it should be converted into a sacred
body.
32. Having made the nydsa^ on the hand and body one has
to do mental worship. Visnu is adored with his retinue
in the heart-lotus with mental flowers.
33. The lord of lords who yields enjoyment and liberation
has to be worshipped with the principal mystic syllable. “O
lord of gods, welcome to you. O Kesava ! be present here.”
34. “Accept my excellent mental adoration properly.”
Then the Tortoise, the supporting power, then Ananta and then
the earth have to be worshipped.
35-36. The righteousness, un-righteousness etc. (have to be
worshipped) in the middle of fire etc., the lotus in the middle
oisattva (goodness) etc., the principle of time, the solar and other
regions and the king of birds, in mdyd (illusion) and avidyd
(ignorance). Then (the deities) of the quarters commencing
with north-west and ending with north-east as well as the line of
preceptors.
37. The attendant gods, Sarasvati, Narada (sage), Nalakubara (son of Kubera), the preceptor, the sandals of the pre¬
ceptor’s preceptor and of the preceptor have to be worshipped.
38-39. The f>erfections already accomplished and the later
perfections, the female energies — Laki^mi, Sarasvati, Priti, Kirti
1 . Tiic aasignment of fingers on the different parts of the body by tou¬
ching thcmx. ^

l§anti, Kanti, Pusti, Tu|$i, Mahendra etc. have to be worshipped
in the middle. Hari, Dhrti, l§n, Rati, and Kranti etc. have to
be invoked in the middle. Acyuta is established with the princi¬
pal mystic syllable.
40. Having prayed by saying “Om, have (your) face to¬
wards me and come near me,” and having placed the articles of
worship and offered scents etc. one has to worship with the principal
(mystic syllable).
41. Om (you) frighten, (you) frighten. Again terrorise
the heart and head. (You) pound the tuft, commencing with
the flames and from the iastra^ to the astra.*
42. (You) protect. (You) destroy. Salutations to the arm¬
our. Om, hrum, phaf. Salutations to the missile. (One should
worship) the parts of the body with the principal mystic
letter,
43-44. At first one should worship different forms of
idols in the east, south, west and north. Vasudeva, Sankarsana,
Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Agni, Sri, Dhfti, Rati and Kanti (arc)
the forms of Hari. The conch, disc, mace, lotus and Agni (should
be worshipped) in the east.
45. The bow, club, sword, and garland of wild flowers
(should be worshipped) outside it. Indra and others as well as
Ananta, and Varuna (should be worshipped) in the south-west.
46-48. Brahma and Indra (should be worshipped) in the
north-cast and their hosts of weapons on the outside. TheAiravata (the elephant of Indra), goat, buffalo, monkey, fish, deer,
hare, bull, tortoise, and harhsa (should be worshipped) and
Kfsna on the outside. The gate-keepers Kumuda and others
(should be worshipped) in pairs from the east to the north.
After saluting Hari, the food (is offered) outside. Salutations to
the attendants of Visnu. The offering should be made on the
altar.
49. One should worship the Universal Being, the All-pcrvading on the north-east. The protective thread should be tied on
the right arm of the lord.
1. An ordinary missile.
2. Any missile discharged after the repetition of appropri.atc mystic
syllables.

Agni Purd^
50. (One should say), “Om salutations to the one who con¬
fers full benefits of worship done through the whole year.
You wear this thread for the purpose of installation.”
51. One should observe the vow of fasting etc. in the preTsence of the deity (saying), “I am pleasing the deity by observing
fasting etc.”
52. ‘‘May not lust, anger, and all other (qualities) reside
in me ever. O lord of gods from this day onwards it is the last
of them.”
53. If the worshipper is unable (to do as described), he
should observe the vow eating only in the night. Having made
oblations, the rijar/ana (dismissal) is done, after laudation. This
is the (mode of) daily worship which yields riches. Only hriniy
him, salutations to Sridhara the enchanter of the three worlds.
CHAPTER THIRTYFOUR
Mode of performing oblation
Agni said :
1-2. One has to enter the sacrificial ground with the follow¬
ing mystic syllable and adorn it. “Salutations to the brahman,
the lord, Sridhara (and) undecaying self, the form of Pg, Tajur
and Sdma (veda)y (possessing) a body (composed) of sound (and)
Vi^iju. Having drawn the circular altar in the evening, one
has to bring materials for the sacrifice.
3. Having washed hands and feet and made assignment,
and taken the arghya (respectful offering) in the hands one
should sprinkle the arghya on the head and the gate-way.
4. He should then begin sacrifice at the gateway. He
should worship the presiding deity of the arch. The aivattha^y
udumbard^y vafa* and plakfeP are the trees of the east.
1. Ficus religiosa (fig. tree).
2. Ficus ^lomerata.
3. Ficus mdica (banyan tree).
4. Ficus infectoria (a large tree with small white fruit).

5. The Rg {veda) is the ornament of Indra on the west.
The Tajur {veda) is auspicious for Yama. The Sama {veda) is of
the water-god and is known as Sudhanvan. The Atharva (veda)
is of Soma (and is called) Suhotraka.
6. The edges of the gate, flags, (gate-keepers)
Kumuda etc. and two pitchers should be adored at every door
by their respective names, as well as a pitcher full of water in
the east.
7. Then one should worship the guards of the doors —
Ananda, Nandana, Daksa, Virasena, Susenaka, Sambhava and.
Prabhava in the north (Saumya)^.
8. One should enter after having removed obstacles by
throwing flowers and the repetition of names of weapons.
Having performed purificatory rites of the elements and the
assignment (of limbs) one should show the posture or
hands.
9-10. Having recited the mystic syllable ending with phap
one should scatter mustard seeds in different directions.
(One should sanctify) the cow’s urine with Vasudeva, cow’s
dung with Sahkarsana, the milk with Pradyumna and the curd
got from it with Narayana. The ghee should be one part and
the others respectively one part more.
1 1 . When these are mixed in a vessel of ghee it is known
as the pancagavya^ (the five products got from a cow). A part of
it is for the sprinkling of the temple building and the other for
eating.
12. One should worship Indra and other guardian deities
of the world in ten pitchers which have been brought. Having
worshipped them one has to make them hear command.
They must be installed by the command of Hari.
13. Having kept the articles of sacrifice well-protected,
one must scatter those which must be scattered. Having recited
the basic mystic syllable eight hundred times one should take
kuSa grass.
14. Then one should place there a pitcher and (the vessel)
vardhani at the north-east. Having worshipped Hari along with
1. Soma meaiu Kubera, tlic regent of the north.
2. These arc— the dung, urine, milk, curd and ghee.

94 Agni Purina
the attendant gods in the pitcher one should worship weapons in
the (vessel) vardhani. »
15. (Having made) a circumambulation of the sacrificial
place, water is sprinkled in broken streams by the vardhani. Then
the pitcher should be taken and worshipped at a fixed place.
16. Hari should be worshipped with perfumes etc. in the
pitcher adorned with five gems and cloth and the weapons
(should be worshipped) at the left in the Vardhani in which gold
has been placed.
1 7. One should worship the goddess of the building and the
presiding deity of obstacles near it. In the same way, one should
arrange for the consecration of Visnu on the days of movement
(of the sun from one stellar place to another), and other days
(of importance).
18. Nine dentless jars full of water should be placed in the
nine corners. One should offer water for washing the feet, arghya
for rinsing the mouth and the pahcagavya.
19. The five sweet things, water etc. (are placed ) in the east,
north-east etc. The curd, milk, honey and hot water are the four
constituents for the worship of the feet.
20. The lotus, iydmdka (a kind of grain), dUrva (grass) and
the consort of Visnu are for the worship of the feet. Together
with barley seeds, perfumes, fruits and unbroken rice, this is
spoken as constituting the eight articles for the worship of the
feet.
21. The kaia (grass), flowers of white mustard, sesamum
(are) the ai^icles (used) for adoration. One should offer waters
for rinsing the mouth together with cloves and (berries).
22. One should bathe the deity with the five sweet mate¬
rials along with (the recitation of) the principal mystic syllable.
One should pour pure water on the head of the deity from the
central pot.
23. The worshipper should touch water poured from the
pitcher and the tip of the kUrcha (bunch of kuSa grass). One
should offer pure water for washing the feet and arghya for sipping.
24. After having wiped the body with a cloth, the deity
(adorned) with a cloth should be taken to the altar. Having
worshipped him there, one should offer oblations in the sacri¬
ficial pit after having controlled breath.

25. Having washed hands, three lines running towards
the east from the south to the north and three running towards
the north are drawn.
26. Having sprinkled them with the waters of arghya^ one
has to show yonimudr&} Having meditated on the fire of the
form of the self in the^on* one should throw it in the pit.
27. Then one should place vessels together with darbha
grass and wooden ladles. The twigs and saw (should be) at
arm’s distance.
28. (Then one must bring) vessels prat}it&y proksani and
sthdli for (holding) the clarified butter (and offering) ghee etc.
Two prasthas^ of rice (are spread) evenly with face downwards.
29-30. The kuSa (grass) with its tip (facing) eastwards should
be placed in the pranita and proksani vessels. Having filled
pranitd (vessel) with water and having meditated on the deity
and worshipping, the pranita (vessel) should be placed in the
midst of materials in front. Having filled the proksani (vessel)
with water and worshipping it, it should be placed on the
right side.
31. The oblation should be consigned to the fire. Brahma
should be assigned to the south. Having spread the ktiia (grass)
in the east etc. the (line of) enclosure should be drawn.
32. Rites relating to Visnu should be done with (the rites)
such as garbhddh&na etc. The garbhadh&nay purhsavana, simantonnayana, and (the rite performed after) the birth (are the rites).
33. Eight offerings to the fire arc made commencing with
naming (ceremony) and ending with sam&varla (rite performed
on the completion of one’s studies). The final oblation is made
with the sacrificial ladles for each act.
34. The oblation is made after having meditated on the
lustrous (goddess) Laksml at the middle of the pit. (She) is
known as KundalaksmI (Laksmi of the sacrificial pit), the source
of the material world composed of the three qualities.
35. She is the source of all beings as well as mystic learning
and collection of mystic syllables. The fire is the cause of libera¬
tion. The supreme soul (Vis^u) is the conferer of emancipation.
1 . On this mudri and other mudris see KMi. P, 70.36-56. This is one of
ten mudrOs in the worship of the goddess. See BrahaUtaia P. IV. 36.62; 42.1-19.
. A measure equivalent to 32 paUu.

Agni Purina
36. (His) head is spoken as at the east, the two arms are
situated at the corners north-east and south-east, the two thighs
at the north-western and south-western corners.
37-38. The belly is called (the sacrificial) pit. The organ
of generation is said to be the source. The three qualities are the
girdle. Having meditated thus fifteen twigs should be placed in
the fire (after reciting) Om by showing mudr^. Oblations
should be made again to the vessels and worship is offered (to
the vessels) on the north-west to south-east.
39. Parts of oblations are offered (for the directions) upto
the north-east with the basic mystic syllable. (Oblations are
made) in the north with (the syllables) (forming) the end (of
the) twelve syllables* and with the middle (ofthe mystic syllable)
in the south.
40. The consecrated fire of Visnu, possessing seven tongues
and having the radiance of crorcs of sums and having the moon
as its face and sun as the eye and situated in the middle of the
lotus should be meditated upon with the vyahrtis.^ Then one
should offer one hundred and eight oblations (to this form).
Then fiftyeight oblations (should be offered) and a tenth of it
for the limbs.
CHAPTER THIRTYFIVE
Mode of consecration of an image
Agni said :
1. Having sprinkled with the residual offering one should
perform consecration of the sacred, subtle, and chanted mystic
formulae of the manlion form.
2-3. Consecration of the vessels covered by the clothes
should be done with mystic syllables. The vessels on which water
is sprinkled once or twice with bel (leaves), should bo placed
1 . This is formed by holding a clenched fist.
2. Om namo bhagemtU Jfirdjfoeiya.
3. The basic syllables forming part of the Gftyatrf-mantra.

near the pitcher. Having pronounced the protective spell the
priest should place stick for (cleansing) the teeth and myrabolan
on the east with (the recitation of syllable for) Sahkar^na.
4. The ashes, sesamum, and cowdung-mixed earth (should
be consecrated) on the south with (syllable for) Pradyumna, in
the west with (that of) Aniruddha and in the north with that of
Narayana.
5. Then the waters along with the kuSa grass (should be
assigned) to the south-east with the heart, the saifron and pig¬
ment on the north-east with the head, the incense on the south¬
west with the tuft.
6. Then the principal beautiful flowers (should be assigned)
to the north-west with the armour. The sandal, water, unbroken
rice, curd, and dUrvO. (grass) arc placed in small cups (made of
leaves ) .
7-8. The chamber having been encircled by three threads,
the articles kept ready should be thrown again. Then in one’s
own order of adoration one should ojffer perfumes and (other)
articles, at the foot of the gate or at the pitcher of Vi§nu with
sacred syllables. One should then worship the radiant, beautiful
form of Visnu capable of destroying all sins.
9. “I conceive on thy limbs, the deity who grants all
coveted things”. After having worshipped him by (showing)
the incense, lamp etc., one should approach the gate-way.
10. One should offer pavitra^ along with perfumes, flowers
and unbroken grains. The radiant of Vi^nu (is capable)
of destroying all sins.
11. 1 hold on my limbs {the pavitra) for the accomplish¬
ment of virtue, desire and worldly benefits. The pavitra is
offered to the other attendant deities and to the preceptor
(seated) on a seat.
12. After having worshipped well with perfumes, one has
to offer to Hari along with perfumes, flowers etc. and saying,
“May these become the energy of Vij^iu”.
13-14. Having offered to the deity stationed in the fire one
shouldpray to the deity (saying), “O lord couched on the great
1. It means the sanctified articles. It also means the twining of the
dcBrbha grass in a partictilar shape so that it could be worn on the finger.

Agni Purina
serpent in the milky ocean. I shall worship you in the morning.
You (please) be present here O Keiava.” Then havingK)ffered offerings to Indra and others one should dedicate them
to the attendants of Visnu,
15. Then one should place a pitcher covered by two cloths
and filled with water mixed with perfumes, rocaniy camphor and
saffron in front of the deity.
16-18. Having adorned the deity with perfumes and flowwers, one should worship him with the mystic formula. Having
come out of the hall one should place in three circular enclosures
the five products obtained from the cow, the sacrificial offering
(cam) and wood for cleansing the teeth. One should read
pura^as and recite hymns and along with servants, a women
and children remain awake. Then the consecration rite should be
performed immediately without sacred perflmies.
CHAPTER THIRTYSIX
Mode of performing the investiture of sacred thread
Agni said :
1 . Having bathed in the morning and worshipping the guar¬
dian deities, (the worshipper) should enter the secret chamber
and gather (articles) and place.
2. The articles (are) the dress, ornaments and perfumes
which were offered in the consecration ceremony earlier. Having
discarded the remnants (of articles for worship), the deity should
be well-installed and worshipped.
3. One should offer the paficimrta (five sweet articles), the
unguents, pure and perfumed waters as well as dress, perfumes
and flowers.
4. Having offered unto the fire as done everyday one should
pray to the deity and bow down. Having submitted one’s actions
to the deity one should perform the naimittika (periodical) cere¬
mony.

5. One should worship the gate-keeper, the pitcher of Visnu
and the varddkanl (vessel) and Hari. The pitcher (should be con¬
secrated) with the sacred syllable 'ato deva* (and the following).
6. “O Kr^na ! Salutations to you. You accept this sacred
thread for the sake of purifying all and which yields fruits
of a year’s worship.
7. You purify sins that had been committed by
me. O God ! the lord of celestials I will be purified by
your grace.”
8. Having sprinkled mentally the sacred thread and the self,
and having sprinkled the pitcher of Visnu, one should go near
the deity.
9-10. One should offer a sacred thread to the self, after
having discarded the protective thread (tied on the hand). O
Lord ! Accept the sacred thread that has been made ready by
me, for the sake of accomplishing rites so that there may
not be any fault on me. The sacred thread (should be offered)
to the gate-keepers, the seat and to the chief preceptors.
1 1 . The garlands of forest flowers (should be offered ) to
the gods of inferior order with the basic formula. The articles
should be offered to the heart etc. and ending with Visvakscna
(an epithet of Visnu).
12. Having offered to the fire the oblations placed near the
fire for Vi§nu and other (gods), and having worshipped, the
final oblation should (then) be made with the basic formula
for the expiation (of one’s sins).
13-16. O Lord ! having Garuda as your emblem ! Let
this be your annual adoration with one hundred and eight or
five Upanisads^ (and) with garlands of gems and corals, the
flowers manddra and others.
“O Lord ! Just as the garland of wild flowers and the
kaustubha gem (are) (worn) always on the chest, so also bear
the sacred thread and the worship on the chest. Whatever has
been done wantonly or unwantonly in the regulations of the
worship let it become complete by the rite shorn of impedi¬
ments.” Having worshipped, bowing down, and requesting
them the purified article should be placed on one’s own head.
1. The mystical writings ascertaining the meaning of the Vidas.

Agni Purdtj^
17. Having made offering to Vi|nu the preceptor should
be satisfied by (giving) the fees. The brahmins should be •satis¬
fied) by (giving) food, clothes and other things either for a
day or for a fortnight,
18. At the time of bathing, having gone down into the
waters, the sacred thread should be offered. Without any restric¬
tion, food and other things should be given (to others) and
then one has to eat.
19-22, Having worshipped fire at the (rite of) dismissal
the threads are removed. (One should then say) “Having thus,
duly accomplished my annual adoration O thread ! you now
go to the world of Visnu having been permitted by me. Hav¬
ing worshipped Somesa and Visvaksena at the centre and havings
worshipped the sacred threads one should dedicate them to the
brahmins. As many knots as there are in that thread (one will)
live gloriously for so many thousands of years in the world of
Visnu. One will get release (from bondage) after having^
redeemed hundreds of his ancestors the ten preceding and the
ten succeeding and having established them in the world of Vi^nu.
CHAPTER THIRTYSEVEN
The investiture of sacred thread for all gods
Agni said :
1 . Listen to (the description of the mode of) investiture
for all deities. The thread is the primary characteristic as
well as its yellow orpiment.
2. O the cause of the universe ! come here along with
the attendant gods. I invite you in the morning and offer this
sacred thread.
3. O the creator of the universe. Salutations to you 1
Accept this sacred thread for the sake of purification (and which)
conveys the fruits of the annual worship.
4. O God l^iva ! Salutations to you 1 Accept j;his sacred

thread along with garlands of g^ms and corals and mandSra
flowers.
5-6. O lord of the learned in the Vedas ! Let this be your
annual worship. After having accomplished this annual worship
•of mine according to the rules, O articles of worship ! go to
heavens after being discarded by me. O lord Sun ! Saluta¬
tions to you. Accept this article of worship.
7. O Lord Siva ! Salutations to you. Accept this article
of worship which is capable of yielding fruits of annual worship
for the sake of purification.
8. O lord of ganas ! Salutations to you. Accept this
article of worship which is capable of yielding fruits of
annual worship for the sake of purification.
9. O goddess Sakti ! Salutations to you. Accept this
article of worship which is capable of yielding fruits of
annual worship for the sake of purification.
10-14. I dedicate unto you this excellent thread verily the
same as (lord) Narayana and (lord) Aniruddha and which
is capable of yielding fruits of annual worship for the sake
•of purification and which yields wealth, grains and health. I
dedicate unto you this excellent thread verily the same as
K^imadeva and Sankarsana, which yields learning, progeny
and welfare. I dedicate unto you this thread verily the same
as Vasudeva, which yields dharmaf artkCf kSmOy and mokfa and
which is the cause for transport over the ocean of mundane
existence. This thread verily the imiversal form is the donor
of all things, the destroyer of sins and elevates past and
future lineage. I offer in order to the four younger deities
with the mystic syllables.
CHAPTER THlRTYEIGHT
Benefits of constructing temples
Agni said :
1. I will now describe the benefits of erecting the
1. These are the, four objects of human Ufe, namely, righteousness,
pleasures, desires and release from bondage.

Agni Purg^a
temples of Vasudeva and others. One who is desirous of construc¬
ting the temples of gods gets freed from sins incurred in« thou¬
sand births.
2-5. Those who conceive of building a temple get the sins
accrued in hundreds of births destroyed. Those who approve
the building of a temple for lord Krsna, also become free
from their sins and go to the world of Acyuta (Visnu). Having
built a temple for Hari, a man immediately conveys a lakh of
his ancestors both past and future to the world of Visnu. The
manes of a person who builds a temple for Vis^u having seen it
remain in the world of Vi^nu well-honoured and relieved
of their sufferings in hells. The erection of the abode for the
deity destroys sins such as the killing of a brahmin.
6. Whichever benefit could not be obtained by doing
sacrificial rites, could be got by the erection of an abode (for
the god). He who erects an abode for the god reaps fruits
of bathing in all holy waters.
7. Even the making of a temple by perfidy with dust one
would reach heaven. It gets more benefits than those (got) be¬
ing slain in the battle.
8. One who builds one temple goes to heaven. One who
builds three temples goes to the world of Brahma. The builder
of five abodes reaches the world of Sambhu (Siva). By build¬
ing eight abodes one remains in the world of Hari.
9-17. One who builds sixteen abodes gets enjoyment and
emancipation. Having built a small, medium or excellent temple
for Hari one gets heaven or the world of Visnu or emancipation
respectively in order. Which merits a rich man would get by
erecting an excellent temple of Visnu, a pool* man would
get by (erecting) a small temple itself. Having acquired riches
and built a temple for Hari even with a small portion of it one
would get excellent and enormous merits. By erecting a temple
of Hari with a lakh or thousand or hundred or fifty (units of
money) one would reach the place of that person who has the
eagle in his banner. Those who play in their childhood with
(the building of) abodes of Hari with earth also go to the world
of Vasudeva. The building of temples of Vi§nu at holy places,
within temples, accomplished place or hermitage (yields) three¬
fold benefit than those already described. Those wlio decorate

(the temple) of Vi$nu with the bandhiika flowers and an oint with
fragrant paste, also reach the place of the lord. (Having
erected the temple of Hari), a person obtains two-fold merits
after having elevated the fallen, the falling and half-fallen. He
who brings about the fall of a man is the protector of one fallen.
18-19. By (erecting) a temple of Vi§nu one reaches his
region. As long as the bricks remain in the temple of Hari, the
founder of that family is honoured in the world of Visnu. He
becomes pious and adorable in this world as well as the next.
20. He who builds a temple for Kr$na, the son of Vasudeva
is born as a man of good deeds and his family gets purified.
21 . He who builds an abode for Visnu, Rudra, Sun or the
goddess etc. acquires fame. What is the use of the hoarded
riches for an ignorant person ?
22-23. If one does not cause an abode for Kr^na to be
built (with wealth) acquired by hard (work) (and) if one’s
wealth could not be enjoyed by manes, brahmins, celestials
and relatives, his acquisition of wealth is useless. As death is
certain for a man so also the destruction of wealth,
24. One who does not spend his riches for charities or for
enjoyments is stupid and is being bound even while alive, while
the riches are flickery.
25. Is there any merit in being the lord of wealth
acquired either accidentally or by one’s effort, if it is not spent
for acquiring fame or for philanthropy ?
26-31 . One may give to the foremost brahmins and also do
(such acts) which would glorify him. More than the charities
and more than the acts which would glorify him, one has to build
the temples of Visnu and other gods. The temple of Hari being
set up by devoted great men, the three worlds, the movable and
immovable things and the entire objects get established. All the
things beginning with Brahma to the Pillar, that has already
born, that is being bom-, that is to be born, the gross, the
minute and the other things are’bom of Vi?nu. Having set up
an abode for that lord of lords, the omnipresent, the great Visnu,
one is not bom again in this world. By building temples for the
celestials, Siva, Brahma, Sim, Vighne^a (lord ofimpediments),
Candi (Pilrvati), Lak§mi and others (a man) reaps the same
benefit as he would get for building an abode for Vis^u. Greater
merit (is acquired) by installing images of gods.

Agni Purltna
32. In the rites (relating to) installation of an idol there
is no limit for the fruits (gained). An image made of^ wood
gives greater merit than that made of clay. One made of bricks
yields greater merit than that made of wood.
33. One made of stones gives (greater merit) than that made
of bricks. (Images made) of gold and other metals yield more
benefits. Sins committed in seven births get destroyed even at
the very commencement of installation.
34. One who builds a temple goes to heaven and never goes
to hell. Having elevated a hundred of his ancestors he conveys
them to the world of Visnu.
35. Yama (god of death) said to his emissaries :
Tama said :
“Those men who build temples of gods and adore the idols
are not to be brought to hell.
36. Bring them to my view who have not built temples and
other things. Move around in the befitting way and execute my
directive.
37. Except those who have resorted to Ananta, the father
of the universe, no other beings would at any time disregard
the command.
38. Those who are devotees of Visnu and have their mind
fixed on him have to be avoided by you. They are not to live
here.
39-49. Those who always adore Vi^nu should be avoided
by you from a distance. Those who sing the glories of Govinda
while standing or sleeping or walking or standing behind or
stumbling or remaining (at a place) are to be avoided by you
from a distance. Those who worship Janardana with obligatory
and occasional rites are not to be beheld by you. Those who
follow this course attain good position. Those who wor¬
ship (the god) with flowers, incense, raiments, favourite orna¬
ments, (and) those who have gone to the abode of Kr^^a
are not to be seized by you. Those who besmear with unguents,
and those who are engaged in sprinkling his body, their children
and their descendants should be left in the temple of Kr^^a.
Hundreds of men born in the family of one who has built the
temple of Vi?nu should not be seen by you with evil mind. Who-

«ver builds a temple of Vi?nu with wood or stone or earth gets
free from all sins. One who builds the temple of Vi^nu gets that
great benefit which (one would acquire) by doing' sacrificial
rites everyday. By building a temple for Vi§nu (one) conveys
hundreds of his discendants and hundreds of his ancestors to
the world of Acyuta. Visriu is identical with the seven worlds.
One who builds a house for him saves the endless worlds and also
obtains endlessness. One who builds (a temple) for him, lives
for so many years in heaven as the number of years the set
up bricks would remain. The maker of the idol (would reach)
the world of Visnu.One who consecrates it would get absorbed
in Hari.
One who builds a temple, makes an idol and installs it goes
within his range.
Agni said :
*T have not brought one who has installed Hari as told by
Yama”. HayaSiras told Brahma for the installation of gods.
CHAPTER THIRTYNINE
Preparations of ground for constructing temples
Hayagriva said :
1 . O Brahman ! Listen to me speaking about the installa¬
tion of (images of) Vi^^u and others. (The principles of)
Paflcardtra^ and Saptardtra have (already) been described by me.
2-5. They have been divided by the sages into twentyfive
(books) in this world. Hayaiir$a tantra is the first one. Trailokya^
1 . word ritra means knowledge and the PaftcarStra means the collec¬
tive knowledge of five kinds according to the Nor. Sva- I.l*
However the Ahit. Sam. the earliest text of this class of literature would
take it to mean the fivefold manifestation of Lord V&sudeva, viz. Para, vySAa,
■vitAava, ered and antarydmin.

Agni PurS^
mohana, Vaihham^ Paufkaraj PrahlSda^ GUrgya^ Gdlava, NSradiya^
SripraSnay Sdndilyay AiSvaray spoken by Saty^, Saunakay Visi^thay
JfiSnasSgaray Svdyambhmy Kspilay Tdrk^yay MdrSya^iyaka, AtreyOy
Pfdrasithhay Ananday Aruna, Baudhdyandy and the one spoken by
Visva as the quintessence of that (the preceding), having eight
parts (or the other books).
6-7. A brahmin bom in the middle country may perform
installation (rite). Those who were born in Kaccha (Cutch),
(in the regions of the river) Kaveri, Kohkana, Kamarupa,
Kalihga, K^ftci, Kalmira, Kosala should not (do instal¬
lation). The sky, wind, radiance, water, and earth are the pancardlra.
8. Those other than the pancardtra are inanimate and engulf¬
ed in darkness. He ^ the preceptor who hits the knowledge “I
am brahman and stainless Visnu”.
9. Even though, deficient in all characteristics he who is a
master of the tantras is (to be looked upon as) the preceptor.
The image of the deity should be placed facing the city and never
turned backwards.
10. At Kurukfetra, Gaya and other places and near the
rivers, (the image of) Brahma at the centre of the city and (the
image of) Indra on the east are auspicious.
11-12. (The images) of Agni, mothers, goblins, and
Yama (should be placed) in the south-east. (The images) of
Candika (should be placed) in the south and those of the manes
and demons in the south-west. The temples of Varuna and others
should be built ki the west. (The images) of Vayu and Naga
(serpent) (should be) on the north-west and those of Yak^
and Guha (Karttikeya) on the north.
13-15. (Those) of Gandi^Sa (the lord of Gandi), the great
lord and Vi^^u (are) always (placed) in the north-east. One
should not knowingly construct a temple of a reduced size or
equal in size or bigger in size than another temple already cons¬
tructed so as to encroach upon it. A wise-man would leave
between them a space measuring twice the elevation and erect a
new temple without affecting both the temples. After having
examined the ground one has to take possession of it.
16. The oBerii^ to the .(presiding) goblins should be offer¬
ed upto the outer enclasihg wall (with a mixture of) black

gram, turmeric powder, fried grains, curd and flour.
17-18. Having dropped the flour in all directions along
with (the recitation of) eight syllables: (one has to say),
“The demons and goblins who remain on this ground may
go away. I am making a place for Hari.** Having cleav¬
ed the earth with the plough one should cleave it with oxen.
19. Eight Param&rjus make one rathdnu. Eight rathS^us are
said to make one trasare^u. Eight times that (makes) one hdldgra
and eight times that is known as likhyd. Eight times that is known.
zs ynka. Eight times that is 2l yavamadhyama. Eight times
(makes) one aAgula. Twenty-four aAgulas (make) one kara.
Four aAgulas make one padmahastaka.
CHAPTER FORTY
The mode of making the respectful offering to the god
The Lord said :
1 . In days , of yore that material principle was dreadful
among all principles. It being placed on the earth it was
known to be the lord of that place.
2. At a place (divided) into sixty-four compartments lia
occupying a half of the comer square is worshipped with ghee
and imbroken rice. Then the (god) Parjanya (the rain god)
occupying a square (is worshipped).
3. The god Jayanta, who occupies two squares (is worshipp¬
ed) with lotus (flowers) and water, and the lord Mahendra,
who remains in one square (is worshipped) with a banner. The
Sun god (is worshipped) in a square with ail red things.
4. The (god of) truth occupying half a square at the bottom
is worshipped with canc^y and profuse offering of ghee.
The lord of the sky occupyir^ half the angular Square (is propi¬
tiated) with the bird's flesh.
5. Hie fire-god in half a square (is worshipped) with tlie
1. The mantra of eight tyUablei: OAt nam nirdyapdra.

Agni PuTlb^
sacrificial ladle and the god Pu^an in a square with fried gprains,
the lord of untruth in two squares with gold, churning rod and
unbroken rice in the house.
6. The lord Dharme^a stationed in two squares is worshipp¬
ed) with meat and cooked food, the Gandharva in two squares
with incense and the tongue of a bird.
7. Mrga occupying one upper (square) (is) then (worshipp¬
ed) with blue cloth. The manes (are worshipped) with a dish
composed of milk, sesamum and rice in half a square and sticks
of tooth-brush in another square.
8. The (two) door-keepers Sugriva and Pu^padanta occu¬
pying two squares (are worshipped) with barley grains and
a clump of grass respectively, and Varuna with lotus flowers in
a square.
9. The asura (demon) in two squares (is propitiated) with
wine, (the serpent) Se^a in a square with ghee and water, the
sin in half a square with barley grains, the disease in half a square
with maniaka (a kind of baked flour).
10. The Naga (serpent) (is worshipped) in a square with
the n&ga flowers and the chief serpent in two squares with edibles
The Bhallafa (a kind of superhuman being) (is worshipped)
in a single square with rice mixed with kidney-bean, and the
moon (with the same offering) in the next square.
11. The sage placed in two squares (is worshipped)
with honey, sweat gruel and nutmeg, Diti in a square with anoint¬
ments and Aditi in one and a half squares.
12. Apas (is propitiated) in a square below in the north¬
east with milk and cake and then Apavatsa remaining in a
square below with curd.
13. Marici (is propitiated) in four squares in the east with
balls of sweet-meat and for (the god) Savitr, the red flowers (arc
placed) in the lower angular square.
14. In the square below that, water along with kvia grass is
offered to Savitr, red sandal paste is offered to Aruiia in four
squares.
15. Respectful offering along with tmmcric (is made) to
Indra in the lower square in the south-west and rice mixed with
ghee (is offered) in the corner square below Indrajaya.
16. Sweet gruel (mixed) with jjs^ery (is offered) to Indra

in four squares and cooked meat (is offered) to Rudra in the
corner square in the north-west.
17. In the comer square below that wet fruit (is offered)
to Yak^a, rice meat and black-gram (are offered) to Mahidhara
in four squares.
18. Rice and sesamum should be placed in the central square
for Brahma. Caraki (is worshipped) with black-gram and clari¬
fied butter and Skanda with a dish composed of milk, sesamum
and rice and a garland.
19. Vidarl (a demoness) (is worshipped) with red lotuses,
Kandarpa (god of love) with cooked rice and meat, Putana
(a demoness) with meat and bile and Jambaka (a demon)
with meat and blood.
20. The I^a (is appeased) with bile, blood and bones,
Pilipifija (a demon) with a garland and blood. Other deitiesare worshipped with blood and meat and in their absence with
unbroken rice.
21. Sacrificial offerings are made to demons, divine
mothers, manes and guardian deities of the ground in due order.
22. One should not build temples and other things
without offering to these (deities) or appeasing them. Hari,
Ltikijml, Ga^a (the attendant deity of l§iva) should be wor¬
shipped at the place (set apart) for Brahma.
23-24. The final offering is then made to Brahma in the
central pitcher and to Brahma and other deities as well as Mahesvara, the presiding deity of the ground with a pitcher together
with a small vessel. After having made benediction, and holding
well the water-jar with small holes at the bottom an auspicious
circumambulation is made.
25. O Brahman ! the drop of water is rotated (to fall)
in a line. As before in the same line seven kinds of seeds are sown.
26. The excavation should begin in the same way. Then a
hole of the measure of a hand should be dug at the centre.
27. Then having made (the pit) smooth to a depth of four
fingers’ breadth and having contemplated on the four-armed
Vi§nu (waters of adoration) should be offered from the pitcher.
28. Then the hole is filled (with water) from the water-jar
having holes at the bottom, white Bowers are placed. The excel¬
lent conch-shell (known as the) Dak$i^varta (curved to the

no
Agni Purdna
right) has to be filled with seeds and earth.
29. After having performed the offering of water, one should
present the preceptor of cows, clothes and other things and
honour the sculptor, and the vcdsniavas who know the proper time.
30. One should then dig carefully till water is found. The
substance lying below the presiding deity under the building
would not have any beneful influence.
31 . The bone or substance below if broken, the broken thing
forebodes baneful influence for the inmate. Whatever kind of
sound one would hear, (it is to be known ) as due to the substance
lying below.
CHAPTER FORTYONE
Mode of performing consecration
The Lord said :
1. I shall narrate the mode of consecration of the founda¬
tion and (the rites relating to) the laying down of the founda¬
tion stone. A shed is erected at first and four (sacrificial) pits
(are made).
2. The placing of pitchers (of water) and bricks, the erec¬
tion of the doors and pillars (are finished). The dug up pit is
filled to a quarter (of its depth) and the presiding deity is wor¬
shipped at the same time.
3. The bricks should be of twelve fingers in length, with a
breadth and width of four fingers respectively, and well-burnt.
4-8. Stones measurii^ a cubit (in length) would be best
in the case of stone slabs. Nine copper pitchers and bricks should
be placed. The pitchers (should be filled) with water, (substance
known as pailcakafdy(Pf waters of all herbs and fragrant waters.
1. A (tecoctiem front ^ fruits of five planti/Miiil, SSlmaU, eitySla, bakula
•nd badam {MW. p. 575).

Then with the pitchers filled well with waters (and containing
gold and rice and anointed by fragrant sandal, and having plac¬
ed the stones along with (the recitation of) the mystic syllables
— the three-footed apo hi ianno devi^^ tarat sa mandify^t
pdvamdni\ uduttamarh varuna^y kayd nah*, varutfosya^, hariisah Suci?at^y
Srisukta*.
9. Hari should be worshipped in a bed in the shed in the
eastern part of the (drawn) diagram. Then having kindled the
fire twelve twigs should be offered (as oblation).
10. The primary offering and the offering with clarified
butter should be done with the syllable om. Then subsequently
eight offerings and again eight offerings with clarified butter
(should be offered) with the syllables (known as)vy&hftis^^ duly.
1 1 . After that offer oblation (in the fire) to the gods, Agni,
Soma and Purusottama separately with vydhrtis.
12-13. The preceptor (officiatir^ at the rite) should do the
expiatory rite facing the eastern quarter offering to the image,
meat, and sesamum along with ghee separately in the pitchers
with the vedic syllables or the mystic formula of twelve syllables.
Having scattered (sesamum) in the eight directions a stone
and a pitcher should be placed at the centre and the following
divinities (should be invoked) in order.
14. Padma^^y mahdpadmay makara, kacchapay kumuday nandOy
padma, iahkha and padmini (are the divinities).
15. The pitchers should not be moved. Eight bricks should
be placed in them duly beginning with the eastern direction
and ending with the north-east.
16. The female energies Vimala and others, the presiding
deities of these bricks, should be invoked in their proper pitchers.
7. One of the many hymns beginning with this word See Ved* Cm.
9. This is the sSktOy ^hkwigfaBarfAm hari^tm*, pLV Kh. 5.87.1a.
10. The three syllables bhOr, bhuvas, svar. Moku 2.76.
11. This and the following are die different treasures. SeeAirdiiia XVII. 2
p. 160, The text here omia nlla and repeats Padma.

Agni PurOfta
The energy Anugraha should be invoked at the central pitcher.
17. “O perfect, unbroken, full-bodied brick, the" daughter
of the sage Ahgiras, I am establishing you. You grant me
the desired thing.”
18-20. The preceptor, having placed the brick with this
mystic syllable should do garbhddhdna^. Having invoked the
goddess PadminT at the central pitcher, earth, flowers, minerals,
gems, and iron pieces as well as the weapons of deities of
quarters (should be placed) in the hole of twelve fingers’ width
and four fingers* depth.
21-22. The goddess earth should be worshipped in a
copper vessel of the shape of a lotus. “O the exclusive mistress
of all beings, abound with the summits of mountains as the
seats, one surrounded by oceans, O goddess ! You resort to this
hole. O rejoicer ! born of sage Vasi^tha ! you rejoice with
the Vasus and the progeny.
23. O Victorious ! related to Bhargava (Para^ur^ma)
Maker of thine subjects victorious ! the perfect ! the relative of
Angiras ! fulfil all my desires.
24. O Auspicious one ! related to sage Kalyapa ! Make
my intellect good. One who is accomplished with all seeds !
One v^ho possesses all gems and herbs !
25. May you be victorious ! O beautiful one ! O re¬
joicer ! Related to Vasi§tha ! The daughter of the creator !
O Goddess ! O handsome one ! Stay on here in bliss — O
majestic one !
26. Stay thou in this house ! O beautiful and brilliant
one ! the daughter of Kaiyapa ! The honoured, most wonder¬
ful and bedecked with scents and garlands !
27. O Goddess ! Stay in bliss in this room ! O Bhargavi (daughter of Sukra) 1 Bestower of worldly prosperities !
Possessed by the gods, kings, and masters of the house !
28. May you become the multiplier of animals for the
happiness of men and others. Having said in this way one
should then sprinkle cow’s urine on the pit.
29. Having done so, one should place in the pit (such that)
the impregnation would take place in the night. One should
1. Impregnation at the pit.

give away cows and clothes to the preceptor (the officiating
priest), and food to other people.
30. Having filled the hole and placing the bricks in the hole,
the hole is completely filled. Then one should construct the base
of the deity proportionate to the edifice of the deity.
31 . An excellent base is that where it is more than half the
breadth of the edifice, while a quarter lesser than that would be
mediocre and that which is half of the excellent base (aforesaid)
would be the lowest (in merit).
32. After completing the base, the rite for the presiding deity
(of the ground) should be done again. One who performs the
consecration of the base would enjoy in heavens free from sin.
33. One who would mentally think that “I am going to
build a temple”, the sins which had stuck to his body would get
destroyed that day itself.
34-35. No need to speak (about the merits) of one who has
built a temple in the prescribed manner. It is imp>ossible for
anyone to describe the merits one would accrue by building a
temple with eight bricks alone. One should indeed infer from
this the (proportionate) fruits (accrued) (from the building)
of temples of greater dimensions.
36. The door of the temple at the centre of the village or on
the eastern part should face the west, while in other directions
tlie door should be facing the west and in the southern, northern
and western parts (the door) should face the east.
CHAPTER FORTYTWO
Construction of a temple
Hayagriva said :
1 , Listen to me describing the construction of a temple in
general. A wise man should divide a square ground into sixteen
parts.
2. One should make the four central squares endowed with
wealth. The other sixteen parts are left for the walls.

Agni Pur&^a
3. The pedestal should extend over four squares. The
length of the cornice should be double that of the pedestal.
4. The path of circumambulation should be a quarter of
(the length) of the cornice. Two equal openings having the same
width as the latter, should be left on the two sides for projections
5. The extent of the ground should be made at first equal
to the length of the tower or twice that such as it may be beauti¬
ful.
6-7. One should construct the pavilion in front of the sanc¬
tum on the lines running parallel through the sides of its inner
chamber, adorned with pillars and being of the same length or
longer than the principal temple sanctorum by a quarter of its
length. The anti-chamber should then be constructed at 81 steps.
8. The deities at the end of the base should be worshipped
before placing the parrots at the front door. In the same manner
the thirty-two gods at the end should be worshipped when the
outer wall is raised.
9. This is the characteristic of a temple in general. Listen
to the description (of raising) a temple proportionate to the
(size of the) image.
10. The base (of the deity) should be of the same size as the
image. The adytum (of the temple) should be half the size of
the base and the walls proportionate to the adytum.
11. The height (of the walls) should be equal to the length
of the walls. The pinnacle should be made equal to twice the
height of the wall.
12. The path around the temple should be a quarter of the
extent of the pinnacle. The entrance chamber in the front should
be a quarter of the extent of the pinnacle.
13. The projections of the arches should be one-eighth of
the extent of the adytum. The arches should be made propor¬
tionate to the circumference.
14. The projections of arches should otherwise be made
as one-third of it. Always there should be three projections on
the left on the three arches.
15-16. Four upward lines should be marked for (the con¬
struction of) the pinnacle. A downward line is marked to fall
above the key-stone which is located at the middle port of the

pinnacle. A lion is built at the middle part of the pinnacle in a
line with the key-stone.
17. Two such lines should be marked on the sides. There
should be a small platform above that.
1 8. (The lion) should not be in a dropping posture or fiercelooking. The conical shaped structure is placed above, propor¬
tional to the small platform.
19. A beautiful opening should be made twice the length
of the platform. Two globes should be placed above that with
beautiful (ornamental) branches.
20-21. (Forms of) Canda and Pracanda should be carved
on the door-frame occupying a fourth (of its space), (possessing)
a staff like that of Visvaksena (Visnu) and at the threshhold of
the branch beautiful (Goddess) 8ri (LaksmI) (should be carved)
as being bathed by the elephants of the quarters with (waters
from) the pitchers . The height of enclosing wall should be onefourth of that of the temple.
22. The height of the tower should be a quarter lesser than
that of the temple. The pedestal (of the image) of the deity of
five cubits should be of a cubit.
23. A shed known as the Garudamandapa and shed for
Bhauma (Mars) and other (planets) (should be made). In
the eight directions above (the chamber housing) one should
make (the images as follows) :
24-25. (The images of) Vardha (boar) in the cast, j\ysiniha
(man-lion) in the south, Sridhara ( a form of Visnu) in the west,
Hayagriva (horse-necked form of Vi?nu) in the north, Jdmadagn~
yaka (Paraiurama, a manifestation of Vi^nu) in the south-east,
Rdma in the south-west, Vdmana (the short-statured manifesta¬
tion of Victim) in the north-west (and) VdsiuUva in the north-east.
The temple should be decorated with gems all around. Leaving
out one-eighth of the door if that is done, it is not defective.

Agni PurS^a
CHAPTER FORTYTHREE
Installation of deities in the temples
The Lord said :
1. O Brahman ! Listen to my description (of the mode)
of installation (of images) of deities in the temples. (Image of
Vasudeva should be placed at the middle of the five divine)
edifices.
2. (The images of) the dwarf-form, man-lion form, horseheaded form, (and) boar form (of Visnu) should be placed in
the south-east, south-west, north-west and north-east (respecti¬
vely).
3-5. (The image of) Narayana should be placed in the mid¬
dle. (The images of) the goddess, sun, Brahma and the lihga
(symbolic representation of Siva) or of Rudra (Siva) should be
placed in the south-east, south-west, north-west and north-east
(respectively). Otherwise, (image of) Vasudeva should be
placed at the centre of the nine chambers and beautiful (images.
of Indra and the guardian deities of the world (should be placed)
in the east and other directions. Otherwise, one should make
five chambers and worship Purusottama (Visnu) in the centre.
6. (The images of) Lak^i and Vaisravani (Kubera)
should be placed in the east, the divine mothers in the south,
Skanda, Gai^ela, liana (a form of Siva) and the sun and other
planets in the west.
7-8. Otherwise, having installed (the images of) the mani¬
festations (of Vi?nu) such as the Fish etc., in the north, Can^ika
(a form of Goddess Parvati) in the south-east, Ambika in the
south-west, Sarasvati in the north-west, Padma (Lak^mi) in the
north-east and Vasudeva or also Narayana in the centre. The
omni-present form of Hari should be placed in ihe centre in
(the construction of) the thirteen chambers.
9-11. (Images of) Keiava and others (should be placed)
in the east and other directions or (the images) of Hari himself
in all chambers. The images are of seven kinds — earthen,
wooden, metallic, made of gems, made of stones, made of sandal
and made of flowers. The images made of flowers, sandal and
earth yield all desired fruits when they are worshipped at

that moment. I shall describe the stone image (where such prac¬
tice) prevails.
12. In the absence of hills, the stone lying buried in the earth
should be taken out. Among the colours, white, red, yellow,
and black are extolled.
13. When stones of the above-mentioned colours are not
available (the desired) colour is brought about by the (cere¬
mony known as) sirithavidyd}
14. After (the performance of) the sirhhahoma (a piece of)
stone (which becomes) tinged with white colour or black colour
■or produces sound like a bell-metal or emits sparks of fire (is
deemed) as male.
15. The female one is that in which these characteristics
are present in a lesser degree. If they are devoid of colours they
are neuter. (The stones) in which the sign of a circle is found
are to be taken as impregnated and should be rejected.
16. One should go to the forest and perform the forest
rites for the sake of an image. After having bathed and plastering
a shed Hari should be worshipped there.
1 7. After having made the offering of the victim, the (stone¬
cutter’s) chisel used for the work should be worshipped. Having
offered koma (pouring of clarified butter into the fire), water
mixed with rice should be sprinkled over the image with the
implement (chisel ) .
18. Having made the protective spell it should be worshipp¬
ed with basic sacred syllable of lord Nfsimha. After having
made the offering to Hre the final oblation should be made. Then
offerings to the goblins should be given by the preceptor,
19. Having worshipped the good (spirits), the demons,
ffikyakas (a class of attendant-gods of Kubera), and accompli¬
shed souls and others who may be residing there, should be
requested to forgive.
20. (They should be addressed as follows). “This journey
(has been undertaken) by us for the image of Vi^^u by the com¬
mand of KeiSava. Any work done for the sake of Visnu,
should also be your (concern).*’
1. Only Hayaifrfosailihitd of the PaAcaritrftgama texu mentions this.
The present text does not explain this. See Vaifvaoa ieanogre^kyt p. 40.

Agni Purd^a
21. “Being always pleased with this offering (you) repair
quickly to some other place quitting this place for good***.
22. Being informed thus (these beings) go to another place
in good cheer and satisfied. Having eaten the sacrificial
porridge along with the sculptors, he should repeat in the night
the following sacred syllables (inducing) sleep.
23. “Om ! salutations to (Lord) Visnu, the omnipresent,
Prabhavisnu (Visnu) (strong), the universe, and Salutations
to the lord of dreams.”
24. “O Lord of lords ! I have slept by your side. (Ins¬
truct me) in my dreams (how to execute) all the works I
have in my mind.”
25. *‘0m Om ! hrUm phaf visnave svdhd ! When the dream
(is) good, everything (will also be) good. If it is bad, it becomes
good by the performance of the siiiihahoma^. Having offered
reverential waters to the stone in the morning, the implements
should be worshipped with (the sacred syllables) (for the worship
of) implements.
26. The spades and chisels should have their edges be¬
smeared with honey and clarified butter. (The priest) should
think himself as Visnu and the sculptor as Viivakarman (the
divine architect).
27-28. The implement which is of the form of Visnu should
be given (to the sculptor) and its face and back should be shown.
Having cut a square block of the stone with controlled senses
and holding a chisel, the sculptor should make a smaller one for
the purpose of the pedestal. Having placed (them) in a chariot
and brought to the workspot together with the cloth (one who)
makes the image after having worshipped (the form conceived),
is a sculptor.
CHAPTER FORTYFOUR
Characteristics of the image ofVdsudeva
The Lord said :
1-2. I shall describe to you the characteristics of the image
1. See W. 13 end 17 above.

of Vasudeva and other gods. Having placed the stone to the
north of the temple facing either the east or the north and
worshipped it, the sculptor should- divide the stone into nine
parts along the central line after making the offering.
3. In the twelve divisions (of the line) a division is said to
be an angula (a finger breadth). Two aAgulas arc known to be a
golaka. It is also said to be a kdlarutra.
4. Having divided one of the nine divisions into three,
(with one part) the region of the calves should be made. In the
same way a part is to be used for the knees and part for the neck.
5. The crown should be of a measure of a tdla (12 aAgulas).
In the same way the face (should be) of the measure of a tdla.
The neck and heart should also be a tdla each.
6. The navel and the genital part should be a tdla apart.
(The length) of the thighs should be two tdlas. (The length)
of the part from the ankle to the knee should be two tdlas. Listen,
now to (the description) (of the drawing) of lines (on the body).
7. Two lines should be drawn on the foot, and (two) more
in between the calves (and knees). Two lines about the knees
and two more in between the thighs and the knees should be
drawn.
8. One line should be drawn over the genital part, and one
more about the waist. Another (line) (should) then (be drawn)
above the navel for accomplishing the girdle.
9. Then (a line) should be drawn on the heart and two lines
on the neck. One such line should be drawn on the forehead and
one more on the head.
10. One more line should be diawn on the crown by the
learned. O Brahman ! seven vertical lines should be drawn.
1 1 . Six lines should be laid in between the armpits and the
lower part of the spine. These lines alone should be marked
clearly omitting the central line.
12. The forehead, the nose and the mouth should be made
(to measure) four aAgulas. The neck and the two ears should
be made (to measure) four aAgulas long.
1 3 . The cheeks so also the chin should be made ( to measure )
two aAgulas broad. The forehead is said to be eight aAgulas
broad.
14. Over that the temples (sides of the forehead) should

Agni PurSi^a
be made two afigulas endowed with curbs. The intervening
space between the eyes and ears is said to be four atlgula^.
15. The ears should be two ahgulas wide. (The inter¬
space between) the ears and the ends of eye-lashes (should
be) two and a half units. The cavity in the ear is spoken to be
in the same line as the eyebrows.
16. A pierced ear (should be) six angulas and an unpierced
(ear) (should be) four angulas equal to the chin. (Or it should
be) six angulas whether it is pierced or not pierced.
17. Then the external auditory passage with its membranes
etc. should be made. The lower lip should be of two angulas
the upper lip should be half of it,
18. Then the (breadth) of an eye (should be) half an
angula and the mouth (should be) four angulas. The measure¬
ment of its depth is spoken to be one and a half angulas.
19-20. The unopened mouth should be in this way. The
opened mouth should be three afigulas. The base of the bridge
of the nose should be one angula high. From its tip it should be
two aAgulas similar to the karavira (flower) (oleander). The
intervening space between the two eyes should be made to mea¬
sure four afigulas.
21. The corners of the eyes (should be) two angulas. The
space between them (should be) two afigulas. The pupil (should
be) one third of the eye and the iris (should be) one fifth (of it).
22. The breadth of the eye (should be) three angulas. The
cavity (of the eye) is considered to be half an angula. The lengths
of the eyebrows are considered to be equal and are proportional
to the eye-brows.
23. The middle of the eye-brow should be two afigulas and
its length (should be) four afigulas. The measure round the head
(should be) thirty-six aAgulas.
24. The measurement around the heads of the images of
Ke^ava and other gods should be thirty-six (aAgulas). The headmeasure of all those (images) which are short-necked (should
be) ten (aAgulas).
25. The inter-space between the neck and the chest should
be three times the length of the neck and should be thrice as
much broad plus eight aAgulas.
26. The shoulders (should) be made (to measure) eight

aAgttlas and the two beaut.iful shoulder regions (should be) three
times those. The arms should measure seven times (the length
of) the eyes. The fore arms (should be) sixteen afigulas.
27. The arms should be three kald^ in breadth and the fore¬
arms should also be equal to fhat. The upper arm should have
a circumference of nine kal^.
28. It should be seventeen afigulas at the middle and sixteen
above the elbow-joint. O Brahman 1 the circumference
of elbow should be three times that.
29. The circumference of the middle of the forearm is said
to be sixteen aAgulas. The circumference of the fore-part of the
arm is said to be twelve aAgulas.
30. The palm of the hand is said to be six aAgulas in breadth.
‘The length should be seven aAgulas. The middle (hnger) should
be five aAgulas (long).
31. The index finger and the ring finger (should be) ihalf
an aAgula less than that. The little finger and the thumb should
be made to measure four aAgulas each.
32. The thumb should be made to have two parvans (joints ) .
The other fingers (should have) three joints. The measure of
the nail is laid down as half (the size of the joints) on the res¬
pective fingers.
33. The extent of the belly is same as that of the chest. The
navel should be an aAgula (in breadth) and proportionally deep.
34. Then the inter-space between the generative organ and
the intestines should be made to measure a tilla. The girth around
the navel (should be) forty-two aAgulas.
35. The inter-space between the breasts should be made
to measure a tdla in breadth. The nipples should be of the mea¬
sure of a (barley grain). The circular space around them
should be two p&das (two feet).
36. The circumference of the chest should be made sixtyfour aAgulas clearly. The girth of the lower portion (of the chest)
is said to be four mukhas^ (one tdla).
1 . Equal to two aAgulas. Alio called Golaka.
2. One eighth of an aAgula,
3. Seems to be a corrupt form for mukfya equal to one tdla or twelve
aAgulas.

Agni PurSifa
37. The circumference of the waist should be fifty-four
aAgulas. The breadth of the base of the thigh is said t0 be twelve
angulas.
38. It is somewhat greater at the middle (of the thigh)
and gradually less (broad) below. The knee-joint (should be)
eight aAgulas in breadth and thrice that in its girth.
39. The middle of the leg from the ankle to the knee is said
to be seven aAgulas broad. The girth of it (should be) three times
that. The top of the leg (should be) five aAgulas broad.
40. The girth of that (the leg) (should be) thrice its breadth.
The feet (should) measure a tdla. The extent of elevation
of the feet (should be) four aAgulas.
41. The front (part) of the ankles should be four aAgulas
The extent of the feet should be three kalds. The generative organ
should be three aAgulas.
42. Its girth (should be) five aAgulas. The fore-finger
(should be) of same length. The other fingers are duly lesser
by one part of eighth.
43. The height of the toe is said to be one and a half aAgulas.
The nail of the two should be made twice that.
44. (Those of other fingers) should be gradually made half
aAgula less than the previous. The scrotum should be three
aAgulas (long). The generative organ (should be) four fingers
(long).
45. The girth of the upper part of the pouch should be made
(to be) four angulas. The girth of the scrotum is said to be six
aAgulas.
46. The image should be adorned with ornaments. This is
the exact description of details. The features (of the deities)
should be made in this world, as described.
47. A disc on the (upper) right hand, and a lotus on the
lower (right hand) , the conch on the (upper) left hand, the
mace on the lower (left hand) are to be placed according to
the characteristic of Visudeva.
48-49. (The images of) Sri and Pusti should be made carry¬
ing a lotus and a harp respectively in their hands, (their images)
reaching upto the thighs (of that of Vasudeva). Then the t^vo
Vidyadharas (a class of semi-divine beings) holding the gar¬
lands (in their hands) should be made in the halo of the prin-

cipal image). The halo (should also) be decked with the (ima¬
ges) of (celestial) elephants. The pedestal should be radiant
like a lotus on which the images (should be worsliipped) as
follows.
CHAPTER FORTYFIVE
Characteristics of pedestals and details relating to images
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe the characteristics of the pedestal. The
length is the same as that of the image. The height (should
be) half of it. It should have sixty-four folds.
2. Leaving two rows at the bottom, the other parts
should be polished on either side as also inside.
3. Leaving two rows at the top, the other parts arc polished
evenly on either side and inside.
4. The rectangular space in between these should then be
polished. The first two rows should be divided into four parts
by a wise man.
5-6. The girdle should be equal to one such part. The in¬
dent should be half that. Leaving one such part evenly on either
side a wise man should leave on the exterior a breadth of a foot.
The water drains should be at the top of each one of the three
parts.
7. This auspicious and excellent pedestal (has been des¬
cribed) relating to its manifold ways (of construction). The
(images of the)goddess Lakfml and other feminine forms should
be made (to measure) eight {tilas in length.
8. The eye brows should be more than ^Lyava (in length).
The nose (should be) less than 2^ yam (in length). The mouth
(should measure) more than a small ball well distributed above
and below.
y. The eye should be made long (measuring) three parts of
a yava less than thieQycmas. The breadth of the eyes should be
made half of it.

Agni PufU^a
10. The beautiful ears should be made to be in a line with the
corners of the mouth. Then the two shoulders should be made
sloping by less than a kali.
11-12. The neck should be one and a half kalis long and
made beautiful by a proportionate width. The thighs, kneejoints, the pedestal, should be broad. The feet, the hinder part,
the bullocks and the hips should be made as prescribed. The
iingers should measure less than the seventh part of the above
and should be long and not crooked.
13. The shank, thigh and the hip would be one netrd}- less
in length. The middle part and the sides should have the same
roundness. The two breasts (should be) fully developed and
plump.
14-15. The beasts should be made to measure a t&la. The
waist should be one and a half kalis. The other marks should be
the same as before. A lotus (should be placed) on the right hand
and a bilva (fruit) on the left (hand). (There should be) two
maidens on the sides holding chowries in their hands. (The
image of) Garuda should have a long nose. I shall then describe
those which bear the marks of a disc.
CHAPTER FORTYSIX
Characteristics of different Silagrima stones
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe (the characteristics of) the iilagrima
mQrti* (the different gods represented by different kinds of
iilagrima stones) which yield enjoyment and emancipation.
(The stone called) Visudeva is black (coloured) around its mouth
and has (marks) of two discs on it.
2. The SahkarfOJia (stone) is red (in colour) and has marks
1. The measurement indicated by this word is not quite dear. Pro¬
bably equal to two aAguIas.
2. The tdiagrdma stones obtained from the beds of Gaqdskl river in
Nepal are associated with the worship of Viypu. Ihe different stones bearing
different marks are taken to represent difiSnrent forms df Vifou.

of two discs (and is considered as) excellent. The Pradyumna
(stone) has many holes, elongated and is blue (coloured).
3. The Aniruddha (stone) is yellow (in colour) and has the
mark of a lotus. It is circular (in shape) and has two or three
rays. The N&riyai^a (stone) is black (in colour) with an elevated
and deep hole.
4. The Parameffi (stone) (has the marks of) the lotus and
disc. It is perforated at the back and has dots on the surface.
The Vif^u (stone) has a big disc (mark). It is black(in colour).
It has a line in the middle part. It is of the shape of a mace.
5-6. The NfsiThha (stone) is tawny. It has (the mark of)
a big disc and five dots. The Var&ha (stone) is of the shape of thefemale divinity. It has unequal discs. It is of the colour of sap¬
phire. It is large with the marks of three lines and is good. The
K&rma stone has an elevated hinder part with circular linesand is black (in colour).
7. The Hayagriva (stone) has a line of the shape of a good.
It is blue (coloured) and is dotted. The VaUcui^fha (stone) has.
(the mark of) a disc and lotus. It has the radiance of a gem.
It has tail-shaped lines.
8. The stone is long and has three dots. It is crystalline-coloured and is well formed. The Sridhara (stone) has a
garland of wild flowers and five lines and is circular.
9. The V&mana (stone) is circular and is very short. It is
blue (coloured) and has a dot. The Trivikrama (stone) is black
(coloured ) . It has a line on the right and a dot on the left side.
10. The Atlanta (stone) has the mark of the hood of a ser¬
pent, it has variegated colours and manifold forms. The Ddmo-^
data (stone) is big and has a disc in the middle part with twominute dots.
11. The SudarSana (stone) has (the mark of) a disc. The
Ldcpninirdyoita (stone) (is that which has the marks of) two discs.
The Acyuta (stone) (has the marks of) three discs. Or the 7rtoikrama (stone) may have (the marks of) three discs.
12. The Jandrdana (stone) has (the marks of) four discs.
The V&sudiva (stone) has (the marks of) five discs. The Pradyumna (stone) has (the marks of) six discs. iThe SaAkarfotfa
(stone) has (the marks of) seven discs.

Agni Purd^a
13. The Purufottama (stone) has (the marks) of eight discs.
The NaoavyUha form has the marks of nine discs. (The stone
representing) the ten manifestations (of Visnu) (is marked)
with ten (discs). The Aniruddha form (is marked) with eleven
(discs). The Dvadaidiman (class of Sdlagrdma) (is marked) by
twelve (discs). (One is deemed to be) the Ananta (class of
Sdlagrdma) (if it has) more (discs) than these.
CHAPTER FORTYSEVEN
Mode of worshipping Sdlagrdma
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe the mode of worshipping the Sdlagrdma
marked with discs for (the sake of) accomplishment. The wor¬
ship of Hari (in the Sdlagrdma) is of three kinds —
(i) k&myd performed for gaining particular benefit
(ii) akdmyd performed with disinterestedness about the benefits
(iii) Subhaydtmikd, that is of the nature of both of them.
2. (The worship) of the five (manifestations of Visnu)
(such as) the Fishi etc., is,either kdmyd or ubhaydtmikd, (The
worship of the manifestations) of the Boar Man-lion and Dwarf
forms (of Vi^nu is) for emancipation.
3-6. Listen to the three-fold worship of the Sdlagrdma endow¬
ed with discs. The excellent worship is that performed without
desiring for the fruits. The worship with desire for the fruits is
the last (in the rank). The worship of an image is mediocre.
In a circular lotus placed on a rectangular seat, having assigned
the projtava (the syllable Om) to the heart and having assigned
(the sacred syllables) to the parts of the body and having shown
three mudrds (positions of fingers in the practice of worship),
the preceptor should be worshipped outside the circle. The
attendant gods {ga^) should be worshipped on the west. Dh4tr
on the north-west, Vidhatr on the south-west,the Kart&andHarta
on the south and north, Vi$vaksena(Vi$pu)should be worshipp1. The tMt does not spediy the names of other maniiiMtati<xu.

«d in the north-east, and K^etrapilaka (the guardian deity)
on the south-east.
7. The Vedas y Rgoeda etc. (should be worshipped) in the east
etc. (The serpent) Ananta (which is) the support of the earth,
the seat of worship, the lotus, the three orbs — sun, moon 2ind
fires (should be worshipped).
8. The seat (should consist) of twelve letters^ (forming the
mystic formula of the God). Having placed (the God) there,
the stone should be worshipped with the individual syllables
and the whole of the sacred syllable in order.
9-10. Then one should worship with the vedic sacred sylla¬
bles accomplished by the syllables such as the gdyatri, etc. and
pranava on the east and other directions. Then the three mudrds
of the Visvaksena (Vi^nu), the disc and the Kijetrapala should
be shown. This is the first variety of the worship of idlagrama.
Then I shall describe the one with no merits.
1 1 . One should draw a circle as before with sixteen radii and
with a lotus. One should then worship the preceptor and others
with a conch, disc, mace and sword.
12. The bow and the arrows (should be placed) in the east
and the north. The seat should be placed with the vedic (syl¬
lables). The stone should be placed with the (sacred) twelve
syllables® of the lord. Listen to the third variety of worship.
13. One should draw a lotus having eight radii and worship
the preceptor and others as before. Having offered the seat with
the eight sacred letters® one should place the stone with the same
(formula). One should worship ten times with that (formula).
It is then accomplished by gdyatri etc.
CHAPTER FORTYEIGHT
Adoration of twentyfoar forms of Vif^u
The Lord said :
1. Keiava of the form of (syllable) Om bears the lotus,
1 . Om name bhagavaU odsadev^a.
2. See the previous note.
3. Om nanio oAsudev^a.

128 Agni PurOifar
conch, disc and mace. Narayana (bears) the conch, lotus, maceand disc. Circumambulation to Him. ^
2. Then I salute Madhava, who bears the mace, disc, conch,
and lotus. Govinda wields the disc, the Kaumodaki (name of a.
mace), lotus and conch.
3. Vi^nu, the bearer of the disc, the mace, lotus and conch
is the bestower of emancipation. I salute Madhusudana, who>
bears the conch, disc, lotus and mace.
4. (I prostrate) with devotion (at the feet of) Trivikrama
who bears the lotus, mace, disc and conch. May V^ana, the
bearer of the conch, disc, mace and lotus protect me always.
5. Sridhara who holds a lotus, disc, bow and also the conch,
yields emancipation. Hr^Ikeia wields the mace, disc, lotus and
conch. May He protect us.
6. And Padmanabha (is one) who yields boons and whoholds the conch, lotus, disc and mace, (I salute him). Damodara (is one) who holds a lotus, conch, mace and disc. I salute
him.
7. May Vasudeva, who wields a mace, conch, disc and
lotus (protect) the universe. May Sahkar^ana, who holds a.
mace, conch, lotus and disc protect us.
8. Lord Pradyumna is one who holds a mace, disc,
conch and mace as well as a lotus. May Aniruddha, who wieldsthe disc, mace, conch and lotus protect us.
9. May Puru^ottama, the Lord of celestials, who holds
disc, lotus, conch and mace (protect you). May Adhok^aja
who wields lotus, mace, conch and disc protect you.
10. I salute that Lord Nrsimha, who wields disc, lotus,
mace and conch. May Acyuta, who holds mace, lotus, disc
and conch, protect you all.
11. So also (may) Upendra, who is of the form of a child
and (who holds) the disc and lotus, (protect you). And (may)
Janardana, who wields lotus, disc, conch and mace (protect
you).
12. May Hari, who holds conch, lotus, disc as well as
(mace) kaumodaki yield me enjoyment and emancipation.
May Kr^na, who holds conch, mace, lotus and disc give en*
joyment and emancipation. ^

13. The first manifestation was that of Vasudeva. Then
Sankarsana manifested. Pradyumna manifested from SahkarSana. Aniruddha appeared from Pradyumna.
14. Each one of the (above) forms was divided into three
forms such as Ke^ava and others. . One who reads or hears this
hymn consisting of twelve letters on the twenty-four forms gets
free from impurity and gets all things.
CHAPTER FORTY-NINE
Characteristics of forms of 'Fish* etc. of Vi^nu
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe to you the characteristics of the ten
manifestations (of Visnu) beginning with the Fish. The Fish
(form of Visnu) should resemble a fish. The Tortoise (form)
should resemble a tortoise.
2. The terrestrial boar (manifestation) should have a hu¬
man body and as carrying a mace and other (weapons) in the
right hand, and the conch, (the goddess) Lak^mi or a lotus in
the left.
3. Or (the goddess) (is represented) as resting on the left
elbow and the earth and (the serpent) Ananta at the feet. The
installation of the figure secures for a person a kingdom and
(such a person) gets across the ocean of mundane existerxe.
4. The Man-lion image (should be represented) as having
a wide open mouth and having the killed demon (Hiranya*
kasipu) on the left thigh. His chest should wear a garland and
(his arms) should hold disc and mace.
5. The Dwarf-form may hold an umbrella and a stick or
have four arms. The figure of Parai$urama may hold the bow
and arrow, a sword and an axe.
6. (The figure of) Rama should have the bow, arrow, sword,,
conch or two hands or may have four arms holding a mace and
plough.
7. The plough may be provided on the left half (upper arm )
and the auspicious conch on the lower arm. The mace may be

130 Agni Pwrd/fa
provided on the right half (upper arm) and the auspicious disc
on the lower arm.
8. The figure of Buddha (should be made) as calm, hav¬
ing long cars, white complexion, wearing a cloth, and seated on
a lotus with its petals upwards and as conferring favour and
protection.
9. (The figure of) Kalki is (to be represented as) a twiceborn endowed with a bow and quiver and as destroying the
foreigners. Or (he should be represented as) seated on the horse
and endowed with a sword, conch, disc and arrow.
10. I shall describe the characteristics of nine forms
of Vi§nu commencing with Vasudeva. The mace (is placed)
on the right half (upper arm) and the excellent disc on the left
half (upper arm).
1 1 . The image of Vasudeva may be made as before or as
having four hands or two hands, one holding a conch and the
other as conferring boons and having Brahma and Isa (Siva)
always on either side.
12. (The figure of) Balarama (is represented) as hold¬
ing a plough, mace, club and lotus. (The image of) Pradyumna
(is represented as having) thunderbolt and conch on the
right arm and the bow in the left arm.
13. Or Pradyumna (is represented) as having the mace
resting on the navel with pleasure or holding the bow and arrow.
Aniruddha may be (represented as) having four arms. In the
same way Lord Narayana (may also be represented).
14. (The image of) Brahma is (represented as having)
four faces, four hands, big belly, long beards, matted hair, and
(having) swan as the vehicle in front (of him).
15. (There should be) a rosary and a ladle on the right
hand and a water-pot and vessel to hold the sacrificial clarified
butter. Sarasvatl and Savitri (consorts of Brahma) (should be
placed) on the left and right sides.
16. (The image of) Vi^nu (is represented) as having eight
hands, Garuda (the vehicle), (holding) a sword, mace, and
arrow in the right hand and as conferring gifts and (holding)
the bow and mace in the left hand.
17. (The figure of) Narasixhha (is represented) (as having)
four hands holding the conch and disc and piercing (the body)
of the mighty demon (Hira^yakaiipu).

18-22. (The figure of) Var&ha (is endowed with) four arms
holding the (serpent) 8e$a in (one of) the hands and the earth
in the left (hand) and (his consort) Kamal^ (Lak^ml). The
•earth should be made as resting at the feet and (goddess )Laksmi
as seated at the feet. Trailokyamohana (one who stupefies the
three worlds) (should be represented as riding) the T&rkhya (the
«agle-vehicle) and possess eight hands, holding the sword, mace
and goad in the right hand and the conch, bow, mace and the
noose in the left hand. (Images of)Lak9mI and Sarasvati should
be endowed with lotus and lute (respectively). Then (the form
of) Viivarupa (of Visnu) (should be endowed) with the club,
noose, spear and arrow in the right hand and conch, bow, mace,
noose, tomara (javelin), plough, axe, staff, sword and leather
sling in the left hand.
23-24. The Harihara (8iva and Vi§nu) form of Vi§nu
(should be placed) on the right or left (side), (being endowed
with)twcnty hands, four faces and three eyes. He should either
be lying on his left or reclining on the water. (He should further
be represented) as his leg being held by the goddess Sri (Laksmi).
He should also be shown as being attended to by (the female
divinities) Vimala and others. He should also have the four¬
faced (Brahma) in the navel-lotus.
25. The form of Vi^nu bearing the marks of Rudra and
Ke^ava should hold a spear and sword in the right hand and
the mace and disc in the other and be in the company of Gauri
and Lak^mi (the consorts of Siva and Vi^pu).
26. The Haya^iras (horse-headed) form of Vi?nu (should
be represented) as holding the conch, disc, mace and the Vedas.
The left foot should rest on (the serpent) Se?a and the right on
the back of tortoise.
27. The form of Dattatreya may have two arms, the goddess
Sr! (Lak^m!) being seated on the left lap. The Vi$vaksena form
of Vi9nu (may hold) a disc, mace, plough and conch.

Agni Purd^
CHAPTER FIFTY
Characteristics of an image of the goddess
The Lord said :
1 -5. (The image of) Can^i may have twenty hands and may
hold the spear, sword, dart, disc, noose, club, iamaru (a
small drum) and spike in the left hands and also (show) protec¬
tive posture (and) the snake as the noose, club, axe, goad, bow,
bell, banner, mace, mirror, and iron mace in the (right) hands.
Or (the figure of) Gandi is made to have ten hands, with thebuffalo placed below with its head fully severed and the demon
as issuing forth from (its) neck with rage and brandishing his
weapon, holding spike in the hand, vomitting blood, his hairs
(stained) with blood and blood dripping out from the eyes
(forming) a garland (on the chest), being devoured by the lion
and well-bound by the noose in the neck. (The goddess is repre¬
sented as) resting her right foot on the lion and the left foot on
the demon underneath.
6-12. This form of Gan^ika, the destroyer of enemies
(is made as) having three eyes and endowed with weapons.
(This) Durga is to be worshipped with the nine elements in order
in a diagram of nine lotuses from her own form at the beginning,
centre and the eastern and other (directions). (The image
should be made as) possessing eighteen arms (carrying) a human
head, club, mirror, tarjani (a kind of weapon ) , bow, banner and
a little drum in the right hand and the noose, spear, mace,
trident, thunderbolt, sword, goad and dart in the left hand.
The others (Rudracanda and other goddesses) should be
endowed with the same weapons in their sixteen hands
except the little drum and tarjani (a kind of weapon).
The nine (goddesses) commencing with Rudracanda are
Rudracanda, Pracanda, Ga^dogra, Gai^danayika, Ga^a,
Gandavati, Gandarupa, Aticandika and Ugraca^da stationed
at the centre. (They are made to be) coloured as the rocanS
(yellow pigment), red, black, blue, white, purple, yellow and
white and as riding the lion. Then the buffalo as a human (form)
should be held by the hair by the nine (forms) of DurgS holding
weapons.

13. They are in the Sli^hc^ posture. They have to be
established for the increase of progeny; as also (the forms)
Crauri, Candika and others (as well as the forms) Ku9di> Ak^raTada (and) Agnidhrk.
14-15. She is the same as Rambha. (She is) accomplished
and devoid of fire. (She is) also Lalita. (She) holds the
severed head along with the neck in the left (hand) and a
mirror in the second hand.
(The image of) Saubhagya (is made) as holding fruits in
the folded palms on the right side. (The image of) Laki^mi
holds the lotus in the right hand and the Sriphala (bilva fruit)
in the left.
16. (The image of) Sarasvatl (should be made as holding)
a book, rosary and lute in the hands. (The image of) Jahnavi
(the river Ganges) (is represented) as holding a pot and flower
in the hand (and standing) on the crocodile and of white com¬
plexion.
17. (The image of the river) Yamuna is worshipped as
mounted on the tortoise and as holding a pot in the hand and of
dark complexion. (The image of) Tumburu is represented as
white (in colour), holding a lute and trident and riding a bull.
18-19. The four-faced Brahmi (the female-energy of Brahma)
(is represented) as of fair complexion, riding a swan and as
carrying a rosary, different vessels such as surd and kun^a hi the
left hand. Sankar! is represented as white, (seated) on a bull
holding the bow and arrow in the right hand and the disc and
the bow in the left hand. Kaumari (is represented) as red
in colour, riding the peacock and having two arms, holding the
spears.
20. (The form of) Lak$mi should hold the disc, and conch
in the right (hand) (and) the mace and lotus in the left (hand).
(The form of) V&rahi should be mounted on the buffalo and
hold the stick, conch, sword and goad.
21-25. (The image of) Aindri conferring success should be
represented as having thousand eyes and holding the thunder¬
bolt in the left hand.
1. The posture ia shooting, in which the right knee is advanced and
the left leg is held back.

Agni PurS^
Camu9^& may have three eyes deeply sunken, a skeleton
form devoid of flesh, erectly standing hair, emaciated belly, clad
in tigerskin and holding a skull and spear in the left hand and
a trident and scissor in the right standing on the dead body
of a man and wearing a garland of bones. (The image oQVinayaka
should have a human body, big belly, elephant face, big trunk
and sacred thread. The mouth measuring 7 kalds in breadth
while the trunk should measure 36 flnger-breadths in length.
The neck should be 12 kal&s in girth and lOkal&s in height. The
throat-region should be 36 Anger (in length). The space about
the region of anus should have the breadth of half a Anger.
26. (The region of) the navel and thigh should be of twelve
(Angers) as also the leg from the ankle to the knee and the feet.
He should be represented as holding his own tusk made into an
axe in the right hand and the la^iuka (a ball of sweet) and
lotus flower in the left.
27. (The image of) Skanda, the lord (of the universe) also
known as Sakha and ViiSakha, (is represented) as a boy possess¬
ing two arms and riding a peacock (with the images of) Sumukhi
and Vidalaksi^.
28-29. The god may be represented as having a single face
or six faces, six hands or twelve hands carrying the spear and a
cock in the right hand. In the village or the forest (it should
have) two arms. (He should bear) the spear, arrow, noose,
nistrirhia (sword), goad and tarjani (a kind of weapon) in
the six right hands and the spear in the left hand.
30-31. (The image of) Rudracareika (the manifestation of)
the goddess may have a bow adorned by the plume of peacock,
club, banner, protective posture, cock, skull, scissors, trident
and noose in the right and left hands. (She should also be)
clad in the elephant hide, with her leg raised up and the little
drum placed on the head.
32. Hence she (is known as) Rudracamunda, the goddess
of dancing and one who is dancing. This (goddess herself),
having four faces and in the sitting p)osture (is known as) MahAlak^ml.
1. The consorts of Skanda. The two names mean good-faced and
cat-eyed req>ectively. “

33-34. (The goddess) having ten hands and three eyes
(holding) (different) weapons, sword and 4<onaru (little
drum) in the right hand and the bell, club, staff with a skull at
one end and trident in the left (hand) and eating men, horses,
buffaloes and elephants held in the hand is called Siddhac^-
mui^d^.
35. That goddess accomplishes everything and is (known
(as) SiddhayogeSvari. She is also represented in another form
endowed with the noose and goad and red (in complexion).
36. (The goddess) Bhairavi who has an embodiment of
beauty is endowed with twelve arms. These are (all) (spoken
as) fierce (forms) arising from the cremation ground. The
above are remembered as the eight forms of the goddess.
37. (The goddess) K^ama (Forbearance) (should be)
surrounded by jackals, old, having two arms, and widely opened
mouth. (The goddess) Ksemahkari (Benevolent) may have pro¬
truding teeth and be resting her knees on the ground.
38. The wives of semi-gods should be made to have long
and motionless eyes. The iSakinis (female attendants on God¬
dess Durga) should be made to have oblique vision. The Maharamyas should have yellow eyes. The (images of) nymphs should
always be made beautiful.
39. (The form of) Nandlsa the bull, the door-keeper (of
the goddess ) , should carry a rosary and a trident. (The image of)
Mahakala (a form of Siva as the destroyer) may have a sword,
human skull, trident and club.
40. (The form of) Bhjrngin (an attendant of Siva) should
have an emaciated body. Kusmanda (another attendant of
Siva) should have a stout and dwarf form dancing. Virabhadra
and other attendants (of Siva) should have ears and faces
of elephants, cows, etc.
41. Ghan^akarna (an attendant of Siva) form should have
eighteen hands crushing the accrued sin, (holding weapons)
thunderbolt, sword, club, disc, arrow, mace, goad and hammer
in the right hand and tarjani (a weapon), club, dart, human
skull, noose, bow, bell and axe on the lefl and a trident in the
(remaining) two hands and wearing a garland of bells and crush¬
ing the eruptive diseases.

4gni Purd^a
CHAPTER FIFTYONE
Characteristics of the images of the Sun and otfter plamts
The Lord said :
1. (The image of) the Sun (should be made) to ride a
chariot having one wheel and seven horses. (He must) hold two
lotuses, ink-stand, pen and a staff in his right hand.
2. Pihgala, an attendant and gate-keeper of the Sun (should
be placed) on the left with the mace in his hand. (Sun-god)
should have female attendants bearing chowries (fly-flappers)
and the pale-looking consort by his side.
3. Or (the image of) the Sun should be made as riding a
horse alone. The guardian deities of different quarters
should duly be endowed with weapons, holding two lotuses
(in hands) and bestowing boons.
4. (The images of) Agni and other gods bearing the club,
trident, disc and lotus should be placed in different directions
(around). (The images of) the forms of Sun, commencing
with Aryama are represented as possessing four arms and placed
in a diagram of twelve petals.
5-6. Varuna, Surya, Sahasrarhsu (one who has thousand
rays), Dhatr, 'Tapana, Savitr, Gabhastika, Ravi, Parjanya,
Tva§{rj Mitra(and) Vi$nu are his different names as he moves
over the zodiacal signs commencing with the Aries in the course
of months commencing with Margaiirsa and ending with
Karttika.^
7-9. Their female energies known by the names — Ida,
Susumna, Vi^varcis, Indu, Pramardini, Prahar^nl, Mahakali, Kapila, Prabodhanl, Nllambara, Ghanantastha and Amfta,
and placed at the ends of petals are of black, red, pale red,
yellow, pale yellow, white, brown, yellow, green, white, grey
and blue.
10. Similar colours arc given to Varuna and others placed
at the tips of petals. The form of Tejas (effulgence) should
be represented as fierce, extremely crooked, possessing two arms
bolding a lotus and sword.
1. These two correspond to the months December-January and November-December.

1 1 . The form of Moon should be represented as holding
a sacrificial pitcher and rosary. (The image of) Mars should
be) holding a spear and rosary. (The figure of) Mercury (should
be) holding the bow and rosary in his hands. (The form of)
Jupiter (should be) holding the sacrificial pitcher and rosary.
12. (The image of) Venus may be holding the sacrificial
pitcher and rosary. (That of) Saturn should be endowed with
a girdle of bells. (While that of) Rahu (the ascending node
of the moon considered as a planet) (is represented as) holding
half of the lunar disc, (that of) Ketu (the descending node of
the moon considered as a planet) (is represented as) holding the
sword and lamp.
13. (The serpents) Ananta, Taksaka, Karka, Padma,
Mahabja and Sankha are all (represented as) having hooded
heads with great radiance.
14. (The image of) Indra is endowed with thunder-bolt and
.as seated on an elephant, (that of) Agni as riding a goat and
holding a spear, (that of) Yama as on a buffalo and carrying a
club and (that of) Nirjrti as holding a sword.
15. (The image of) Varuna (ocean god) is made as seated)
on a crocodile and as holding a noose, (that of) Vayu (wind
god) (as riding) an antelope and holding a banner, (that of)
Kubera (god of wealth) as seated on a sheep and bearing a
mace, and (that of) Isana (as seated) on a bull and having
■a matted hair.
16. (The images) of the guardian deities of the quarters of
the world are endowed with two arms. (The celestial architect)
Visvakarman (should be represented) as holding a rosary.
(The figure of) Hanumat (monkey, devoted to Rama) may be
holding the thunderbolt in his hand and pounding the earth
^ith his feet.
17. (The semi-divine beings) Kinnaras may be (represent¬
ed) as holding lutes in their arms and the Vidy^dharas (semi¬
divine beings) as having garlands (and moving) in the sky.
The goblins may be (represented) as having emaciated bodies
and the vampires as deformed faces, the Guardians of the sites
as having the tridents and the spirits of the dead people as lean
and big-bellied.

Agni PurOj^a
CHAPTER FIFTYTWO
Characteristics of images of different forms of goddesses
The Lord said:
1. I shall describe (the characteristics) of the eight
Yoginis (female attendants on Durga) respectively residents of
(the eight quarters) east to north-east. (The Yoginis) Ak^obhya,
Ruk^akarni , Raksasi, Kirpana and Ak^aya (reside in the east).
2. (The Yoginis) Pingaksi, Ksay^, Ksema, Ila, Lila, Laya,
LaktS, Bal^e^i, Lalasa and Vimala (dwell in the south-east).
3. (The Yoginis) Hutaia, Viialaksi, Hunkara, Vadavamukhi, Mahakrura, Krodhana, Bhayahkari and Mahanana
(are the residents of the south).
4. (The Yoginis) Sarvajiia, Tarala, Tara, Rgveda, Hayanana, Sara(khya), Rudrasahgrahi, l^ambara and Talajahghika
(occupy the south (-west).
5. Raktaksi, Suprasiddha, Vidyujjihva, Karahkim, Meghanada, Pracandogra, Kalakarni and Varaprada (are the inmates
of the west).
6. Candra, Candravall, Prapafica, Pralayantika, l§i^uvaktra, Pi^aci, Pisitala and Lolupa (dwell in the north-west).
7. DhamanI, Tapani, Ragini, Vikrtanana, Vayuvega,,
Brhatkuk^i, Vikrta and Vi^varupika (govern the north).
8. Yamajihva, Jayanti, Durjayi, Jayantika, Vidals, Revati,
Putana and Vijay^tika (hold sway over the north-east).
9. (These Yoginis should be represented) as having eight
arms (or) four arms, wielding weapons of their choice and yield¬
ing all benefits (on their votaries). (Lord) Bhairava may hold
the arka plant (Calotropis Gigantee) in the hand and have
the face like the knee or elbow bearing the matted hair and the
Moon.
10. Krttivibas (should be represented) as holding on one
side the sword, goad, axe and arrow and offering protection to>
the universe and a bow, trident, club with a skull at the top and
noose on the other.
11. Or he shall be having five faces and be wearing the
elephant*s hide and adorned by the serpents. He shall be seated,
on the dead body. He must be worshipped in the'inidst of the

mother goddesses.^
12. One has to worship him being endowed with the
letters of the alphabet upto the letter ‘ra’ and with (his mantra)
having six constituents and the eight long vowel mantras.
13. (He is also to be contemplated upon) as established in
the wicks of the flame in the house as endowed with golden orna¬
ments and the nida^ bindu and indu* and making the body of the
divine mother and the lord radiant.
14. Virabhadra (attendant of iSiva) (is represented) as
having four faces, seated on a bull in front of the mother (god¬
desses). (Goddess) Gaur! (consort of Siva) (is represented) as
having two arms and three eyes as endowed with a spear and
mirror.
15. (Goddess) Lalita (a form of Durga) (should be re¬
presented) as having four arms (holding) a spear, a small pit¬
cher, (and another) pitcher (in the hands) and showing boonconferring hands. (She should) be seated on the lotus. (She
should also) be endowed with a mirror, a small stick for apply¬
ing collyrium and Skanda and Gana (Ganeiia).
16. (Goddess) Candika may (be represented) as having
ten hands having a sword, spear, disc (and) dart in the right
(hand) and the magical noose, shield, pike, axe, and bow in
the left (hand). (She must) be riding a lion with the buffalo
(demon) having been slain with (her) spear in front of her.
CHAPTER FIFTYTHREE
CharacUristies of the lihga {parabolic representation of Siva)
The Lord said :
1-2. O Lotus-bom (Brahman) 1 shall describe to you
the characteristics of the lihga and other things. Listen. Havingmarked a rectangular (block of stone) as divided into two parts
1. They are Brahmi, M&heivari, Caodli V&r&hi, Vaif^avi, Kaum&ri,.
^”4 CSarcika.
2. These are the sound, dot and crescent, making ig} the Pmeava or Om.

Agni PurS^a
lengthwise, the lower part again being divided into eight parts
and three parts of these divisions being left out, the remaining
(block) formed by five parts should be divided breadthwise
into three parts and the three (gods) should be assigned therein.
3. This is spoken as representing the foims of Brahman,
Vi^nu and Siva (among) which (the last one) is larger (than
the other two parts). Half of the figure is marked at the angular
points in the square.
4. An octagonal (block) known as the part of Visnu is
certainly obtained (thus). Then a polygon of sixteen sides is
made" and then a polygon of thirty-two sides.
5. Having made a polygon of sixty-four sides, the cir¬
cular shape is accomplished. Then the excellent spiritual teacher
should chisel the head portion of the emblem.
6. The breadth of the linga may be divided into eight parts.
An umbrella-shaped top portion (of the liAga ) is got by discard¬
ing half of this length.
7. A liAga which has a breadth equal to three-fourth of its
lehgth bestows all the desired benefits.
8. The pillar (part of the emblem) should be a quarter of
the length (of the emblem) in the case of those worshipped by
the celestials. Listen now (the narration) of the characteristics
•of all liAgas.
9. The wiseman should divide the liAga measuring 16
aAgulas into 6 parts through the central line upto the Brahman
and Rudra parts.
10. The spaces in between two such lines of division should
measure e\g\iiyavas each in the first two cases, each latter measur¬
ing 2Lyava less than the preceding one.
11. Having divided the lower part into three parts, one
part should be left out. Having divided the (remaining) two
parts into eight parts, the three upper ones (of these divisions)
should be left aside.
12. Those (three sections) above the five divisions should
be rotated and the markings lengthened. Having left out one
part their union should be brought about.
13. These are the general characteristics of the li^a des¬
cribed by me. I shall (now) describe the most general (charac¬
teristics) of the pedestals.

14. After having known the commencing portion of the
liAga and height, the part (belonging) to Brahman should be
well placed by the learned person on the stone (pedestal).
15. Then having known the height (of the liAga) the differ¬
ent dimensions of the pedestal should be made. The base (of
the liAga) should be twice the height and length commensu¬
rate with that of the liAga.
16. The central part of the pedestal should be hewn and
divided into three parts. Its breadth should be one-sixth part of
its length.
17. The girth should measure one-third part of its breadth
and the dep^h (of cavity) should be equal to that of the girth.
It should be sloping gradually.
18. Or the depth (of the cavity) should be one sixteenth
part of that of the girth. The height of the base should be deviated.
19. One part of the base should remain imbedded in the
ground. One part of it will be (the height of) the stool proper.
Three such parts (will be the height) of the neck portion. The
first step should be one such part.
20. The second step should be of two such parts in height
while the remaining steps should have a height of such a single
part until one reaches the neck portion step by step.
21 . Outlets to the breadth of such a part should be set apart
on each one of the steps till the last one. They should be cut into
three parts by the three outlets.
22. It should measure a tip of the finger in breadth at the
base and one-sixth (of a finger) af their ends. Their beds should
be a little inclined towards the eastern side. These are considered
to be the general characteristics of the liAga along with the
pedstal.
CHAPTER FIFTYFOUR
The dimensions of different varieties of the liAga
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the measurement of the liAga in
a different way. Listen, I shall (now) speak about the lii^as

142 Agni Pufd^
made of salt, (and) ghee (which when worshipped) increases
(one’s) intellect. *
2. A lihga made of cloth (is worshipped) for the sake of
wealth. It is known as temporal. The one made of earth is either
burnt or half burnt of which the former is better.
3. Then, one made of wood is meritorious. One made of
stone is more meritorious than that made of wood. (The lihga)
made of pearl is more meritorious than that of stone. Then
(relatively merit-worthy) are the lihgas made of iron, and gold.
4. The lihgas made of silver, copper and brass yield enjoy¬
ment and release from bondage. The lihgas made of red lead and
mercury are excellent and confer enjoyment and release from
bondage.
5. The installation of a lihga on the earth made of mercury
and iron etc or studded with gems increases one’s glory and
grants success as desired.
6. If desired one can build temples and bases to these
(emblems) on the left side. One may worship the image of the
sun cast on the mirror.
7. Hara should be worshipped everywhere. The worship
gets completed only (by the worship) of the lihga. A lihga made
of stone or wood should be of a cubit length.
8. The movable lihga should be of the size of a finger and
encircled by the adytum. The lihga worshipped in the house
should be of the size of one to fifteen fingers.
9. The lihgas are classified into three groups according to
the measure of the doorway or into nine groups according to the
measure of the adytum. These lihgas should be worshipped in
one’s residence.
10. Thus there are thirty-six lihgas in the first class, thirtysix in the second class and thirty-six in the third class.
11. Thus totally there would be one hundred and eight
lihgas. The lihgas (measuring) one to five fingers (known as)
the short are said to be movable.
12. The movable lihgas measurii:^ six to ten finders are
known as middle. Those measuring eleven to fifteen fingers are
known as the best.
13. (Hiose made) of excellent gems (shbhld measure)
six' fingers. (iThose niade) 'of other glems (slS&uld meiimre)

nine fingers. The golden ones (should be) twelve (fingers).
The rest of the lihgas (should be) fifteen (fingers).
14. The four sets of comers from the top should be succes¬
sively cut into four or sixteen equal sides, and those again into
thirtytwo and sixty-four (in turn so as to make it a polygon of
sixty-four equal sides).
15. The two sides being thus lopped off, the neck of a solid
liAga should be twentysix parts from the rectangular space at its
foot.
16. (The face of the liAga) should gradually be decreasing
by four, six and eight parts from its base (and similarly) the
middle part of the liAga should be gradually less than the height
at its beginning by a foot.
17. That which is equal to half (the size of) the adytum is
(said to be) the lowest (variety of) linga. That which is fifteen
(fingers in length) is the excellent. Seven equal lines should
be drawn in the central portion of these liAgas.
18. In this way there would be nine lines. The middle
(variety of liAga) would have five lines. The length of the liAgas
should be nine fingers. The opposite side (should be) separated
by two intermediate links.
19. The liAga is measured out cubit by cubit till it would
be nine hands (length). The linga is of three kinds — inferior,
mediocre and superior.
20-22. A wiseman should mark three liAgas at the centre of
every liAga foot by foot at fourteen (places) by a fixed measure
of length of the door or the adytum. Four liAgas representing
l§iva, Vi$nu, Bfhaspati proportionately should be marked by the
breadth. The liAga should be (shaped) long to represent the
three forms.
23. The liAga should have a circumference of four, eight,
eight (inches) representing the three qualities. One should make
the liAgas of such lengths as one desires.
24. One should divide the figure (marked) by the banners,
celestial gods, elements or cocks. One should know the good or
bad from the inches left over.
25. The banners etc., the crows, lions, elephants and goats
are excdlent. The others are auspicious. Among the primary
notes of Indian gamut, the first one, second one and the fifth
one confer good.

Agni Pur^^fa
26-27. Among the elements, the earth is auspicious. Among
the fires, the consecrated fire (from the household’s perpetual
fire) is auspicious. Half of the said length having been divided
in order into seven, eight, five, nine and five parts there would
be symmetrical representation of Siva, Vi§nu and Brahman.
28. The fifth one is known as the Vardhamdna. There would
be two kinds based on the increase of breadth and length. Many
kinds are described according to Vi^vakarma(the divine archi¬
tect).
29. The i4hya class would be of three kinds on account of
the size. Measured by the barley grains it would be eight parts,
by the arm it would be three parts. The last one endowed equally
is known as jina.
30-31. (There would be) twenty-five lifigas in the first
(variety) which are worshipped by the celestials. Then being
divided into thirtyfivc there would be 14000 and 1400 varieties.
Thus (we have) the eight angula's extent from the nine cubit
adytum.
32. One has to mark the angular points by means of threads
placed at the angular and middle of angular points. Having made
the expansion from the middle, three parts should be fixed from
the middle.
33. There would be eight angular parts above the division.
Two angular parts represent the part of Siva. From the foot to
the knee portion (of the liAga) is Brahma. (From the knee) to
the navel is Vi?nu.
34. (From the navel) upto the head is the part of Siva.
Similarly, it is in the case of distinct and indistinct forms. In the
linga of five parts, the head part is said to be circular.
35. The images (maybe) of die shape of an umbrella, cock
or crescent moon. I shall descrijsTe the merits of the four varieties
in each (class) differing on sM^count of one’s option.
36. The head portion (of the linga) should be divided into
eight parts. The first part of the longitudinal portion should be
divided into four parts.
37-39. There (should be) four lines successively drawn in
order to divide into parts. We have by one part the lotus, the one
called viSdla by cutting off, the trivaisa by thinning out and the
iatrvkrt by elision of the fourth part. In the sarvasama class the

top portion is the excellent and the cock-shaped in the sura class
among the liAga of four parts. The top portion of the anddi has
been described. You listen to (the characteristics of) the
crescent of the top.
40. At a comer of a part (there should be) the charming
axis (represented) by four parts deficient by one part. By the
elision of two, three and four parts in order, (one gets) the
full, crescent moon and lotus shape.
41. Listen then to (the description of forms having) four
or three faces or one face and mukhalihga. The part to be wor¬
shipped is to be made set with nine parts.
42-43. Having left out twelve parts for the arms and eyes, as
before, the head, forehead, nose, face, chin, neck are then to be
made. Having covered by the hands, the arms and eyes (are
made) with four parts proportionate to the measurement of
image.
44. The face should be made equal to one-eighth part of
the breadth. I have described the four-faced form. Listen !
The three-faced form is described now.
45. The ear and feet are made. One has to mark the fore¬
head etc. for that. Then the arms should be made with four parts
quite strong.
46. The projection of the frontispiece (should be) oneeighth of the breadth. One face has to be made such as to have
beautiful eye on the eastern side.
47‘. It should be made round at the forehead, nose, face
and neck. By one-fifth from the arm one should make it round
less by one’s arm length.
48. It is good to have the projections in the frontispiece as
one-sixth of the breadth for all the mukhaliAgas whether it is
trapufa or kukkufa (?)

Agni Purd^
CHAPTER FIFTYFIVE
The characteristics of the pedestal
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe (the characteristics of) the pedestal of
images. They have the same length as (the height) of the image
and have breadth half (the height) of (the image).
2. Or the breadth should be half or one-third of the measure
of the height. The girdle should be equal to one-third of its
breadth.
3. The cavity should be of the same measure and should be
inclined towards the posterior part. A quarter of the breadth
(should be left out) for the canal as outlet.
4. (The width) of the forepart (of the channel) should
be half of the breadth of the base. The water-course should be
one-third of the breadth (of the base).
5. Or else the length of the liiign is said to be equal to half
(the length) of the base or equal to the length (of the base).
6. The height (of the pedestal) should be divided into six¬
teen parts as before. The lower six divisions should be made to
comprise two parts. The neck should be three parts.
7. The foundation, projections, joint, seat and other remain¬
ing parts should each comprise one part. This will hold good in
the case of ordinary images.
8. The door-way (leading) to the image is said to be pro¬
portionate to the door-way of the temple. The canopy over the
image should be endowed with elephants and tigers.
9. The pedestal of (the image of) Hari also should always
be made beautiful. The measures (laid down) for the images of
Vi^nu shall apply to (the images of) all gods. Those measures
set forth for the image of Lak$m! shall apply to all (images
of) the goddesses.

CHAPTER FIFTYSIX
Five divisions of installation :
The Lord said :
I . I shall now describe the five divisions of an installation.
The image is the embodiment of the supreme being, the real
principle, the pedestal is the symbol of nature or the Goddess
Laksmi. The installation is the union of the two.
2-3. Hence, the installation is done by men who desire to
have their wishes fulfilled. The officiating priest (has to ar¬
range) sheds (measuring) eight, sixteen or twenty (cubits)
in front of the temple for bathing, the pitchers, and things
required for the sacrifice by extending the side lines of the ady¬
tum.
4. The auspicious sacrificial platform should be made ready
with one third (or) half (of the above space). It should be
decked with pitchers big and small and canopies etc.
5. All the materials (to be used in the rite) should be cleans¬
ed with pahcagavya (the five things extracted from a cow).
The priest should adorn (himself with ornaments). Having
contemplated his own self as (lord) Vi|nu, he should begin
worship.
6. The expert idol-worshippers should be established in
front of each pit (intended for the rite). (They should be
endowed) with rings, bracelets and other things.
7. Logs of the pippala^ udumbara, vafa trees (should be plant¬
ed) at the doorways of the place for the sake of arches. The
place may be quadrangular, semi-circular, circular or lotus¬
shaped.
8. Log of the fig tree should adorn the east, of the subhadra
the south, of the sukarma and suhotra the northern and western
doorways respectively.
9. The pitchers having young sprouts of mango trees should
be placed five cubits apart at the toot of each one of the suppor¬
ting columns of the ardies and be worshipped with the sacred
syl^bles sjmd prthiol^,
10. The sidarfana (disc of Viypu) should be placed at the
top. A wise man has to make the banner five cubits long.

Agni Purity
11-12. It should be made sixteen fingers broad. O excellent
among the celestials ! the height should be seventeen qubits in
the alternative. The pit should be duly reddish, flame-coloured^
black, white, yellow, deep red, white and (again) white.
13-15. The presiding deities of the banners (hoisted) in
the (quarters) east etc., such as Kumuda, Kumudaksa, Pundarlka, Vamana, Sahkar^ana, Sarvanetra, Sumukha and Suprati^(hita, who are endowed with countless (divine) qualities should
be worshipped. One hundred and eight pitchers resembling the
ripe binUia fruit (in colour), not having black spots and having
been filled with water and gold and having pieces of cloth around
their necks should be placed outside the arches.
16. Pitchers should be placed at the east and other direc¬
tions. Four pitchers should be placed at the corners of the sacri¬
ficial altar with the sacred syllable djighra.
17. After having invoked Indra and others in the pitchers
in the east etc. one should worship (Indra). O Indra, the:
lord of celestials, the wielder of thunderbolt, seated on the
elephant you come.
18. (You) protect the eastern door in the company of
celestials. May salutations be to you. After having worshipped
(Indra) with the sacred syllable trdtdram indra\ the wise man
should invoke him.
19. O Agni ! endowed with a trident, seated on a goat
and possessing strength (you) come and accept my worship.
You protect the south-east in the company of celestials. Salu¬
tations to you.
20-21. One should worship Agni with the sacred syllable
agnir mQrddfUP. Salutations to Agni. O Yama ! seated on
the buffalo, wielding the mace, and possessing great strength
(you) come. You protect the southern gate. O Yama !
salutations to you. Yama should be propitiated with the sacred
syllable vaivasvaUuh saAgamanam.*
22-24. O Nairrta ! carrying a sword accompanied by
an army and riding an animal, (you) come. Here is the offering
and water for^washing the feet. You guard the south-western

direction. Men should worship with the sacred syllable efa U
nirrti^ and with offerings. O Varuna ! riding the crocodile,
holding the noose and possessing great strength (you) come and
protect the western doorway. Salutations to you. The preceptor
should worship with (the sacred syllabic) umrh hi rdjd mruiym
and offerings.
25-27. O Vayu ! endowed with strength, holding the
banner, together with a vehicle you come. You guard the
north-western direction in the company of celestials and
Maruts (groups of celestial gods). Salutations to you. He should
be worshipped with (the sacred syllables) vdta^ etc. or with
*Om ! Salutations to Vayu’. O Soma ! you come with
strength, wielding the mace and riding the vehicle. You protect
the northern gate along with Kubera. Salutations to you. One
should worship with (the sacred syllable) somarfi rdjdnam or
‘Salutations to Soma*.
28-30. O l^ana ! (you) come along 1 possessor of
strength, riding the bull. You guard the north-eastern direction
of the ritual pavilion. Salutations to you. He should be wor¬
shipped with (the sacred syllable), iidnamasya^ or ‘Salutations
to Iifana*. O Brahman ! (you) come. Seated on a swan I
Carrying the sacrificial vessel and ladle ! You defend the direc¬
tion above the sacrificial place, O unborn i Salutations to
you. (One) should worship with (the sacred syllabic) hiranya-
.garbha or ‘Salutations to Brahman*.
31. O Ananta ! you come. Endowed with the disc !
Seated on the tortoise ! Lord ofthega^. You protect the bottom
(of the sacrificial place). O Lord Ananta ! Salutations to
you. One should worship with (the sacred syllabic) ‘Saluta¬
tions to serpent* or ‘Salutations to Ananta*.
CHAPTER FIFTYSEVEN
Consecration of pitchers
The Lord said :
1. One should do (the ceremony) of taking possession of

Apii Purity
the ground. One should scatter grains and mustard seeds utter*
ing (the sacred syllable) ‘N^asimha’ which destroys demons.
One should sprinkle paflcagavyaitYic five things got from a cow).
2. Having worshipped the earth in the pitcher containing
gems as well as Hari and his retinue, worship the eighteen
pitchers therein with the sacred syllable of weapons.
3. The rice grains should be purified by an incessant shower
(of water) and scattered around. The pitcher should be placed
in their midst.
4-5. Lord Acyuta and (his consort) Sri should again be
worshipped in the pitcher (provided with) a cloth. The bed as
well as the mattress should be spread on the kuSa grass on a drawn
circle with (the recitation of) the sacred syllable yogeyoge.^ Lord
Vi?nu, the slayer of (the demon) Madhu and the lord of the
three (divisions of the universe) and also the different lords of
learning are worshipped on the bed.
6-7. Having worshipped Vamana, Srldhara, Hr§ike§a,
Padmanlibha (different forms of Vi^^u) in the north-west
and other (comers) of the bathing place and the Damodara
(form of Vi§nu) in the north-east and having brought all the
materials to the bathing pavilion they should be deposited in the
four pitchera and the altar in the north-east.
8. These pitchers should be consecrated in the four quarters
with the pitchers containing water for the consecration. The
pitchers should be placed with due regard for the purpose of
consecration.
9-11. The young sprouts from the vafa udumbara, aivattha,
campakat aSoka^ iridrumaj paldiay arjtmay plakfay kadambay bakula and
mango trees should be brought and put in the eastern pitcher.
The lotus, rocand (a kind of yellow pigment), dUrvd grass,
darbha grass, piRjala (yellow orpiment), the flowers and
kunday (pieces of) sandal wood, red sandal, white mustard, tagara
(a kind of herb), and rice should be put on the southern one.
12-14. Silver and gold and earth from the two banks of
rivers flowing into the ocean especially the earth from the (river)
J&hnav! (Ganges), the urine of a cow, barley grains, paddy and
sesamum should be placed in another pitcher. The oiftfuparffi
Sydmtdatdy bhfhgardjay iatdvarly sahadeviy mahddeoly bald and tyih

ghni (?), the auspicious things arc put in the other pitcher in
the north-east.
15. The earth from an ant-hill obtained from seven (differ¬
ent places should be put in another pitcher. The sand from
the Ganges and its water should be put in another pitcher.
16. The earth loosened by the boars, bulls, and elephants
with their horns and tusks as well as earth from the root of the
lotus and the kuia grass should be placed in another pitcher.
1 7. One should put in another pitcher earth got from sacred
places and hills. The flowers of ndgakeiara and kdSmira should
be put in another pitcher.
18-19. Flowers together with the sandal wood, agallochum
and camphor should be placed in another pitcher. (The gems)
lapis lazuli, coral, pearl, crystal, and diamond should be put
earlier in one pitcher and placed firmly by the holy priests. Another
pitcher should be filled with the waters of the rivers and tanks.
20. Another (set of) pitchers filled with perfumes etc. should
be placed at eightyone places and consecrated with the Sris&kta^.
21. Barley grains, white mustard, perfumes, tips of kuia
grass, unbroken rice, sesamum, fruits and flowers should be first
placed for the sake of worship.
22. The lotus, (the creeper called) iydmalatd^ durvd grass,
leaf of holy baisil and kuia grass (should be kept) on the righthand side for being offered at the foot. The madhuparka^ is also
placed on the right side.
23. The kaftkola, cloves and nutmeg along with the dUrvd
grass and unbroken rice (should be offered) in the fire on the
north for the sake of rinsing the mouth.
24. A vessel for offering camphor and perfumes to be applied
on the body should be placed on the south-east. A vessel con¬
taining perfumes and flowers should be placed on the north-east.
25. The murdi mdrhsty myrabolan, sahedevd and nUd and sixty
lamps should be placed. Eight lamps should be kept for the nird^
jam (showing the light in adoration).
26. The conch, disc, irivatsa (mark on the breast of Vi^ijiu),
thunderbolt, lotus etc. should be placed in a golden vessel along
with flowers of variegated colours.
1. Hymn &Miunaudng with hirat^yavaru&xh hari^m. BV. Kh. 5.87.1.
2. A respectful ofieriog consisting of five ingredients: curd, clari¬
fied butter, water, honey, aM candied sugar.

Agni PurS^a
CHAPTER FIFTYEIGHT
Consecration of the idol
The lord said ;
1-3. The priest should get ready a pit (for sacrificial fire)
in the north-east. The fire relating to Visnu should be kindled
with (the recitation) of one hundred and eight times.
Having cleansed the pitchers thoroughly and established (the
priest) he should go to the shed where the image has been made
ready accompanied by the sculptors and custodians of the idol
and along with music of (the instrument) turya. The woollen
thread containing mustard seeds should be tied on the right arm
(of the idol) with the syllables Vi^nave iipivi^tdya^ etc. The
priest should also have a piece of silk cloth tied (to his arm).
4-5. Having placed the idol in the pavilion and having
adored and worshipped the dressed idol (one has to say ) “I bow
to you the sovereign lady of celestials who has been made
(ready) by Visvakarman (the divine architect).” I make obei¬
sance to you who is resplendant and is the sustainer of the entire
universe. I worship in you the healthy Lord Narayana.
6. Be thou always prosperous (goddess) devoid of defects
due to the sculptors. Having submitted thus that idol should
be carried to the bathing pavilion.
7. The sculptor should be satisHed by offering articles (of
present). A cow should be given as gift to the priest. Then the
eyes of the idol should be made open with (the recitation of)
the syllable citrarh deva.*
8. The sight should be endowed with (the recitation of the
syllable) agnir jyoti.* Then white flowers, ghee and mustard ^
seeds should be placed on the pedestal.
9. The priest should place darvd grass and tips of kuSa grass
on the head of the deity. Then the priest should anoint the eyes
(of the deity) with the syllables madhu vdtd.^
10. The syllables hira^agarbha and imam me should be
1 . The mantra beginning with 'Om bhflr bhuvah »vah consisting of twentyfour letters.

recited. Then the idol should be anointed with ghee reciting
(the hymn) gkftavatl}
11. The flour paste of mas Ur a (a variety of grain) should be
rubbed on the deity reciting (the hynm) ato devU.^ Then the
priest should wash (the deity) with hot water with the recitation
of) sapta te agne^.
12. It should be anointed with (the syllables) Urupadddiva. (The image) should be bathed with (the waters of) the
rivers and sacred places with (the syllables) dpo hi ffhd^ and with
the (waters containing) gems (with the) pdvamdna.
13. (The image) (should be bathed) with the waters of
an earthern pot with (the syllable) samudrarh gacctufi.
It should be consecrated with Sanno devi^ and bathed with hot
water (consecrated) by gdyatri,
14. The supreme god should be bathed with five (kinds of)
earth with (the syllable) kiranya. With pot made of earth of an
anthill and sand waters and (the syllable) imam me^ (it should
be bathed).
15. (The image should be bathed ) with herbal waters (with
the syllable) tadvi$nolP and yd ofodhi,* with herbal decoctions
(with the syllable) yajnd-yajnd^^ and then with the pahccagavya
(the five things got from a cow).
16. (The image should be bathed) with the waters contain¬
ing fruits (with the syllables) payah pTthivy&nP- and ydhphalirdP^
and with (the contents of) the pitchers (kept in) the north and
east with (the syllables) viSvataScakfufy.^*
17. The cleansing (of the image) of Hari (Vi?9u) should
be done with (the recitation of the syllables somarh rdjdnam,
vifno rardtamas^* from the right and with harhsah iuci^^ on the west

Agni PurdM
18. One should ofier the dhUtri and mdrfisi (herbs) on the
head with the sacred syllables murdhOncah diviP . (Qne should
bathe the image) with perfumes with the syllables gandhadv&ra
and md nas toka.*
19. (One has to pour over its head the contents of the pit¬
chers) placed in the eightyone squares (with the syllables) idam
dpah. O Lord Visnu ! the bestower of grace on the universe !
you come.
20. (You) accept this share in the sacrificial offerings. O
Vasudeva ! Salutations to you ! Having invoked the lord in
this way, the wrist thread (on the hand of the image) should be
unfastened.
21 . The wrist thread on (the hand of) the priest should also
be unfastened with the hymn muHcdmi tvd.^ The water for wash¬
ing the feet should be offered with (the syllable) hiranmaya^
and the offering with ato devd*
22. The madhuparka (should be offered) with (the syllables)
madkuvdtifi and the acamana (the ceremonial sipping of waters
at the commencement of any rite) should be done with mayi
gfkndmi.’’ The learned (priest) should scatter the unbroken rice
with (the syllable) akfannamlmadanta.*
23. The image should be rubbed part by part and perfumes
(should be offered) with (the syllable) gandhavat^y garland with
(the syllable) unnaydmi and the sacred thread with (the syllable)
idofh visifu.
24. Pair of cloth pieces (should be offered) (with the syl¬
lable) bfhaspatf (and) the upper cloth (with the syllable)
veddham. The herbs and the flower of concluding worship should
be placed with the mahdvrata.
25. Incense should be offered with dhUrasi and the coUyrium (to the eyes of the image) with the hymn (called) vibhrdf.
The mark on the forehead (should be made) with (the syllable)
yu^mti and the garland (should be offered) with dkrgfil^fod,^
3. See LXVII. 22.1.

26. (One should offer) an umbrella with (the syllable)
indra cchatra, mirror with virSja^ the chowrie with vikan^a and
the ornaments with rathantara.
27. (One should offer) the fan with (the syllable) vdyu
daivatya and flowers with muHc&mi tvd. One should sing in
praise of (Lord) Hari(Vi9nu) with vedic hymns and (the hymn
called) purufasUkia.
28. All these rites should be performed similarly relating to
pedestals of Hara (Siva) and other gods. The hymn (called)
sauparna should be recited at the time of raising (the image of)
the deity.
29. (The image) having been raised (by reciting) (the
syllable) uUisfha, the lord should be led to the bed in the pavi¬
lion with (the recitation of) the hymn iakmd^ and with (the
syllable) brahmaratha.
30. Then the image and the pedestal (should be laid) in
the bed with the hymn ato deva.^ With the (recitation of) frfs&kta the rite for Visnu is completed.
31. The eight auspicious things are: the lion, bull, serpent,
fan, pitcher, banner, trumpet and lamp.
32-33. (The priest) should show (these) at the foot with
the hymn (called) aSvasukta and the tripdd {gdyatri). One should
submit a cooking vessel, covering pan, ladle, pestle, crushing
stone, grinding stone, groomstick, utensils for eating and other
household things should be given to the goddess.
34. A pitcher known as nidrd provided with clothes and
gems and filled with edibles (should be placed) at the head-side
(of the image). This is the mode of batjhing (the image).
CHAPTER FIFTYNINE
Preliminary conseeratim of m image
The Loti said :
1-4. The act of eausihg the prresence of God Hari is said tobe the adhiodsma (jH^liminary consecration). Having cemtem-

Agtti Pttrd^
plated on the self as the omniscient, all-pervasive and supreme
spirit and having united one’s self-conceited conscious enei^
with (the syllable) om and af^er having drawn it* out and
identifying one’s own self with the all-pervasive lord, (the priest)
-should unite the earth with the wind, illuminate it with the fire
particle (mentally), draw the fire with the wind (particle) and
lead the wind into the ethereal space. The wiseman should draw
in the same order (the other gross elements) after having made
them the receptacles of subtle principles along with the gross
principles, the supreme being and the secondary forms such as
the sddhya-s^.
5. The ethereal space should be drawn into the mind (prin¬
ciple), the mind (in its turn) should be (drawn) into (the prin-
-ciple of) ego, (the principle) of ego in the (principle of) mahat
(first principle). The mahat should be led into the avydkfta (un¬
manifest).
6-7. The unmanifest (is led) into the absolute knowledge
luiown as V^udeva. Being desirous to create he, the Lord of
sound by means of the unmanifest brought into being Sahkarfana (the principle) known as touch. He created Pradyumna
the form of splendour by agitating the illusion.
8. He created Aniruddha, (consisting of) taste only and
Brahma of the form of smell. That Aniruddha, the Brahma
•created water at first.
9. He also laid the golden egg (of the five principles)
in that (water). Impregnated with consciousness (this generated)
a peculiar force within.
10. The breath united with life force is spoken as existence.
The inner being also known as the vy&hfti^ is a spiritual entity
amidst the five winds {prd^dljt).
1 1 . Then intellect came into being associated with the prdna
and with eight-fold modifications. Egoism was bom then and
the mind came out from it.
12. Then the five (abstract) things were bom possessing
determination. They are known as sound, touch, sight, taste and
smell.
13. The sense-organs possessing consciousness were brought
1. They are refined secondary forms. See MW. p. 1202a.
2. The mystic syllables bhi^h Umah, swab-

about by these. The skin, ear, nose, eyes, tongue are the senseorgans.
14. The feet, anus, arms, speech (mouth) and the genitals are
the five organs of action. Listen (I shall describe) the five elements..
15. The ether, wind, light, water and earth (are the five
elements). The gross body is composed of these elements and
becomes the support for all.
16. (I shall presently) describe the mystic syllables signi¬
fying these and for being (mentally) placed on (the different
parts of) the body. The letter ma which is the symbol of the
inner self should be located to co-extend with (the body of)
the deity.
17. The letter hha which is the emblem of life should be
lodged in the differentiating individuality of the god. The letter
ha which represents the intellect should be located in the region
of the heart.
18. The letter representing the sense of ego should also
be located there itself. The letter pa representing the mind
should be located in the mental resolve.
19. The letter which is a symbol of the principle of sotmd
should be placed on the forehead. The letter dha which is the
symbol of sense of touch should be placed in the region of the
face (of image).
20. The letter da denoting the gradations should be placed
in the region of the heart. The letter tha symbolising the sense of
taste should be placed in the region of pelvis.
21. The letter ta signifying the sense of smell should be
located on the shanks. After having located the letter i^a in the
ears, the letter (fAa should be located on the skin.
22. The letter (fa should be located in the two eyes, the
letter tha in the tongue, the letter /a in the nose and the letter
ha in the speech.
23. Having placed the letter jAa representing the hands in
the hands, a wise man should place the letter ja in the feet,
eha in the anus and ca in the genitals.
24. The letter Aa symbolising the principle of earth should
be placed on the feet. The letter gha (should be placed) in the
pelvis. (The letter ),ga representing the principle of Imtre should
be placed in the heart.

Agni Pufibfa
25. The letter kha which represents the principle of wind
should be placed in the nose. The letter ka signifying^ the prin¬
ciple of ether should be assigned to the forehead by the wise.
26-27. The letter ya denoting lord Sun having been placed
in the lotus of the heart, the letter sa possessing sixteen digits
should be placed in the seventy-two thousand (rays) emanating
from the (lotus) heart. The priest fully initiated in the mystic
syllables should contemplate on the point (Jbindu) representing
the region of fire in the middle of it.
28. The excellent letter ha along with the syllable om
{pranava) should be placed there. Om, dm, salutations to the
parameftydtman.^ Am, salutations to puru?dlman^.
29. Om, Vdm, salutations to the eternal being ! Pfdm, salu¬
tations to the soul of the universe ! Om, vdm, salutations to the
soul of all beings ! Thus the five forms of energies have been
described.
30. The first one (of the above five syllables) should be used
for the place, the second one for the seat, the third one for the
bed, and the fourth one for the drink.
31. The fifth one is used at every worship. These (five
mystic syllables) are known as the five upamsads. The syllable
hum should be placed in the middle after having contemplated
on Hari, composed of mystic syllables.
32. Whichever form of the deity is being installed one should
assign the particular principal mystic syllable of that form
afterwards. The principal syllable of Vasudeva is Om, salu¬
tations to Lord Vasudeva !
33. (The different forms of the god) should be (mentally)
assigned to (the different parts of the body such as) the head,
nose, forehead, face, neck, heart, arms, shanks and feet in order.
(The manifestation known as) Keiava should be assigned to the
head (of the image).
34. N^aya^a should be assigned to the face, Madhava to
the neck, Govinda to the arms, (and) Vi^u to the heart.
35. Madhusudana should be assigned to the hinder part,
Vamana to the belly, Trivikrama to the hip (and) Sridhara to
the shank.
1. The word Parmtffin denotes the MQweme being or one of die forms
of Trin^.
2. This means a nqireme being. .

36. Hr^Uceia (should be assigned) on the right side, Padmanabha on the ankle, D^odara on the feet.
(This is assignment) in the six limbs commencing with tlie
heart.
37-39. O most virtuous one ! This is general mode of
assignment of Visnu. In the alternative, the installation of which
form of the deity has been begun, one should infuse life into the
image with the principal mystic syllable of that form. The first
letter of the name of any form of a deity should be used along
with the twelve vowels and assigned to the different parts of
image such as the heart. O Lord of celestials ! the principal
mystic syllable should consist of ten syllables.
40. The principles should be placed in the body in the same
order as they are found in the god. Lord Visnu should be wor¬
shipped with perfumes etc., in the diagram of a lotus inscribed
in a circle.
41. One should contemplate on the seat as before together
with the limbs and cover. Then one should imagine an auspi¬
cious disc over that as having twelve radii.
42. The circle (should be imagined) as having three con¬
centric naves and two outer circles and filled with the vowels.
The wise man should then place the prakfii (the nature, the source
of the material world) and other principles.
43-44. The sun god should again be worshipped at the tips
of the spokes in the twelve-fold way^ and the moon possessing
three-fold armies and sixteen pliases should be contemplated
therein. The excellent worshipper should contemplate on a lotus
flower of twelve petals.
45. The effulgent energy of the supreme being should be
contemplated and worshipped in the centre (of the lotus flower)
by the priest. Having located (Lord) Hari in that image, one
should worship him as well as the celestials.
46. Ke^ava and others should be worshi{^ed well with
twelve mystic letters^ with perfumes, flowers etc. and with their
attendants and enclosures, in due order.
47-48. The twice-bom should worship the guardian deities
of quarters and others in die circular diagram of twelve
radii. The image should then be worshipped with perfumes and
1. Coniiiting of twelve names of Sun.
2. OA mm khimtt

160 Agni PurO^
flowers and with the purusasOkta.^ The pedestal should be wor¬
shipped with the Irisakta.* The sacrificial lire relating to Vi?nu
should be kindled in the prescribed manner.
49. Having made oblation unto the fire with the sacred
syllables the wise priest should sanctify waters and consecrate
the image (by sprinkling waters). Then he should kindle fire.
50. The wise priest should kindle fire in the pit on the
south with the mystic syllable agnirh kutearP and in the pit on the
east with the syllable agnim agnim*.
51. In the fire pit on the north, the fire should be kindled
with the mystic syllable agnim agnirh havimabhiffi and the sacred syl¬
lable to be used to kindle fire in general is tvam agne kyagnirucyase.*’
52. One should place one thousand and eight twigs of the paldSa
tree in each one of the fire pits and offer grains withvedic hymns.
53. Clarified butter and sesamum (should be offered tofire) with the vydhrtls (Om bhSh, bhuvah, suvah) and ghee with
the principal mantra. One should perform the appeasing obla¬
tion with the three sweet things.’
54. One should then touch the feet, navel, heart and fore¬
head with (the utterance of) twelve mystic sullables (of the
god). After having offered ghee, curd and milk, the head of the
image should again be touched.
55. After having touched the head, navel, and feet, (the
priest) should make four rivers Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari
and Sarasvatl present there by pronouncing their names.
56. (The rivers) should be dried up by (the recitation of the
vififugdyatri* and the sacrificial gruel should be boiled with (the
recitation of) the gdyatri. One should offer oblation, offer
the victim and feed the twice-boms afterwards.
57. For the satisfaction of the singer of sdmans one should
give gold and cows to the spiritual preceptor. Having made
offerings to the guardian deities of the quarters, one should
spend night in vigil. By silking the praise of the brahman one
gets fhiits of the consecration rite.
S. Could not be identified.
6. Gould not be identified.
7. Sugar, honey &ad darified butter.
8. vimah$ visududjm MhM tamo oi/mb PmodojM-

CHAPTER SIXTY
Mode of installation of the image of Vdsudeva
The Lord said :
1 . One should divide the length of adytum into seven parts
for the installation of the pedestal. The wise man should fix
the image on the part of Brahman.
2-3. (One should) never (fix it) in the parts (presided
over) by the celestials, mortals and goblins, leaving out the part
(presided over by) Brahman. The pedestal should be carefully
fixed off the regions of celestials and mortals. Gems should
be imbedded in the case of a hermaphrodite stone.
4-5. Having performed oblation with (the mantra sacred
to) Narasirhha (the man-lion form of Vi?nu), the gems
should be placed with (the repetition of) the same (mantra).
Rice grains, gems, three (kinds of) minerals, iron and other
metallic substances, sandal wood etc., should be placed in the
nine holes commencing with the east at the centre as one likes.
Then the holes should be filled with the guggulu (a kind of frag¬
rant gum resin) with (the recitation of) the mantras — indra etc.
6. After having performed the insertion of gems, the
preceptor should rub t]^e image with sticks of sahadeva (tree) and
bunches of darbha (grass).
7. The outer and inner surface (of the image) should be
cleansed and then purified with the pancagavya (the five things
got from a cow). Water should be sprinkled with the darbha
grass as well as with the waters of the river.
8. The ground for kindling the sacrihcial fire should be made
ready with sand. An excellent site should be of the measure of a
cubit and a half on all sides.
9. The pitchers also should be placed in the eight directions
commencing with the east. The consecrated fire should be
brought in uttering the eight letters (described already)'
10. The twigs should be offered into the fire with (the
mantras) — toam agne (fyub/dh^ andgl^atri. Clarified butter should
be offered with (the recitation of) eight letters, eight hund¬
red times.

Agni PurSjfa
1 1 . The appeasing water sanctified hundred times by the
principal mantra should be sprinkled on the head of the image
with (the recitation of) the hymn irUca te.^
12. The image should be lifted up with (the mantra) brahmajajhdna* and should be led to the temple with the mantra uttiffha brahmanaspate^ and tadvifno^.
13. Lord Hari should be placed in a palanquin and carried
towards the divine edifice accompanied by songs and vedic
hymns. He should be held at the gates of the temple.
14. Lord Hari should be bathed with waters from eight
auspicious pitchers by women and brahmins. Then the priest
should worship the image with perfumes etc. and with the
principal mantra^.
15. Then the dress, the devotional offerings of eight kinds
should be offered with (the mantra) ato devSP. (The image)
should be fixed on the pedestal at the fixed moment with (the
recitation of) devasya tvs’.
16. The learned (priest) should fix the image on the pedes¬
tal (with the recitation of the following mantra). “O Con¬
queror of three spaces ! Om 1 salutations to you who
surpassed the three regions.
17. The image should be bathed with the paheagavya
(five things got from a cow) with (the recitation of) the mantra
dhruvd dyaubP and vifvatascakfufp and bathed again with perfumed
water.
1 8. Lord Hari should be worshipped along with the atten4ilmts and paraphernalia. The heavens should be contemplat¬
ed as his form and the earth as the seat.
19. His body should be imt^ined as composed of lustrous
minute particles. (One should say), *T am invoking his spirit
pervading the twentyfive principles.”
5. Oik nemo bhagaoaU odsuiaiya.

20-21. O Supreme Lord ! you become firmly established
in the im^e. I invdEe you, the spirit of supreme happiness, one
devoid of (three states) waking, dreaming and deep sleep,
one who is devoid of a body, sense-oi^ans, intellect, life and
egoism, and one who resides in the hearts of all beings beginning
with Brahman and ending with a dump of grass.
22. You make the image imbued with your soul both inside
and outside. You have taken your abode in this image (of the
size of) a thumb with attributes.
23. Having invoked (the god in the image), the supreme
brahman, lustrous form of knowledge and who is one without a
second, that is deemed as alive by the use of (the mantra) Om.
24. The act of bringing the god near consists in uttering
(the mantra) and touching the heart (of the image). (The priest)
should recite the purusasSkta^ and should recite the following
{mantra) in secret.
25-27. Salutations to the Lord of celestials who is of the
form of happiness and fortune, of the form of knowledge and
wisdom and who attends on the lustre of the supreme brahman.
(Salutations to) the one who is beyond proi>erties, the great
being, devoid of decay, old age. O Vi?nu, you be present here.
Whichever is the supreme principle in you and that which is
your form verily i^made up) of knowledge, all that be present
here in this form. May you awake !
28. Stationing oneself in front of the deity, (the priest)
should establish Brahman and other attendant gods as well as
the respective weapons (by showing) the mudrH (different pos¬
tures shown with the hand).
29-30. (The priest) should infer the presence of the god
from th& y&tfi^ and Having saluted and sung the glories
and recited the mantras of eight syllables^ etc., the priest should
come out and worship Ga^d^ and Pracapd^ (the two guardians )
at the g^te. (The priest) should go to iIml place of sacrificial
fire, install the image of Garuia (the vehicle bird of Lord Vifpu)
and worship.
2. Exuteiice, livelihood.
3. Rahis.
4. Om nmu

Agni PurSnet
31. Having installed and worshipped (the images) of
different presiding deities of the quarters in their respectiv&quar*
ters, the priest should install the image of Lord Vi^vaksena^ and.
worship the conch, disc etc.
32. Offerii^s should be made to the attendant gods and tothe goblins. The priest should be given the fees — (which may be
of the form of) proprietary right over a village, clothes and gold.
33. The materials required for (the performance of)
sacrificial ceremony should be given to the principal priest. The
attendant priests should be paid fees half of what was paid to theprincipal priest.
34. The other priests should be paid their fees. The brah¬
mins should then be fed. Without any restraint the benefits of
sacrifice should be extended to the patron-employer by the prin¬
cipal priest.
35. The consecrator of the image of Visnu leads the self,
as well as his entire family (to the region of the god). This is the
general mode of performance for all gods. Only the principal
mantra would be different. The other formalities are the same.
CHAPTER SIXTYONE
Consecration of doors of the temple and the erection of banner
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe the purificatory bathing of Vi^^u. The
offering to the fire is made (with the mantra) na toiP. Havingplaced eightyone pitchers (at their respective places) Lord Hari
should be invoked and installed.
2. He should be worahipped with perfumes and flowers.
Having made the offering, the priest should be worshipped. I
shall describe the (mode of) consecrating the door. (A piece of)
gold should be placed beneath the door (firame).
3. The priest should place shoots of udundtarai&g tree) in.
1. An qathet ofVitQU.
2. One of the many hymns begiiining with these words.

the (mouth of the) eight pitchers and worship them with per¬
fumes etc. and vedic mantras.
4. Twigs, fried paddy and sesamum should be offered unto
the fire in the pits. Having offered the bed etc., the supporting
■energy should be placed underneath.
5 . Gods Canda and Praca^da should be located at the bottom
of the shoots. Goddess Lak^mi worshipped by the celestials should
be placed above (the shoot of) the fig (tree).
6. Having assigned the four-faced (Brahman) and duly
worshipping (him) (by reciting) the SrisQkta^ the fruits of the
Jtilva (tree) should be offered to him and the fees should be paid
to the priest.
7. (I shall describe) the consecration of the divine edifice
the doors of which have been consecrated and wherein the image
of Hari has been duly installed. It is in the consecration of the
adytum. Listen.
8-9. Pitcher made of gold, silver or bell-metal filled with
eight kinds of gems, herbs, minerals, seeds of grains, iron and
water and covered with a cloth should be placed on the darbha
(grass) in a circle to the east of the altar after the Sukandsa (the
keystone) has been got ready.
10. Fallen twigs which have been gathered should be offer¬
ed into fire with (the mantra of) Nrsiriiha. Then (the temple)
should be enlivened with the principle known as ndrdyar^tattva.
11. (That lord) who is the life of the temple should be
contemplated (as) “O Lord of celestials*’. Then a wise man
has to imagine the temple as the god himself.
12. (A piece of) gold should be placed below the golden
pitcher. The priests and others should be paid their fees and the
brahmins should be fed.
13-14. Threads should be wound round the altar, neck,
top and the globe of the temple after that. Then the metallic
ring known as the sudor iana disc should be placed. It should be
known as the form of (Lord) Vksudeva offering protection from
fear.
15. Alternatively a pitcher should be placed (in the place
of a globe) and the disc above that. O birthless one ! eight lords
1. See above, p. 151 and in 1 thereon.

166 Agni PttrS^
of obstacles (Vighne^vara) should be placed around the altar
in the temple.
16. Or four images of Garuda (vehicle of Lord Vi^nu)
should be placed in the four quarters. I shall describe now the
erection of the flagstaff which destroys the evil spirits.
1 7. One who performs this remains in the regions of Visnu
for so many thousands of years as the number of atoms in the
image of the god in the temple.
18. O sinless ! It should be known that (a man gets) a
crorc times more merit by erecting the flag-staff, since it surrounds
the neck of the temple and it wafts the wind around the globe,
altar and image.
19. The flag should be known as the prakfti and the staff
as the purusa and you know that the temple is another form of
image of Vasudeva (Visnu).
20. (In a temple) the dharanl (earth) is so called from its
ability to hold, its internal cavity stands for the sky, the illumi¬
nation inside represents the fire, and its touch represents the wind.
21. The earthly waters found in the stone slabs (of the
temple) (represent) the earthly attributes. Its echo stands for
the principles of sound. Its touch represents roughness.
22. Its colour which may be white or otherwise stands for
the subtle principle of colour. The food (and other eatables)
offered (to the deity) stand for the seme of taste. The pjerfumes
represent the sense of smell. The sense of speech lies in the down
(used in the temple).
23. The keystone is the nose (of the temple). The two
apertures (on either side) represent the two hands. The arched
terrace above is to be taken for its head and the pitcher on the
head.
24. Its neck should be known as the neck. The platform
over the fault is spoken as the shoulder. The outlets for water
are the anus and genitals. The lime-plaster is spoken as the skhi.
25. The door would be the mouth. The image (installed ilk
the temple) is said to be its life. The pedestal should be known
as its energy. I ts shape should likewise be known as its animation.
26. Its cavity is its inertia. Lord Kelava is its controller.
In this way Lord Hari Himself remains in the form of the temple.
27. God Siva slumld be known as the shank. Oo^ Ehahman

is located in the shoulder. Lord Vif^u remains in the upper
portion of a temple as it is.
28. Listen to me. I shall describe the consecration of a
temple by means of a banner. The demons were defeated by the
celestial gods by erecting banners impressed with the signs
of divine weapons.
29. The pitcher (shaped part of the temple) should be
placed over the top and the flag should be placed over the same.
The post should be made to measure a half or one third of the
height of the image.
30. The flag should have a mark of a circle of eight or twelve
radii. (There should be the figure) of the man-lion (form of
Visnu) or the Garuda (Tarksya) (inside the circle) in the middle.
The stair of the flag should not have any cut.
3 1 . The length of the staff is spoken as the measure of the
breadth of edifice. It should be made cither half of the ter¬
race or a third part of it.
32. The staff should otherwise be made twice the length
of the door. The flag staff should be planted on the north-east or
the north-west of the divine edifice.
33. The flag should be made of a piece of silk cloth, of a
single or variegated colours. It should be adorned with bells,
chowrics and small bells. (It is said to be) destroyer of sins.
34. A flag which touches the ground and measures a cubit
in breadth at its extremity or has a breadth equal to one fourth of
its length at its base is called a mah&dhvaja. It grants all things
when worshipped.
35. The banner should measure half (the dimension of)
the staff. The breadth should measiure twenty fingers.
36. All the rites relating to the consentration of an image
should be done for (the consecration) of the disc, flag and the
staff. They should be bathed in the shed.
37. The priest should duly perform all rites described
earlier except that of opening the eyes. The consecration should
be done in the prescribed manner leaving them in the resting
position.
38. Then the learned priest should assign (mentally) the
hymn (called) sakasraiirfd^ in the disc. Then the stukifiana mantra

Agni Pufd^a
and the principle of mind should be assigned.
39. It is known as imbued with life by mental formation.
O excellent among gods, (the different forms of Vi?nu sach as)
Kelava etc. should be assigned to the spokes.
40. The priest should assign twentyfive principles at
the navel, and each of the arcs of the lotus. The form of Nfsimha
(the man-lion form of Vi?nu) representing the universe should
be assigned to the middle of the lotus.
41 . The sakala (endowed with parts) forms should be assign¬
ed to the staff as the living soul of it. Lord Hari, the supreme
being of the nifkala (undivided) form should be contemplated
and assigned to the flag.
42. The energies Bala and Abala which manifest in the
form of the banner should be contemplated. Having placed it in
the shed and worshipped it, oblation should be made in the pit.
43. Having placed the golden pitcher over the pitcher and
putting five (kinds of) gems (at the top of the temple) a golden
disc should be placed underneath that with the mantra of the disc.
44. The disc should be washed with mercury and covered
with the eye-cover. The disc should then be placed. Lord Nrhari
(man-lion form of Visnu)should be imagined there in the middle.
45-46. Om, k$aum^ salutations to Lord Nrsiihha. Lord Hari
should be invoked and worshipped. Then the yajamana (the
person who has arranged for the consecration) accompanied by
his relatives should hold banner and dip the tip of the banner
in a vessel full of curd. The banner should be worshipped with
the mantra commencing with dhruvd^ and ending with phaf.
47. Holding that vessel on the head and remembering Lord
Narayana {the yajamdna) should go around the temple along
with auspicious sounds from the tSri {sl musical instrument).
48. The staff should then be placed with (the recitation of)
the eight-syllabled mantra*. Then the flag should be (hoisted)
and unfurled with (the recitation of) the hymn muncOmi tvSP
by the learned person.
49. The twice-born (jajamdna) should give the priest the
2. Om none

vessel, banner and elephant etc. Mode of consecration of the
dag has been thus described in general.
50. The mark which represents a particular god should be
planted with the respective mantra. By the offer of a banner one
goes to heaven and becomes a strong monarch on the earth (in
the next birth).
CHAPTER SIXTYTWO
Mode of installation of the image of Goddess Lakpni
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe to you the mode of installation of all divine
images. At first I shall describe the (mode of) installation
(of the image) of LaksmI and her attendant goddesses.
2. As before, one should do all rites such as bathing (the
image) in the shed. (The image of) goddess Lak.smi should
be placed on the pedestal. One should place eight pitchers.
3. The image should be anointed with ghee with the prin¬
cipal mantra and washed with the five things got from a cow.
The eyes of (the goddess) LaksmI should be opened with (the
recitation of the mantra) hiranyavarnum haritiim^.
4. The three sweet things^ should be offered with (the
recitation of the mantra) tdm ma dvaha^. She (the image) should
be bathed with (the waters of) the pitcher on the east with (the
recitation of) the (hymn) a^vapurva*.
5. The image should then be bathed with (the waters of
pitchers on) the south, west and north with the recitation of
hymns kdmo'smi te®, candram prabhdsdm^j dditya var^a* (respectively)
5. Gould not be identified.
6. Could not be identified.

Agni PurOna
6-7. (Waters) from (the pitchers placed in) the south¬
east, south-west, north-west and north-cast should bg poured
on the image accompanied by (the recitation of the mantras)
upaitu md^y ksut pipdsd^y gandhadvdrc?^ manasafi kdmamdkrti* . The
im^ge should subsequently be bathed with (the waters of) eightyone pitchers (accompanied) by dpah srjan ksitim.^
8. (The priest should worship the image) with perfumes
accompanied by ardram puskarinim^y with flowers accompanied
by tdrh ma avahcO and^ya ananda^
9. The goddess should be worshipped in the bed with (the
mantra) i&yanti^ yena and her presence is accomplished by Srlsukta?^. Her consciousness is invoked and worshipped again with
the principal mantra of the goddess.
10. Thousand or hundred lotus flowers or karavira flowers
should be offered in the fire pit at the shed accompanied by
SrisUkta.^^
1 1. Household furniture should be offered with the irisukta^^
itself. Then the consecration of edifice should be performed
as described earlier.
12. The pedestal should be made with (the recitation of)
the mantra. The installation of the goddess is done subsequently.
Her presence is accomplished with the Srlsdkta.^^ Everyone of
the hymns (stated earlier) ) should be recited as before.
13. Having invoked consciousness in the image, her
presence is accomplished by the principal ma«/ra. The priest and
the brahmins should be presented with land, gold, clothes,
cow and food. The images of all other forms of goddesses should
be installed in the same way. One who invokes (and consecrates)
in this way is held as going to heaven.
5. Could not be identified.
8. Not found.
9. Could not be identified.

CHAPTER SIXTYTHREE
Mode of installation of other gods and goddesses^ the Sudariana disc
and the writing of books and their installations
The god said :
1. The installation of the (images of) Garu<^a (vehicle of
Visnu) Brahman, Nrhari (man-lion form of Vifnu) and of the
{sudarSana) disc should be done in the same way as that of Vi?nu
with their respective mantras. Listen to me.
2. O Siidarsana ! The great disc that is tranquil ! Dread¬
ful to the wicked ! Kill kill, pierce pierce, cut through and
cut through.
3. Devour devour the incantations of others. Ea<^ up,
eat up the evil spirits. Frighten frighten, hum phaf, salutation to
sudariana. Having worshipped the disc with this mantra one
destroys the enemies in the battle.
Om ksaum Narasimha (man-lion) ! of fierce form ! burn, burn,
blaze up, blaze up, svahd. Om haurn salutations to lord Nara^
siiiiha ! Eflfulgent like crores of radiant suns ! One armed with
mace, claws and teeth ! One who manifests with a sound similar
to the trumpet while the dreadful and dishevelled manes wildly
dance in the storm and one who has agitated the ocean ! One
who rescues from all incantations ! O Lord Narasiriiha (you)
come ! Manifest with the divine truth as the universal sub¬
jective and objective ! Open thy mouth ! Attack ! Roar and
release your lion-like voice ! Cut through ! Drive away ! Pierce
into all sorts of incantations ! Kill, cut, heap together, dislodge,
cut open, break up, cause to be burst ! A multitude of cluster
offiames ! Destroy all nether regions with your disc (shower¬
ing) flames and thunderbolts in all directions 1 Besiege the
nether regions with your arrows of thunderbolt discharging end¬
less fire ! Pull out the hearts of all demons residing in the
nether worlds ! Burn quickly ! Cook ! Destroy ! Diy up I
Hack them to pieces till they have not been subject to my control !
P/w/ to the nether worlds ! to the demons ! P/m/ to all kinds
of incanl.'Uions ! O Lord of the form of Narasiriiha ! Protect
me from all doubts ! Protect me from all calamities and all incantation> ! O Visnu ! Hum Phaf ! Salutations to you ! This

1 72 Agni Purd^a
is the spell of Narasimha representing Hari (Visnu) which
grants all desires.
4. The captivator of the three worlds {trailokyamohana) (the
image of the lord) should be installed with the mantras known as
trailokyamohana (captivating the three worlds) (described above).
(The image) should be made to have two or four arms, holding
the mace in the right hand and conferring benediction.
5. The disc should be placed in the upper left arm and the
(conch-shell) pahcajanya on the lower (arm). (The two right
hands) should be provided with iri (riches) and pusti (nourish¬
ment) along with strength and welfare.
6. The images of Visnu, Vamana (dwarf form of Visnu),
Vaikunjha, Hayasya (horse-faccd form of Visnu) and Aniruddha
should be installed in a shed or house or edifice.
7-9. (The images of) manifestations (of Visnu) (such
as) the fish etc. should be installed in waters. (The images
of) Sankarsana, Visvarupa, lihga, the form of Rudra, herma¬
phrodite form (of Siva) (Ardhanarisvara), Hari (Visnu),
Sankara, Siva, the divine mothers, Bhairava, Surya, the planets,
Vinayaka, Gaurl (consort of Siva) worshipped by Indra and
others, Bala and Abala (should also be installed similarly).!
shall describe the (mode of) consecration of books and the
mode of writing them.
10. Having worshipped the manuscript and the written
book on a scat made of kuia grass placed on a svastika figure, the
preceptor should W’orship the spell and Lord Hari (Visnu).
11-12. The yajamdna (the person at whose instance a rite
is performed) should face the cast and contemplate the spiritual
guide, the spell, lord Hari, the copyist and (the goddess) Padmini after having written five verses on a silver plate with golden
pen and devanagari letters. The brahmins should be fed accord¬
ing to one’s capacity and fees should be paid as much as one
could give.
13. After having worshipped the preceptor, the spell and
Lord Hari, one should write the purdnas etc. as before in a figure
in an auspicious seat in the north-east.
14. Having seen the book in the mirror in the pitcher it
should be consecrated as (described) earlier. After opening up
the eyes one should place it in the bed.

15. The puru^asukta^ and the Vedas etc. should be (men¬
tally) located in the book. After having infused life to it, it should
be worshipped and the porridge offered.
16. Having fed the preceptor and given the fees, the twiccborns should be fed. The book should be carried by men in a
car, or on the elephant.
17. The book should be established and worshipped (on
its return) in a house or temple. That which is wrapped up in a
cloth should be worshipped at the commencement and end of
reading.
18. Having resolved to have universal peace a chapter of the
book should be read out. The yajamdna and others should be
sprinkled with water from the pitcher.
19. The merit of presenting a book to the twice-born is
unlimited. Three things (are said to be) gifts par excellence.
(They are) cows, land and knowledge.
20-21. O sinless one ! the merits of imparting knowledge
(is great) . One who presents a bundle of written leaves, remains
and enjoys in the region of Visnu for so many years as the num¬
ber of leaves and letters (in the manuscript). One who gives
away pancardtra^, purdnas, bhCirata (as gift) elevates jtwentyone
generations of his family and gets merged in the supreme being.
CHAFFER SIXTYFOUR
Mode of consecration of tanks and ponds
The Lord said :
1, I shall describe the (mode of) consecration of wells,
tanks and ponds. Listen ! Lord Hari (Visnu) as Soma and ex¬
cellent Varuna remains in the form of water.
2. The universe is permeated by fire and water. V^snu in
the form of water is its cause. The image of Lord Varuna (the
presiding deity of waters) should be made of gold, silver or gems.
2. Tlie religious code book of tlic Vaitt/iavas.

Agtii Purdna
3. (The image should have) two hands, the right conferring
refuge and the left should hold the snake-noose and as seated on
the harfisa along with the rivers and serpents.
4. There should be an altar at the centre of sacrificial shed
having a fire-pit. There should be an arch. A pitcher made of
stone for Lord Varuna should be placed.
5. Pitchers (should be placed) at the entrance to the fire
receptacle which may be of a semi-circular sliape or a svastika
of auspicious nature. Having done the agnyadhana (rite) in the
pit for water the final oblation should be done.
6. (The image of) Varuna should be touched in the bathing
seat with (the mantra) ye te iate^. It should then be anointed with
ghee by the priest with (the recitation of) the principal mantra.
7. Having washed the eight pitchers with pure water with
(the recitation of) Sarh no devi^ they should be consecrated. Sea
water (should be kept) in the eastern pitcher.
8-9. Having kept the Ganges water in the (pitcher on the)
south-east, rain water in the (pitcher on the) south, water from
waterfalls in the (pitcher on the south-west, river water in the
west, water from a masculine river in the north-west, spring water
in the north, waters from sacred places (should be kept) in the
north-east. In the absence of all the above, river water (should
be poured into these pitchers) with the chanting of ydsdrfi
10. After having cleansed and anointed the eyes with the
three sweet things {honey, sugar and clarified butter) with (the
mantra) durmitriya*, they should be opened with CitramJ* and
taccakfuh*.
1 1 . Having invoked lustre in them the priest should be offer¬
ed a golden cow. (The image of) Varuna should be consecrat¬
ed with the (waters of the) pitcher on the cast with (the recita¬
tion of) samudrajyefthd."^
3. not identified.

12-13. The waters of the Ganges should be poured with
(the mantra) samudrarh gaccha^^ rain waters with scmo dlunum^^
water from watei-falls with devirapd^, the water of the masculine
rivers with panca nadyald^ the spring water with udbhid^y the waters
from sacred places with pSvamdni^y the pancagavya (the five
things from a cow) with dpo hi sthdP and from the golden (pit¬
cher) with hiranyavarndm^.
14. (The image should be bathed) with rain water with
dpo asmd^f with well waters with the vydhrtis (bhuhy bhuvah, suvafy).
(Image of) Varuna should be consecrated with the waters of
the tank with varunadbhihy^.
15. Waters from the hills (should be poured) with (the
mantra)dpo devV^ and then with the waters from eightyone pitchers.
Then (the image) should be bathed with varunasya^^ and waters
for sipping (sliould be given) with tvanno varmed^.
16-17. The madhuparka^* should be given) with the vyakflis^^^
clothes with brhaspate^^y pavitra with varuna^'^^ the upper garment
with pranava (Om).
Flowers etc. chowriec, mirror, umbrella, fan and banner
should be offered to (the image of) Varuna with (the mantra)
yadvarvnya^^.
18. The image should be raised up with the principal
mantra (saying) ‘Rise up’ and the preliminary consecration is
made that night. The presence of divinity is accomplished
by varunarh ccd^. It should be worshipped yadvdrutiyad^
5. Could not be identiHcd.
6. Designation of the hymn sv&di^{haya madi^ffliqyS RV.9.1.1.
10. Could not be found.
12. One of the many hymns beginning so. See Bloomfield, Vedic
Concordance C. 106.
14. Curd, clarified butter, water, honey, sugar.
17. Could not be identified.
18. Could not be identified.
20. Could not be identified.

Agni PurSijta
19-20. Life should be infused into the image with the prin¬
cipal mantra and should again be worshipped with perfpme etc.
Having worshipped it well in the shed as before after having
offered twigs etc. into the fire pits with (the recitation of the
prar^ava) the first word of the Vedas y four cows should be milched
in the four directions. Then gruel of barley should be prepared
and offered to the fire.
21. The invocation should be performed with the vyakrtisy
gayatri and the principal mantra. Oblation should be done with
the mantra sUryaya praj&pataye dyauh svdhd cdntariksakah.
22. (Ceremony is to be performed) for the earth, Dehadhfti, Svadhrti, Rati, Ugra, Bhima, Raudraka.
23-24. Visnu, Varuna, Dhatf, Mahendra the furtherer
of riches, Agni, Yama, Nairrta, Varuna, Vayu, Kubera, Ha
Ananta, Brahman and the lord of waters should be propitiated
with oblations reciting svdhd and (the mantras) idarh vifnuh^ and
tad viprdsa^.
25. Having made oblation six times with somo dhenu^,
oblation should be made with imarh me^. Again oblation should
be done thrice with dpo hi sfhd^ (and once) with imd rudrd^.
26. Bali (offering) should be made in the ten directions.
The image should be worshipped with perfumes and flowers
The image should be lifted and placed in a mystic diagram by a
wise man.
27-28. (The image) should be worshipped with perfumes
and flowers as well as golden flowers duly. The excellent priest
should lay eight raised platforms filled with sand after having
made ready the water tanks measuring two feet. Then clarified
butter (should be given as oblation) hundred and eight times with
(the mantra) varunasya’’.
29. Then the barley gruel should be offered in the fire and
purificatory water sprinkled over the image. The rite to bring
life into the image should be performed.
7. Could not be identified.

30. Lord Varuna should be contemplated as being accom¬
panied by goddess Gauri and the host of masculine and feminine
rivers. Then having worshipped with the mantra '‘om salutations
to Varuna”, the act of bringing near should be done.
31. (The image) should be lifted and carried around on
the back of elephant etc. and along with the eight auspicious
things (a brahmin, cow, fire, gold, clarified butter, sun, water
and king). With the recitation of dpo hi sthd^, it should be
immersed in the water of the pitcher into which the three sweet
things have been put.
32. The image should be placed in the midst of the tank
unseen. (The priest) should bathe and contemplate on Varuna,
the creation known as the primordial egg.
33. Having purified it with the principal letter (of the
mantra) of the fire, the ashes should be scattered over the earth.
The entire world consists of water. Hence, the lord of waters
is contemplated.
34. The sacrificial post of a rectangular, octagonal or cir¬
cular shape should be placed in the middle of the tank.
33. Having worshipped the symbol of the lord, post made
of the tree used for the purpose of sacrifice (should be driven)
ten cubits into the ground in the case of (consecration of) a well.
At the bottom of the post gold and fruit should be placed.
36. It should be driven into the ground in the middle of
water fifteen cubits in the case of a well, twenty (cubits) in the
case of a tank (puskarini) and twentyfive cubits in the case of a
pond.
37. In the alternative, (the post) should be driven in the
centre of the sacrificial bed and with the mantra ySpavraskd^
cloth should be put around. The banner should be put at the
top of the post.
38. Having worshipped it with perfumes etc., (the rite
for) universal peace should be performed. The spiritual preceptor
should be given the fees (in the form of) land, cows, gold and
water vessel.
39-40. Fees should be paid to twice-borns. Those who arc
present should be fed. 'Trom Brahman down to (inanimate
1. ^tV.IO.D.la.

Agni PuTd^
objects like) the pillar all those who seek water may get
satisfied with the waters of the tank !” (With the utterance of
these words) the water should be given as charity. The five
things got from a cow should then be thrown (into the water).
41. With the utterance of (the mantra) dpo hi stha^ thrice,
the sanctified water got ready by the brahmins and the holy
waters of the sacred spots should be sprinkled (into the tank)
and herd of kine should be given to brahmins.
42-43. Food and other things should be given to all the peo¬
ple without any restraint. One who consecrates a reservoir of
water (acquires) in a single day a merit ten crores times more
than one who performs thousands of aSvamedha (the horsesacrifice). Such a person goes to heaven in the (celestial)
vehicle and rejoices (there). He never goes to hell.
44. The consecrator can never get any sin as the cattle and
other (animals) drink water from it. One attains all merits
by the endowment of water (tank) and goes to heaven.
CHAPTER SIXTYFIVE
The building of pavilions in front of the temples
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the mode of building pavilions (in front
of temples) and their maintenance. The vdstuydga (rite per¬
formed to please the spirits dwelling in a site) should be
performed after having tested the ground (intended for
building pavilion).
2. Having constructed pavilion as per one’s liking, one
should install (the images of) gods according to his wish.
(Such buildings.) should not be constructed at the junction of
four roads or at a deserted place in the village.
3. Such a builder being free from sins and raising his ances¬
tors (to heaven), enjoys in heaven. One should build a seven¬
storeyed building for Lord Hari (Visnu) in the following
way.

4. The same rule holds good in the building of other (tem¬
ples of gods), as in the case of erecting the mansions of kings.
The banner should be placed in the east. The edifice should be
built as a quadrilateral without (having any walls on) the diago¬
nal lines.
5-7. The building should have three or two chambers or
one chamber. The vyayd^ should not be much. Excessive vyaya
is deemed to be harmful. Excessive aya“ is also harmful. Hence
the two should be made equal. (The priest) well-versed in the
science ofGarga (vastumstra) , should sum up the hand measures
of building and multiply it by eight. It should be multiplied
by three and the resultant product should be divided by eight
and the remainder is known as vyaya.
8. Alternatively, having divided the sum of the hand mea¬
sures of the building by three and multiplying it by eight the
resultant is known as the dhvaja (banner) etc.
9. Banner, camel, lion, dog, bull, donkey, elephant and
crow are said to be eight dyas.
10. It is commended if we have three after leaving the
north and east in houses having three storeys. Together with the
building on the opposite side there will always be two buildings
in the south.
1 1 . One-storeyed building may be had in the south or there
may be two one-storeyed buildings in the west. The other kinds
of buildings cause fear.
12-13. A four-storeyed building devoid of all defects is always
commended. One may build a mansion having one-storey or
seven-storeys without the door, platform and moulding. The
mansions of the images of gods should be consecrated in the pres¬
cribed way for the gods.
14-23. The hall should be consecrated with the cere¬
monies as described (for the installation of an image). The
consecrator should bathe in the herbal waters and becoming
pure and alert should feed brahmins with sweets. He should
then enter the hall decked with pitchers and arches, with his
1-2. One of the formulae for ascertainii^ the right proportion of measure¬
ment.

Agni Purd^a
hand placed on the back of a cow, and after having wished pros*
perity to the brahmins. The householder should then enter the
house after having honoured the astrologers. The following mfl«-
tra of prosperity should be repeated.
*‘Om, O Mother Earth ! related to Vasistha ! you rejoice
with the Vasus (semi-divine beings) and people. Glory be to the
daughter of Bhargava' (Sukra the preceptor of demons),
the giver of success to her offsprings. The accomplished goddess T
relative of Ahgiras ! You grant me my heart’s desire. O auspi¬
cious one ! related to (sage) Kasyapa ! make my intellect good.
Endowed with all herbs ! Surrounded by all gems and herbs I
Shining one ! Joyous one ! related to Vasistha ! May you amuse
here ! Daughter of Prajapati (Brahman) ! O Goddess 1
Handsome in all parts ! Noble-minded ! Beautiful one ! The
strict observer of disciplines ! One who is related to Kasyapa f
May you enjoy in this house ! O Adored by the great precep¬
tors ! Adorned with perfumes and garlands ! Bestower of pros¬
perity !0 Goddess ! Daughter of Bhargava ! May you amuse
in this house ! The primordial element ! The inexplicable
one ! Accomplished ! O daughter of sage Ahgiras ! O
Goddess of bricks ! I establish you. You confer on me my desi¬
res ! One surrounded by the lords of regions, place and the
house ! You be furtherer of men, wealth, elephant, horse and
cow.
CHAPTER SIXTYSIX
Mode of consecration of other gods
The Lord said :
1-2. I shall describe the mode of consecration (of ima¬
ges) of all gods — the Adityas (the suns, twelve in number),
Vasus (eight), Rudrab (eleven), Sadhyah, Vi^vedcvah, Alvins
and the sages etc. It is like (the consecration of the image of)
Vasudeva. I shall describe special features (of ceremonies).
The first letter of the name of particular deity should be
taken.
1. Denotes Lak^.

3. It should be split into syllables. The longer vowels should
be split. The mystical letter (of the deity) is first formed by
adding a nasal and the pranava.
4. (The images of) all gods as well as those who had led
a disciplined life and had observed austerities and atonements
and those who had lived in the monasteries should be worshipp¬
ed and installed with their respective principal mantra.
5. I shall describe the mode of fasting for a month and that
which concludes on the twelfth day (of a fortnight ) . One should
place a stone slab and pitchers made of bell metal filled with the
articles (described earlier).
6. After having collected the brahmakUrca (grass), the wor¬
shipper should prepare the gruel made of barley and milk of
tawny (coloured) cow with (the mantra) tadvisnoh.^
7. It should be stirred with the ladle holding it with (the
recitation of) pranava (pm). Having got it ready and bringing it
down lord Vi^i}u should be worshipped and the offering made.
8. The oblation should be done with the vydhrti {bhul}^
bhuvah, svah), the vedic mantras such as gdyatri* {mantra), tad~
viprdsa^, viSvataScaksuh^ and bhuragnaye^.
9. Oblations should be given to Surya, Prajapati (the
creator), (the lord of) the ethereal region. Oblation to sky !
Oblations to Brahman ! (Oblations should be given upto) the
earth and the great king.
10. Oblations should be done with (the mantras) tasmai,
sornadi ca, rajdnamidam. Having offered the remaining part of the
gruel as oblation, digbali (offerings to the quarters) should be
done with due respect.
1 1 . Having made oblation of one hundred and eight
twigs of the paldSa (tree) along with clarified butter, oblations
should be done eight times with sesamum and water along with
the puru^asukta^.
2. Om bhir bkuvassvab tatsaviturvaretiyam bhargo devasya dhlmahi dhiyo yo
nail pracodayAt.

Agni PurSna
12-13. Having offered oblations for Brahman, Visnu, Ha
(Siva) , the attendant gods, the planets and the presiding deities
of different worlds, oblations should be offered for the moun¬
tains, rivers, and oceans. Sacrificial spoon full of clarified butter
should be offered thrice as the final oblation with the (recitation
of) iryahrtis (bhuh, bhuvah, svah).
14-15. O Brahman after having sipped the gruel along
with the pancagavya (five things got from a cow) with the
vaimava mantra and the syllable vausaf, the priest should be paid
fees, vessel containing sesamum along with gold, cloth and a
cow well-adorned. The wise man should complete the austerity
with (the utterance of) “May lord Visnu be pleased !”
16-17. I shall describe in full about another mode of conse¬
cration other than that of fasting for a month. The lord of the
celestials (Visnu) should be worsliipped and the gruel pertain¬
ing to Visnu should be prepared out of sesamum, rice, nivdra
grains (rice growing unsown), iydmaka or barley. After adding
clarified butter and lifting it up, oblation should be made with
that with the mantras relating to that form of the lord.
18. Oblation should be made to Visnu and other gods who
are the lords of different months then. Om ! oblations for
Visnu 1 Oblations to lord Vi?nu, the ornament ! Oblations to
Lord Visnu, the Hpivisfa (pei*vaded by rays) (an epithet of
Visnu) ! Om ! oblations to Narasirnha (man-lion form of Visnu).
Om ! oblations to Purusottama (the foremost) (an epithet of
Visnu) ! Twelve twigs of the holy fig tree dipped in the clarified
buttei should be given as oblation.
19. Twelve oblations (should be made) with the mantra
vis^o rardfa^. Twelve oblations with the gruel should be made
with (the mantras) idam irdvatP.
20. Similarly, oblations should be made with clarified butter
with (the mantra) tadviprdsa* Having done the remaining
oblation, three concluding oblations should be made.
21. Having repeated the hynrn^^vunjflte® the gruel should be

partaken. With the pranava (syllable om) repeated at the end of
the respective name the gruel should be placed in a vessel made
of holy fig tree.
22. Then twelve brahmins (representing) the twelve pre¬
siding deities of the months should be fed. The priest (would be)
the thirteenth. The thirteenth place should be offered to him.
23. Thirteen pitchers containing sweet water along with
umbrellas, shoes, clothes, gold and garlands should be given to
them for the sake of conclusion of the rite.
24. A path-way should be laid out (for the cattle) saying,
“May the cows get pleased ! May they move happily !” Then
the sacrificial post should be plaiited there.
25-26. A water-shed in the pleasure grove, monastery and
path-way should be of ten cubits. Having done the oblation etc.
in the house duly in the prescribed way, the householder should
enter the house according to the earlier injunctions. Offering
of food etc. without any restrictions should be made on all these
(occasions ) .
27. Fees should be paid by wise men to the brahmins accord¬
ing to one’s capacity. Whoever causes to set up a pleasure grove
stays eternally in the garden of Indra.
28. One who builds a monastery goes to heaven and remains
in the world of Indra. One who sets up a water-shed (lives)
with Lord Varuna. By (the construction of) a pathway one re¬
mains in the heaven.
29. One who builds a bridge of bricks and who constructs
a pathway for cows in the cattle stall and one who observes the
austerities in the prescribed way dwells in the region of Visnu.
One wlio performs atonements gets rid of all sins.
30. Having constructed a house (for the god) one dwells in
heaven so long as the universe exists. The installation and
consecration of Lord Siva etc., the lords of their edifices (have
been described).

Agni Purity
CHAPTER SIXTYSEVEN
Renovation of decayed images
The Lord said ;
1. I shall describe the process of replacing the old images.
The priest should bathe the images with their ornaments on them.
The fixed class of images should be put in a room and the ex¬
tremely time-worn ones should be rejected.
2. A broken or mutilated stone (image) (should be cast
aside) and a new one the same as the previous one should be
installed (in its place) by the priest after merging the principles
according to the process of merging (described earlier).
3. Having made one thousand oblations with the NarasiiTiha {mantra)^ the priest should lift that image. The old image
made of wood should be put into fire and the one made of
stone should be thrown into water. ‘
4. The old image made of a mineral or gem should be car¬
ried on a vehicle after covering it with cloth etc. and be
discarded in the deep waters of the ocean.
5. It should be thrown into waters accompanied by the
notes of music instruments. Fees should be paid to the priest.
6. New images of the same size and made of the same mate¬
rial should be installed on the same day. One accrues great merit
by the renovation of wells, tanks and ponds.
CHAPTER SIXTYEIGHT
Mode of taking out a procession and celebration of festivals after
fixing the new image :
The Lord said :
1 . I sliall describe the celebration of festival after the
image has been installed. It shall be for a night, or three or five
nights.

2-3. Without the festival the installation would become
fruitless. The festival for the deity should be celebrated when
the sun enters the solstitial or the equinoctial points in the bed¬
chamber or garden or it may be done in favour of the person at
whose instance the ceremony is performed with the sowing of
auspicious seeds and the notes of sacred music.
4-5. An earthen vessel, a small water pot or an embankment
are suitable for the sowing of seeds. Grains of barley, uncultivat¬
ed rice, sesamum, green gram, wheat, white mustard, horsegram, and black gram should be winnowed, washed and
sown. Offerings should be made in the east and other directions.
Lighted lamps should be carried round the edifice in the night.
6. (Offering should be made) to Indra, Kumuda and other
deities and spirits. They visit the place assuming shapes of
men.
7. (One who carries such lamps) certainly gets the merit
of (doing) aSvamedha (horse sacrifice) for every step he places.
The priest should submit to the lord (as follows) after his return.
8. “O Lord ! best among the Grods ! you have to be taken
in a procession tomorrow. By all means you deserve to permit
us O Lord ! to commence the same.
9. Having informed the lord in this way the festivities
should be undertaken. The platform should be decorated with
young shoots of plants and small water-jar.
10-11. Four pillars (should be erected). The image should
be placed in a svastika (figure) (drawn) in their midst. Or de¬
sired objects should be painted and placed there and the act of
making the deity present in the image should be done with the
vaif^va mantra. (The image) should be anointed with ghee
with (the recitation of) the principal {mantra). Or the wise man
should arrange an incessant fiow of ghee over the image the
whole night.
12. Havii^ shown the mirror, there should be the waving
of light, auspicious singing and instrumental music, fanning,
worship, and present of light. The deity should be worshipped
with incense and flowers.
13. Turmeric, green-gram, saffron and white powders
should be put on the head g£ image. But when ghee (is placed
over the head) it gets the merit of all sacred places for the
devotees.

Agni Purd^
14. Having bathed and worshipped the image that is placed
in the car for being taken around, the officers of the king should
take it to the river-side accompanied by music, umb/ella and
other things.
15. A platform should be got ready at a distance of a
yojana (eight or nine miles) before the river. The image should
be brought down from the car and placed on the platform.
16. Gruel should be prepared and sweet gruel should be
offered as oblation. The sacred waters (of the sacred spots)
should be invoked for their presence with (the recitation of)
vedic mantras symbolising the waters.
17. The image should again be worshipped with the prin¬
cipal oblations uttering the mantra Spo hi The image should
again be carried to the waters and the aghamarsana^ hymn repeated.
18. (The priest) should bathe with the assembly of brah¬
mins and then the image should be lifted and placed on the
platform. Having worshipped it there that day it should then be
taken to the temple. The priest should worship it as in the fire
which gets him enjoyment and liberation.
CHAPTER SIXTYNINE
Mode of conducting the bathing festival
The Fire {Lord) said ;
1. O Brahman ! Listen ! I shall describe in detail (themode of conducting) the bathing festival. The pitchers should
be placed in a drawn figure in the shed in front of the temple.
2. First of all, God Hari (Visnu) should be contemplated,
propitiated and offered oblations before doing anything. One
should offer oblations hundred or thousand times along with the
final one.
3. The materials for bathing should then be brought and the
pitchers also should be placed. The pitchers to the necks of which
2. B-V.10.190 — rfoA ea satyeah edbhidhdt

threads have been tied should be made fragrant and they should
be held in a circle.
4. A square should be drawn and divided into eleven com¬
partments. The gruel should be placed at the centre, the adja¬
cent parts having been cleaned.
5. The nine angular points commencii^ with cast should
be filled with powdered rice etc., and the pitcher should be brou¬
ght by the wise man after having formulated the himbha mudrifi-.
6. Darhha grass should be put on them with the pui^dlarikdkfa
(an epithet of Vi§nu) (lotus-eyed) mantra. A pitcher filled with
water and containing all gems should be placed in the middle.
7. The barley, paddy, sesamum, uncultivated rice, fydmdka
(grains), horse gram, green gram and white mustard seeds
(should be put) in the eight directions in order.
8-9. A pitcher filled with ghee should be placed in the mid¬
dle of the eastern side in the midst of nine pitchers. The
remaining pitchers should be filled with the decoctions of the
(barks of) paldia^ aSvatthdy nyagrodhay bilva^ udumbaray Hrifaf
jamb fl, iami and kapittha. The central pitcher in the nine pitchers
in the south-east should be filled with honey.
10. The remaining eight pitchers should be filled with the
earth taken from loosening by cow’s horn, elephant’s tusk, horse
hoofs, mountains, Ganges bed, sacred spots, rivers and fields.
11-12. In the nine pitchers on the south, the central one
should be filled with sesamum. The other eight pitchers should
be filled with nSraAga, jambira, kharjSra, ndrikeia (coconut), pUga
(arecanut), pomegranate, panasa fruits. In the nine pitchers on
the south-west, the central pitcher should be filled with milk.
13-15. (The remaining eight pitchers should be) duly
(filled with) saffron (kuAkuma), ndga^ campaka^ jasmine,
punndgdy karavira, and mahotpala Bowers. In the nine pitchers on
the west, the central pitcher should contain the coconut water.
(The other pitchers should contain) waters of the river,
ocean, tank, well, rain water, water firom the melted ice,
waters of the falls, and of the Ganges. In the nine pitchers on
the north-west the central one should have banana fruits.
16. The divine herbs sahadevit hmiriy svAhit lydgkri, amfUky
1 . A posture made with the hands representing a pitcher.

188 AgmPurd^
‘Vifiifupanfdt lataJivd and vacd should be placed in the other eight
pitchers.
17-19. In the east and the northern (directions) among the
nine pitchers one should place the central one having curd. The
other pitchers should duly be filled with the fragrant substances —
cardamom, tvaedy kuffhay bdlaka, the two varieties of sandal, the
kastBrikd creeper and the black agallochum. (In 'the central
pitcher among the nine pitchers on the north cast) one should
fill waters for purification. In the other pitchers we should have
(the materials) candrOy tirdy Sukldy girisdra (iron), trapu (tin),
camphor, iirfa and gems.
20. They should be anointed with ghee and lifted up and
bathed with the principal mantra with perfumes and worshipped.
Having offered oblations into the fire, the final oblation should
be offered.
21. Offering should be made to all spirits. After paying
fees to (the priest), (the priest and the brahmins) should be
fed after having installed the images of deities, sages and other
divinities.
22. Having installed (the image of the god) in this way
one should conduct the bathing festival. One who bathes (the
image) in one thousand eight pitchers gets all fortune.
23. By bathing at the conclusion of the rite, the bathing
festival concludes. The marriage and other festivals of (the
goddesses) Gaurl (consort of Siva), Lak^mi (consort of Vi?ou)
should be celebrated after the bathing festival.
CHAPTER SEVENTY
Mode of planting trees
The Lord said :
1-2. I shall describe the mode of planting trees conferring
enjoyment and emancipation. The trees having been smeared
with all the herbs and adorned with fragrant powders should be
decorated with flower garlands. Cloth should b|^ put around

them. (The rite known as) the perforation of the ear should be
done for them with a golden needle.
3-4. Collyrium should be applied with a short stick. Seven
kinds of fruits (should be placed) on the platform. The pitchers
should be consecrated. The offering should be made for (the
gods) Indra and others and the consecration should be done.
Oblations to the fire should be done for (the sake of) plants.
Remaining in the midst of trees a cow should be let off with
the (recitation of) d)hifekamantra.
5-6. Brahmins should bathe the trees as well as the yajamSna
with the waters of pitchers placed in the platform with (the
recitation of) the fk^ yajus^ sdma mantras and also that of varui^a
accompanied by auspicious music. The yajamdna should adorn
(himself) and should present the fees as well as a cow, ornament
and cloth.
7. Food should be given along with milk (to brahmins)
for four days consecutively. Oblation should be made with sesamum and twigs of paldSa (tree). The sacrificial priest should be
paid the fees double (the value of what is given to other brah¬
mins).
8. The construction of sheds etc. here should be done as
laid down earlier. The consecration of trees and a garden
destroys one’s sins and gets the highest merit.
9. Listen to the (mode of) installation (of the image) of
Surya (sun), Ganeia, the goddess (Gaur!) and the attendant
deities of Lord Hari as described by lla (8iva) to Skanda (ear¬
lier).
CHAPTER SEVENTYONE
Mode of worshipping GaneSa
The God said :
1-2. I shall describe the (mode of) wc^hip of Ga^ia
(Ganela) which removes obstacles and confers the desired
objects. (The worship of six kinds slu>uld be done as follows) :
The heart with ‘^oblations to Ganeia”, the head with **(obla-

Agni Purdia^a
tions) to the one-tusked”, the tuft with “ (oblations) to the one
who has the ear like that of an elephant”, the arhiour with
“ (oblations) to the elephant-faced”, the eye with “ (oblations)
to the big-bellied,” the weapons with “ (oblations) to one who
has his own tusk in his hands”.
3-5. One should worship the ga^y the preceptor, the sandals,
the (divine) energy, Ananta, the dharma, and the collection of
bones in the lower part of the pedestal, the cover, the petals of
the lotus, the lotus and the principal letter, (should be worshipp¬
ed) in the upper part. (The energies) (are) Jvalini, Nanda,
SuryeiSa, Kamarupa, Udaya, Kamavarttini, Satya, and Vighnana^a. The seat (should be worshipped) with perfumes and earth.
(With the following letters the appropriate acts should be per¬
formed): the drying with yam, the burning with ram, the agita¬
ting with lam and making it to nectar with vam. The gdyatrimantra is : lambodardya mdmahe mahodardya dkimahi tamo dantih
pracodaydty
6-7. The following are the names of Ganeiia to be worshipp¬
ed : ‘‘Ganapati (Lord of ganas), Ganadhipa (chieftain of the
ganas), Ganesa (Lord of ga^), Gananayaka (the lord of
ganas), Ganakrida (one who sports with the ga^), Vakratunda (having a bent trunk), Ekadaihspra (having one tusk),
Mahodara (big-bellied), Gajavaktra (elephant-faced), Lambakuk$i (long-bellied), Vika^a (dreadful), Vighnanalana (des¬
troyer of impediments), Dhumravarna (tawny-coloured) and
Mahendra.
CHAPTER SEVENTY-TWO
Mode of bathing and daily worship
The God said :
1 . O Skanda ! I shall describe the modes of bathing and
worship after the installation everyday. Having bathed one
should dig up eight fingers of earth with the sword.
1 . May we know the Supreme person. For that, we meditate upon
lambodara (long-bellied) and ( big-bellied) . Maj^Dantin (one who
has the tusk) impel us towards it.

2. The pit should be filled with the earth thus removed and
it should be carried to the river bed and placed there. It should
then be purified with the weapon.
3-5. The grass should be lifted up with the Hkhi (tuft)
{mantra) and divided into three with the armour {mantra).
Having washed upto the navel and foot with one part of them,
the other part should be burnt with the astra mantra and sprinkled
all over the body. Having pressed the eyes with the hands one
should remain immersed in the water for some time after con¬
trolling the breath. One should contemplate in the heart, the
weapon, radiant like the deadly fire. Having finished the mud
bath in this way one should rise up from waters.
6-7. Having worshipped the astrasandhyd (the union of
weapon), one should bathe according to the injunctions laid
down. The sacred waters of the rivers Sarasvati and others
should be drawn into the heart with the (formation of) ankuSamudra (a formation with the fingers resembling the goad). Having
established it (there), one should collect the remaining mud
formulating the sartdUtramudrd (posture with the fitters indicating
destruction) and enter the navel-deep water.
8-9. (The remaining mud) should be made into three
parts on the left palm facing the north. One part of it
on the south once with the adga mantras, the next part with
the (previous mantra) seven times and the one on the north with
the Siva mantra ten times and duly thus the parts should be sancti¬
fied. After having recited the mantra for the weapon ending with
Auni the first part (of the earth) should be scattered in all
directions.
10. Having the part on the north and reciting the Sivamantra the waters of Siva should be accomplished. The part on
the south (sanctified with the aAga mantra) should be smeared all
over the body from head to foot.
11-12. After having recited the four aAgamantras and cover¬
ed all the (nine) apertures (in the body) with the recitation of
the sammukhikaraffa mantra {mantra accomplishing the presence),
one should contemplate Lord Siva or Lord Hari or the Ganges
and plunge into the waters. Then the fa4aAga mantra {mantra
for assigning to the limbs of the body) ending with vaufat should
be recited and water poured (over the head) .

Agni FufOgja
13-15. One should place water in the pitchers in the east
(and other directions) in order to prevent any harm during ablu¬
tion. Having bathed one should apply sweet perfumes such as.
emblic myrabolans which are (considered as) royal honour.
Having bathed and come out, that water should be made to
cease to exist with the samhdrini (mudra). One should then
bathe from head to foot with the ashes duly purified by the sarfihitd (vedic) mantras or concluding rites with (the recitation)
of the mantra hum phaf.
16-17. Having performed the mala sndna, (bathing with
mud), the vidhisnana (bathing with the recitation of mantras),
one should besmear the head, face, heart, and the genital organ
with the {mantras of gods) Isa (Ifana), Tatpurusa, Aghora,
Guhyaka and Jata (Sadyojata) in the three twilights, night, and
before and after the commencement of rainy season.
18-19. If a person happens to touch a woman, an eunuch,
a man of lower caste, a cat, hare or mouse just after getting up
from sleep, or eaten food or drunk water one should do the dgneyaka bathing, standing up with uplifted arms, the face having
turned towards the east, being cleansed by the shower of sun’s
rays.
20. The mdhtndra bathing (consists in the recitation of the)
ha mantra and walking seven steps in the midst of herds of cows
being besmeared with the dust (arising) from the hoofs.
21. The pdvana (purifying) bathing (should be done)
with the nine mantras or the constituent mantra and the pouring
of water (should be done) with the mantras sadyojdta, etc.
22. The bathing with the mantra should be done in this man¬
ner in honour of (the gods) Varuna, Agni and others with (the
recitation) of the principal mantra being preceded by the regula¬
tion of the breath.
23. The mental bathing which has been universally enjoined
should be performed in honour of Lord Vi?nu, by uttering the
mantra sacred to him.
24. O Guha (son of Lord Siva) ! I shall describe the rules
(relating to) the twilight (worship) (to be performed) with
different mantras. After having had a look one should drink the
water, the Brahma and Sankara tirthas (from the root of diffe¬
rent fingers).
25. (One should pronounce) die different pfincipies consti-

tuting one’s self ending with the term soadh&t touching firmly the
(nine) apertures (in the body). After having done the sakalikararia (accomplishing deed) one should remain composed by
(the performance of) regulation of breath.
26. The performer should mentally repeat tlirice the
Hvasarfihitd. After having sipped water and performing ny&sa
(assigning gods or mantras in different parts of the body, one
should meditate upon the goddess brahmi and the sandhyd
in the morning as follows:
27. (The goddess) having red complexion, has four faces,
four arms with hanging garlands in the right arms and a stick
and kaman4alu (small pitcher) in the left arms and seated in the
crossed-ieg posture on the swan.
28. The midday twilight should be contemplated as Vai§-
navi, white (in complexion), seated with crossed-le^ on the
Garuda, holding conch and disc in the left arm and the mace
and ahhaya {mudra) (hand showing protection) in the right hand.
29. Raudri should be meditated upon as seated on the lotus
and as riding the bull, possessing three eyes, decorated by the
moon and holding trident and rosary in the right arm and the
protective posture {abhaya) and mace in the left arm.
30. The twilight is the witness of deeds of men. The
soul (should be known) as following its radiance. The fourth
twilight is that of the learned and it is meditated upon in the
night.
31. The supreme sandhyd is declared as that which remains
invisible in the cavities situated at the heart, and the upper end
of the nose and which secures the realization of Siva.
32. The root of the fore-finger (is known to be) the pitjr^
tirtha and that of the little finger as that of Prajapati. The root
of the thumb (is known to be) that of Brahma, while the fore¬
part of the hand is held sacred for all gods.
33. It is the place of sacred fire on the palm of the left
hand, and the soma on that of the right hand. All the tips and
folds on the fingers (are sacred) for the sages.
34. After having got ready the sacred waters for Siva with
the mantras pertaining to Siva, one should sprinkle that water
with the sarhhitd mantras.
35. The water sprinkled from the right hand should drip

Agni PurSf/a
down through the left hand and the head should be sprinkled
(with water) with the (repetition of) mantras. *
36. The water remaining in the right palm should be carried
to the tip of the nose and should be conceived as white in colour
and as the embodiment of knowledge. The water should then be
drawn through the right nostril and retained.
37. That water should then be ejected into the right palm
after having conceived it as black in colour because of the re¬
demption of one’s sins. It should be thrown on a stone slab. This
is known to be the aghamarsana (redeeming from sin) rite.
38. Then one should repeat the g&yatri mantra as many times
as possible after having offered the respectful arghya consisting,
of kuStty flowers and unbroken rice to Siva with the mantras of
iSiva ending with (the syllable) svdhd (oblation).
39. I shall describe the offering of water oblations to the god.
One should utter the mantra ^ivdya svdhd (oblations to Siva)
and offer water. (The syllable) svdhd should be repeated in
all cases.
40. (The nydsa should be done as) hr dm, to the heart; hrim,
to the head; hrQm, to the tuft of hair; hr aim, to the armour and
the weapons, (or in the alternative), the eight gods (can be
located) in the heart and other limbs).
41-44. (The water oblations should be performed for the
following gods) — hrdm, to the Vasus, Rudras, Viive (devas),
(to the sages) — hdm to Bhfgus, Angiras, Atri; salutation to Vasi$tha, Pulastya, Kratu, Bharadvaja; salutations to Vi^vamitra,
to Pracetas; vasa^ to Sanaka; hdm vafat to Sananda, vasa^ to
Sanatana, vafat to Sanatkumara; vofat to Kapila, to PaftcaSikha,
(the ceremony bein^ done) with the fingers of the right hand
placed at the elbow joint of the left.
45. Vaufat to all ^ spirits. One should (offer v/ater of
oblations) to the spirits, gods, and manes with the sacred thread
placed on the right shoulder and with the tips of the kuSa and
sesamum.
46. (Oblation should be offered) to the fire, the conveyor
of offerings, to Soma, to Yama, to Aryama, (the manes), Agnimanes), Agni?vatta (and) Barhisada with the addition of
(food).
47. (Oblations should be given) to (the z^anes) Ajyapa,
Soma and to all manes as it would be done for the gods.

Only Mm to l^ana, the svadM (food) should be offered to the
(manes) (departed) father and grand-father.
48. (Oblations should be offered) to the great-grand¬
father and the manes in the form of preta (the form of the
manes during the period of obsequies after one’s death),
the fathers, grandfathers, and great grand-fathers.
49-50. Food oblations (should be given) to great-greatgrand-fathers, mother side relatives such as the maternal grand¬
fathers, great-grandfathers, great-great-grandfathers and all
manes. Food oblation (should be offered) to all departed
paternal relatives, preceptors, to different quarters of heaven,
to their lords, to the divine mothers and to demons.
CHAPTER SEVENTYTHREE
Mode of worshipping the Sun
The Lord said ;
1. O Skanda ! I shall describe the (mode of) worship
of Sun preceded by the assignment (of letters) on the body.
After having contemplated as “I am the Sun”, one should wor¬
ship by offering waters {arghyd).
2-4. It (should be conceived) as filled with red colour with
the drop (of water) drawn to the forehead. After having wor¬
shipped it and after making the protective covering with the 1 imbs
of the sun-god, that water should be sprinkled on the materials
of worship and the sun-god should be worshipped (remaining)
facing the east. (One should recite) the syllables om am {hfda^
y&ya etc. and worship Dan^i and Pingala (attendants of the sun)
respectively at the right and left sides of the entrance. (Saluta¬
tions should be made to the g(a}a saying) am gaMyO’ on the northcast. The preceptor (should be worshipped) in the south-east
and the lofty seat (of the deity) should be .worshipped in the
middle of the altar.
5. One should worship mmala, sSrOy parama and sukha, (the
rays of the sun), which are to be worshipped in the directions

Agni Pur(bfa
south-east (and should be conceived as) strong as the lion and
of the colours of white, red, yellow and blue. •
6-8. One should worship (the essences of the energies of the
lord) rd-diptd (radiant), ra-jayd (victorious), ru-bhadrd (auspi¬
cious), re-vibhuti (prosperity), rai-vimald (pure), rai-amoghd
(profound), rau-vidjmt (lightning), in the (quarters) east etc.
inside the lotus (shaped diagram). The seat of the sun would
be at the centre (established by the syllable) ram. One should
invoke the sun and worship his form with the six-syllabled
{mantra) om hath khakholkdya. One should assign the sun-god
after having meditated upon the altar with the folded hands
lifted to the forehead.
9. One should invoke the god (with the mantra) hrdm hrim
sa and salutations to the sun-god, showing the mudrd. One should
offer him perfume etc. and show the bimbamudrd^.
10. One should show the padmamudrd^ and the bibamudrd*
(to the god) in all directions commencing with the south¬
east. Om am salutations to the heart. (Salutations) to sun on the
head.
11. BhUrbhuvah svah ! Obeisance to the lord of celestials
in the tuft of hair in the south-west, hum to the armour in the
north-west, hdm to the eyes at the centre.
12. Va\ (salutations) to the weapons in the east etc. Then
one should show mudrds. Dhenumudrd (fingers folded in the
shape of a cow) to the heart etc. The Govisdna mudrd* should be
shown to the eyes.
13-14. The trasani (the dreadful) should be added to the
mantra of the weapon and obeisance should be made to the pla¬
nets (as follows) — som salutations to the Moon, bum salutations
to Mercury, bpn to Jupiter, bham to Venus, am to Mars, sam to
Saturn, ram to R&hu and kem to Ketu(to be done) in the petals
(of the lotus) commencing with the east. The perfumes etc.
(should be offered) with the khakholka mantra.
15. Having recited the principal mantra^ water of oblation
from the water-vessel should be offered to the sun-god. Then
1. latertwining of fingen representing a form.
2. Intertwining of fingers representing a lotus.
3. Intertwining of fingers in a particular way.
4. Formation of fingers representing the horn of a Cowl’S

the worshipper should sing the glory of the lord, pay obeisance
to him with his face turned away and say ‘‘Pardon me, (taking
leave of thee)”.
16-17. One should mentally merge the five component
principles in the fundamental one with the syllable The
sun-god should be conceived as identical with lord Siva in the
lotus of the heart. One should offer light to the lord as a
garland made of the solar rays. One gets everything by thus
worshipping and contemplating the sun-god or by oblation unto
fire in his honour.
CHAPTER SEVENTYFOUR
Mode of worshipping Siva
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the (mode of) worshipping Siva.
After having sipped water, and repeated the syllable Om^
one should wash the entrance of the temple with water (conse¬
crated by the) mantra of the weapon and worship the guardian
deities of the door-ways and of the oblations etc.
2-3. One should worship goddess Sarasvati (consort of
Lord Brahma), Lak$m! (consort of Lord Vi^nu) and Gana at
the threshold, Nandin (attendant of Lord Siva) and the Ganges
on the right and Mahakala (form of Siva) and the Yamun&
(river) on the left imagining himself as having divine sight, and
after having driven the spirits and impediments present in the
sky by throwing a consecrated flower.
4. One should kick the earth thrice with the right heels
and enter the place of worship after leaping across the threshold
holding the left door frame.
5. Having entered (the temple) by placing the right
foot (first) and placing the weapons at the threshold, one should
worship at its centre (repeating the following) : om, AAn, (obei¬
sance) to Brahm&, the presiding deity of the dwelling place.
6. Then he should go to the river Ganges silently carrying

198 Agni PurO^ia
pure golden pitchers by means of searching instruments^ after
having obtained permission from Siva.
7. One should fill them with waters of the river filtered with
the cloth after the repetition of gdyatri or the hfdayammtray
and purifying one’s body.
8. The materials for worship such as the perfumes, un¬
broken rice and flowers etc. should be placed in front of the place
and the purification of five material components (of the
earth) should be done.
9. Having placed (these materials) on the right side of the
deity with a pleasing face and having lifted these showing sarhhdra mudrd (posture of the fingers representing destruction),
one should place them on the head with (the repetition of)
the mantra.
10-11. One who is desirous of enjoying the fruits of action
should meditate upon his soul in the twelve-petalled lotus in the
heart by means of showing pdnikacchapikd (a particular way of
showing the fingers)^. As an alternative one should purify the
five elements by meditating upon the apertures in the body from
the toes of the feet upwards both inside and outside.
12. One who meditates should control his breath and medi¬
tate on the energy which pervades the region of the heart, in the
letter hum which resembles the fire and which is situated at the
centre of the aperture.
13. The breath should then be let out and the fiery image
should be led through the heart, neck, palate, the intervening
space between the two eye-brows and the seat of the soul in the
head {brakmarandhra) , with the ending (syllable) phaf.
14. Having broken the knots, the life syllable hum should
be located on the head and the consciousness should be reflected
back in the heart by means of the pur aka (filling with air drawn
through the nostril).
15. Having placed (the syllable) hum on the tuft, one should
meditate upon the absolute soul of the form of a speck. Havii^
withheld the breath at a single stretch, one should unite the
consciousness with iSambhu (^iva).
16. After having merged himself with Siva, by means of
drawing his consciousness with the aid of bijanantras and the
1. Representing the tortoise.

recaka (exhalation of the breath), (the worshipper) should
purify by carrying in the reverse order the luminous point (in
the brain) to the point in (the nerve-complex).
1 7. One should merge the earth, wind, water, fire and sky,
one into the other without any deviation in the order. You hear
about it now !
18. The principle of earth is hard, of yellowish colour and
bears the mark of thunderbolt. Then its destruction is wrought
by the subtle mantra of the soul (namely) haum.
19. The entire body from foot to head should be contemplat¬
ed as a four-sided figure, and the principle of wind should be
meditated therein by five stretches of retention of breath.
20. This principle which has been established with the
principal syllable hrim should be contemplated as of half-cres¬
cent-shaped in a liquid state, white in colour, beautiful and
impressed with (the figure of) the lotus.
2 1 . The reverential principle of fire which is causeless and
which is the end of men, should be purified by four stretches of
retention of breath along with the Rama mantra.
22. The orb of fire should be conceived as three-sided, red
(in colour), marked with (the sign of) svastika and as the form of
knowledge and endowed with the principal syllable hum.
23. The principle of water should be purified by means of
three stretches of awful minuteness. The orb of wind (principle)
(should be conceived) as marked with six dots.
24. It should be meditated as composed of tranquility,
black in colour and endowed with the principal syllable of hrim
(and purified) by two stretches (of retention of breath). The
principle of earth should be purified.
25. (It should be contemplated) as filled in with ether, as
of the form of the speck of ether, uniformly circular, spotless like
the pure crystal and adorned by the energy of bindu.
26. After having contemplated on the form of the digit that
is beyond tranquility by means of the (mantra) haum ending
with phaft one should contemplate the pure (thing) by one
stretch (of retention of breath).
27. One should then permeate the lotus or circles such
as ddhdra (base), ananta (endless), dharma (righteousness)
and jHSna (kno%vledge) with the shower of ambrosia with the
principal mantra.

Agni Puribfa
28. After having contemplated this seat of the heart, one
should then invoke the form of essence of Siva placed inside
that (lotus) with twelve petals. •
29. Then that form should be permeated everywhere with
the divine ambrosia with the mantra of the energy ending with
vaufaf and the sakalikarana (accomplishing) rite should be per¬
formed.
30. The sakalikarana is that by which the mantras for the heart
etc. are placed in the different parts of the body such as the
heart, arms, and the little fingers of the hand.
31. Having protected the enclosure with the weapon and
the outer place with its mantra the consisting of the
«nergy should be shown below and above that.
32-33. One should worship Siva in the lotus in the heart
from head to foot with the retention of breath and with the flow¬
ers of one’s own feeling. One should then offer the clarified butter
of ambrosia to the fire of Siva in the sacred pit of the navel with
the mantras of Siva. One should contemplate the white figure of
the form of bindu on the forehead.
34. One of the vessels among the golden pitchers, should
be purified by water of nectar got from the speck and by unbro¬
ken rice.
35. Having filled the vessel with the six constituents and after
having worshipped it, it should be consecrated. After having protec¬
ted it with the mantra hd one should cover it with the armour.
36. After having made ready the water of offering, one
should sprinkle the eight constituents (with water) by (showing)
the dhenumudri (a particular form of intertwining the fingers
representing the cow). One should then sprinkle one’s own self
on the head with the particles of that water.
37. One should sprinkle water of the weapon on the mate¬
rials of worship kept there. One should then encircle them with
the armour of pinia with the hft {mantra).
38-39. After having shown the amfti mudrd (formation with
fingers denoting ncm-decay) and putting flower on its seat and
a mark on the forehead consecrated by the principal mantra (of
the god) a bold man should remain perfectly silent at the time of
bathing, worship of the god, (offering) oblation unto fire,
eating, practising yoga and repetition of necessary (mantras).

40. The mantra should be purified by pronouncing the nMa
(om) at the end. That purified mantra should then be used in the
worship along with the g&yatri {mantra) and the general water
of oblation should be offered.
41. After having repeated the brakmapaflcaka^, (the wor¬
shipper) should collect the garland from the liAga and offer it to
Canda in the north-eastern direction.
42. The purification of the liAga consists in the washing of
the pedestal and the linga with the water (consecrated) by the
.mantra of weapon and kfdnumtra and sprinkle with the water
(for washing) from the vessel of arghya.
43. All the celestials should be worshipped for the purifica¬
tion of the self, the materials, the mantra and the liAga.
salutations to Gkxi Garfapati in the north-western direction. One
should pay obeisance to the preceptor in the north-east.
44-45. One should worship the goddess of the scat (of the
god) in the kurmaSil& (the tortoise form on the stone) as possess¬
ing complexion of the tender shoots and the seat of iSiva known
as ananta (endless) should be worshipped as seated on the
brahmaSilS along with the attendants of the god such as Vicitrakesa, Krta and Trcta who form the seat and shoes as they were
of divinity.
46. Then the worshipper should worship righteousness,
knowledge, detachment and prosperity, towards the south-east
as possessing the hues of camphor, saffron, gold and collyrium
respectively.
47-48. At the centre of the lotus-shaped diagram and in its
petals in the east etc. one should worship the energy goddesses —
Varna, Jyestha, RaudrI, Kali, K&lavikarinl, Balavikaran! and
BalapramathanI in order as holding the chowries and as confer¬
ring boons and offering protection.
49. One should worship (the goddesses) — HUm^ (saluta¬
tions) to SarvabhfitadamanI, (salutations) to Manonmani^
to K^iti, to $uddhavidy& at the extremities of the petals (of the
lotus diagram) as also the seat as spread over the component
parts of the universe.
58-51. The lord of white complexion, possessing five feces
and ten arms, all-pervasive, bearii^ the crescent moon and
1. The five mantrai! of the five feehman forms of &va.

Agni Purd^
carrying weapons — spear, sword, lance, and staff in the right
hands and a drum, citron, blue lotus, a string and a waterlily
in the left hands should be located on the lion-seat.*
52-54, The image of Siva possessing thirty-two characteris¬
tics (should be installed) at the centre. HSm, haniy hSm (saluta¬
tions) to the image of Siva. After having meditated upon the
self-luminant Siva, the mantra should be led to the spot sacred to
Siva after leaving below the place sacred to Brahma. Then (the
worshipper) having meditated upon that Supreme form of Siva,
effulgent with the splendour of the moon, as a luminous point
at the middle of the forehead and being invested with the six
constituents, with flowers in folded palms, should deposit (those
flowers) on the form of (Goddess) Lak^mi.
55-57. Om, ham, haum salutations to Siva. (The deity)
should be invoked with the invoking hrd {mantra). Having estab¬
lished Siva with the sthSpani {mudrd)^, and placed near (that )
should be checked with Nisfhura and Kalakanti concluding
with phaf. After having removed obstructions by sending
them away and making obeisance by (showing) the lingamudrd, it should be covered with the hrd {mantra). The invoca¬
tion should follow it. Then standing in front of the image he
should repeat. “Let you be located and firmly established. O
lord ! I am in your presence.”
58. The (rite of) avagunfhana signifies the presence and super
vision of the God and the exhibition of one’s devotion (to the
Gkxi) from the commencement to the end of the act.
59. After having done the accomplishing act with the six
mantras, the (rite of) amrtikara^a should be performed by men¬
tioning different parts of the body along with the body.
60-61. The worshipper should permeate his heart with the
energy of consciousness of l§ambhu (Siva). Similarly, (he should
contemplate) the tuft of hair of Siva as formed of the eight¬
fold glories. The worshipper should contemplate the invincible
energy of God as forming his armour, the unbearable prowess
of God which removes all impediments (and the words)
salutations, svadhd, svdhd and vaufaf (should be appended) in
order.
62-65. The water for washing the feet should be offered:
I. Formation with the fingers denoting firm establishment.

I»^eded by the recitation of the hfd {mahitra). The water (should
be offered) at the lotus feet and the water for the rinsing of the
mouth at the face of the image, the respectful offering at the head
of the lord along with the dSrvi (grass), flowers and unbroken
rice. Having purified the supreme lord with the ten purifica¬
tions thus, one should worship with the five kinds of servicessuch as the flowers etc. as laid down (in the code books).
Having sprinkled and rubbed (the ims^e) with salt, mustard
seed etc., it should be slowly bathed with drops of water, flowers,
perfumes, milk, curd, ghee, honey and sugar successively.
66. The defects in the above materials should be rectified
by worshipping with materials along with the recitation of Ha
mantras. Lord l§iva should be bathed with water and fragrance
with the principal mantra.
67-68. Having applied the paste of barley, it should be ba¬
thed copiously with cold water and also with fragrant water
according to one’s ability. Having wiped it dry with a clean
cloth, the preliminary offering of water should be given. The
hand should not be moved over the head (of the image). The
liiiga should never be left without any flower on its head.
69. Having smeared it with sandal etc. and worshipped with
flowers with the mantras of Siva, the vessel for holding the per¬
fumes should be consecrated with the weapons {mantra) and
worshipped with the mantras of Siva.
70. The bell consecrated by the weapon {mantra) should be
taken and the incense should be offered. The water for rinsing
should be given then (with the repetition of) svadhi at the end
and with the hfd mantra.
71. Having shown light for the idol in the night, then
water for rinsing should be offered. Afler having made obeisance
to god and taking his permission, eatables and other articles of
enjoyment should be offered.
72. The heart should be worshipped in the south-east, the
moon on the north-east, the golden-coloured Siva together with
the tuft and blood on the south-west, and armour on the
north-west.
73. These gods having four faces and four arms should be
worshipped in the petals in the east etc. along with the divine
weapon similar to thunder and fierce teeth.

Agni PurO^a
74. Ham salutations to Siva at the base, Om hM kfim him
horn in the head, hpa to the tuft, haim to the armour, kaf^ to the
weapons and to one with the attendants. *
75-76. Waters for washing the feet, for rinsing the mouth
and respectful offering, perfumes, flowers, incense, lamp, food
offerings and water for rinsing again, should be given to lord
Siva. Intertwined blades of kuia and unbroken rice should be
placed on the head (of the image) of the lord. Perfumes, betel,
piece of cloth for wiping the face and a mirror (should also be
offered to the deity).
77-78. After having repeated the principal {mantra) eight
hundred times, tlie sword of the lord covered by the sheath, pro¬
tected by the kuia and flowers and consecrated by hfd (mantra)
along with the unbroken rice and with the udhhava mudrd (a
formation made with the fingers indicating generation). O
most mysterious ! Accept this repetition (of mantra) for our
welfare.
79-81. “May there be success for me by this by your pre¬
sence here”. Having recited this verse at first, the worshipper
should offer to Sambhu (Siva) the waters of respect with the
right hand with (the repetition of) the principal mantra. What¬
ever good or bad that I may do O lord ! let it be cast off from
me who am in the region of Siva. Him k^ah O Sankara, Siva
is the giver, Siva is the enjoyer, Siva is all this universe.
82. Siva is victorious everywhere. I am identical with Siva.
After having repeated these two verses, the japa should be dedi¬
cated to the lord.
83. One-tenih (should be dedicated) to the limbs of Siva.
Having offered the wat^nof respect, one should adore (the deity).
After circumambulating (the deity), one should bow to the
eight-formed (representing the five elements, sun, moon and
yajamana) deity by prostrating (the eight limbs touching the
ground). After salutation (the deity) should be worshipped in
a picture or in the fire by meditation etc.

CHAPTER SEVENTY-FIVE
Mode of installation of the fire
The God said :
1. (The worshipper) should enter another room unseen
with the vessel containing water for offering in his hand and
should look to the arrangements of the materials essential in the
performance of a sacrifice, as it were, with a divine eyesight.
2. He should look at the sacrificial pit with his face turned
towards the north. The sprinkling and beating the water with
the kuia should be done by (repeating) the mantra of the weapon
and the consecration should be done with the mantra of the arm¬
our.
3. The digging out (a piece of earth), filling and levelling
with the sword should be done with (the mantra of) the armour
and bathing and division into parts (should be done) with the
mantra of the arrow.
4. The (rites of) cleansing, anointing, fixing the crescent
form, investiture of the sacred thread and worship (should be
done) always by the mantra of the armour.
5. Three lines should be drawn in the north and one below
them (should be drawn) so as to face the east. Whatever defects
in them may be made good by touching them with the hiSa and
the astramantra of Siva.
6. A quadrilateral figure should be drawn with the^icfa
by the mantras of vajrikarana (establishing firmly) and hfd. The
vessel for the rosaries should be laid with (the mantra of) the arm¬
our. The seat should be laid with the' hfd mantra.
7-8. The Goddess of speech along with the God should be
invoked therein and worshipped. The consecrated fire brought
from a holy place and placed in a pure receptacle, after leaving
aside its parts presided over by the demons and purified by the
divine look etc., the tliree fires auddryOf aindava and bhauta should
be made into one.
9-10. Om kSm (salutations) to god rii fire. (The deity)
should be established with the principal mantra of the fire. The
fire whidi hsa been invaJeed widi the vedie hymns and made
imratH-tal by showii^ the lAawmM (foimatkm with die fingers
represoitiitg a cow), mid proteeted by mmdtna of weapons ehotitd.

206 Agni Purdga
be covered by the armour. It should be worshipped by waving
over the pit thrice and circumambulation.
1 1 . Having meditated upon (the fire) as an element of
Lord :§iva, (the worshipper) should contemplate it as lying
dormant in the womb of Goddess of speech and cast by the
Lord of speech.
12. The worshipper should have his knees resting on the
ground and put the fire in his front with the hfd mantra. Then
the seeds of fire in the vicinity should be gathered at the centre.
13. The collection of clothes, purification and offering
of water for rinsing the mouth (should be done) with the^^
{mantra). Having worshipped the dormant fire, it should be
protected by (the recitation of) the mantra of the shaft.
14. The embryo fire should be contemplated as tied around
the wrist of the goddess as a bracelet. The fire should be
worshipped with the sadyoj&ta {mantra) for the impregnation.
15. Three oblations to the fire should then be offered with
{hfdayamantra. For the purhsavana (rite) (for the determination
of the sex of the foetus) (generally performed) in the third month
it should be worshipped on the left side.
16. Three oblations containing drops of water should be
offered with the head. The simantonnayana (rite) (parting of
the hair on the head) (performed) in the sixth month should be
done after having worshipped the fire.
17. Three oblations should be offered into the fire, after
having determined the formation of its face and body by one who
wants to restore or open up the face.
18. As before the jdtakarma (the purificatory rite on the
birth of a child) and jrtukarma (the rite after the first menses)
(usually performed) in the tenth month should be performed by
kindling the fire with darbha etc. (Mental) bathing (should be
done) to remove the impurities of the pregnancy.
19. After having mentally contemplated the golden bracelet
of the goddess one should worship with the hfd {mantra). He
should sprinkle with water consecrated by the mantra of the wea¬
pon for the immediate removal of impurities after the birth
of a child.
20. The pitcher outside the receptacle for the sacred fire
should be touched with the weapon {mantra) and (water) should
be sprinkled over with the (manira) of the armouj:. The ends of

the kuia which form the boimdary (of the sacrificial pit) and
placed on the north and east (should be washed with water)
with (the mantra of) the weapon.
21. The periphery of a circle around (the fire) should be
determined with the kuSa, previously consecrated with the wea¬
pon and kfd mantra and then the cushions inscribed within it
should be spread out by (reciting) the weapon mantra,
22. Five sacrificial sticks dipped in clarified butter should
be offered into the fire with the repetition of the principal mantra.
Brahmii, Sankara, Vi^^u and Ananta should be worshipped
with the kfd {mantra).
23. The gods located in the periphery (of that circle) should
be worshipped in turn with unbroken rice. The gods Indra to
IiSana who are directly facing the fire and are having their places
inside the circle should be worshipped in their own regions with
the hfd {mantra) “Protect this child (fire) by removing all
obstacles, that might befall it.”
24-28. One should then make them hear this command of
Siva. He should then take the sacrificial spoon and the ladle,
heat them on the fire and touch them with the base, middle and
tips of the darbha with face downwards. In the place touched by
the kuia the three principles relating to the soul, knowledge and
Siva should be located duly with the sounds hdm, krimy hUm and
sam. Having located the goddess in the sacrificial spoon and
Sambhu (Siva) in the sacrificial ladle with the hfdaya mantray
their necks being girdled with three strings (of thread) and
worshipped with flowers etc., kuias should be placed on them
and they should be placed on the right side.
29-32. Having gathered the clarified butter of the cow that
has been purified by looking at it and after having contemplated
one’s own Brahma form and carrying that clarified butter, one
should wave it over the pit and move it round and round in the
south-east. Again having contemplated the Vi?nu form, one
should hold the clarified butter and carry it towards the north¬
east, it should be offered to Vijnu (into the fire) with the tips
of the kuia and with the mantra of the head ending with svlM.
Similarly, one should conceive the form of Rudra (Siva) as a
point in one’s own navel and meditate. One should sprinkle
water over that with two kuias of the length of a span and held
with the ring finger and thumb.

Agni Pitrdifa
33. Water should be sprinkled over the fire in front (of the
worshipper) (with the two ku^as) held (as above) accompanied
by the mantra of the weapon. Similarly, the worshipper should
again sprinkle water (over the fire) in front of him with the hfd
{mantra).
34. The burnt ashes of darbha collected with the hrd
{mantra) should be purified by striking with the implements and
with the other lighted darbha it should be taken out and lighted.
35-36. The darbha burnt by the mantra of the weapon should
again be thrown into the fire. Having put the knotted darbha
of the length of a span in the clarified butter, one should contem¬
plate the two for nights, the three arteries idd etc. in the clari¬
fied butter and offer the clarified butter divided into three parts
as oblation unto fire with the sacrificial ladle in order with (the
syllable) sva and The remaining part of the clarified butter
should also be offered to the fire successively.
37. Orh hdm oblation to god Agni. Orh hdm oblation to god
Soma. Orfi hSm 'oblation to the gods Agni and Soma. (The
above oblations should be offered into the fire) for the purpose of
opening (as it were) the three eyes of the fire god in his face.
38. The fourth oblation should be offered with the sacri¬
ficial ladle filled with clarified butter. OiA hdm oblation to firegod for the offering of a right sacrifice. After having consecrated
in the six parts of one’s body, (the fire god) should be invoked
with the dhmumudrd (posture with the fingers representing a
cow).
39. Having covered it with the armour, the clarified butter
should be protected by the mantra of the shaft. The clarified
butter should be purified by sprinkling water and offering a drop
of it into the fire along with the hjrd {mantra).
40. The rites of uniting the mouths of the fire should be
performed as follows. Odt hdm oblations to Sadyojata. Om hdm
oblations to Vamadeva. Orh iOm oblations to Aghora. Om kdm
oblations to Tatpuru;a. Ofh kdm oblations to Ifdna. Thus with
oblations to one by one, one should do the union of the (diffe¬
rent) fibces.
41-42. Orh hdm oblations to Sadyoj&ta and Vftmadeva.Oi!A
him oblations to V&madeva and A^^UMra. OWt hdm oblations to
Aghora and Tatpurufa. Oih him c^tkns to Tadtpurufa and
li&na. Thus the union is done in oeder with die recitation of

these mantras. With the flow of ghee from the sacrificial ladle
taking it from the fire through the angular points such as north¬
west, south-west, and ending with north-east, one should unite the
faces. Om ham oblations to Sadyojata, Vamadeva, Aghora,
Tatpurusa and liana. Thus its form and other faces should be
contemplated in the face of one’s liking.
43. Having worshipped the fire in the north-east and offer¬
ing three oblations with the mantra of the weapon, (the worship¬
per) with his entire soul should contemplate — “O Fire-God I
you are the divine essence of Siva.”
44. Having worshipped the parents with the hfd {mantra)
and left them aside, the final oblation wliich concludes the rite
should be offered as laid down with the principal mantra ending
with vaufaf.
43. Then one should worship the resplendent, Supreme God
attended upon by the attendants and retinue, after having in¬
voked him in the lotus of his heart as before. He should offer
waters of oblation to Siva after having requested his permission.
46. Having established a union among the god of the sacri¬
ficial fire, god Siva and his soul situated in his arteries, (the
worshipper) should offer oblations with the principal mantra
befitting one’s capacity and using one-tenth of mantras as a
supplement.
47. A karfika (a particular weight) of the clarified butter,
milk and honey and a lukti (twice that of kSrsika) of the curd and
a handful of sweet porridge (should be) offered.
48-49. The worshipper should offer as deemed fit the obla¬
tion with all the eatables, a handful of fried grains, three
pieces of roots and an equal number of fruits. Five half¬
mouthfuls of cooked rice, bits of sugarcane of the length of a
span and stems of sacrificial creepers measuring two fingers in
length should be offered into the fire.
50. The oblations of flowers and leaves should be according
to tlieir own measure. The sacrificial twigs should measure ten
fingers in length. The cam{^r, sandal, saffron, musk and an
ointment made of camphor, l^^a^ochum and hAkola in equal
parts (should also be offered).
St. (Tlte should make an oblation of the fuUdya
(a fegundnous teed) and jisgida (a flagrant gum-resin) of dte

210 AgniPurOna
size of the kernel of the jujube fruit and eight parts of the
roots as laid down.
52. The oblation should thus be completed with the (prin¬
cipal mantra) brahmabija {pm) with sacrificial ladles filled with
clarified butter holding the ladle in such a way as to have its cup
part downwards.
53-56. Having placed a flower at the head of the spoon and
then holding it first with the left hand and then with the right
hand and (showing) the mudril denoting the conch he should
stand up half erect with feet evenly placed and eyes fixed upon
the end of the ladle and holding the base of ladle pressed against
his navel. Then one should rouse up the stream of his pure con¬
sciousness through the sufumnd (nerve centre below the spiral
chord) and carry it to the base of his left breast vigilantly and tell
the principal mantra ending with the vaufaf in a low tone. The
clarified butter should be offered having a flow of the measure
of the barley.
57. Water for rinsing the mouth, sandal, betab etc. should
be offered. (The worshipper) should meditate in his greatness
with devotion and then offer salutation,
58-59. After having worshipped the fire well with (the
mantra of) the weapon ending With phat and showing the sariiMra
mudrQ (the posture of the fingers conveying destruction) and
uttering “Pardon me’*, the gods who reside in the periphery
(of the mystic circle) should be placed in the lotus of the heart
with extreme devotion with the hrd mantra after taking a breath.
60. All the edibles (got ready for the worship) should be
taken and kept in two circular diagrams. Offerings should be
done both inside and outside in the vicinity of sacrificial pit in
the south-east.
61 . Odi hSm oblations to Rudras in the east and in the same
way to the mothers in the south. HSm^ oblations to the
on the west. This offering is for them.
62. And Mm to ihtyak^as on the north. Mm to the planets
on the north-east, Mm to the asuras on the south-east, hAm obla¬
tions to the rdkfosas in the south-west.
63. And Mm to the ndgas on the north-west, and to the stars
at the centre. Hdm oblations to the constellaticms in the south¬
east, and then to the Vidvf (deoas) in the<soutii-wcst.

64-65. It is said that the offering for the guardian of the
ground is inside and outside in the west. (Oblations should
be made) to Indra, Agni, Yama, Nirj-ti, Vanina, V&yu, Kubera
and li^a in the east etc. outside in the second ma^^ala. Salu¬
tations to Brahm& on the north-east.
66. Oblations to Vi^^u in the south-west. The offerings for
the crows etc. (should be) outside. The mantras for the two offer¬
ings in one’s soul should be by the sarAhdramudrd (posture with
fingers indicating destruction).
CHAPTER SEVENTYSIX
Mode of worshipping Ca^4<i {attendant of Sioa)
Lord said :
1. (The worshipper) should approach (the image of Lord)
l§iva and address as follows : “O Lord I accept the merits of the
worship and the oblations offered by me.”
2. We should convey these to the lord with a firm mind
along with the respectful offering of water and uttering the prin¬
cipal mantra preceded by the hfdblja (om) and the exhibition of
the udbhava mudrd (a posture of fingers representing genera¬
tion).
3. Then having worshipped as before and praising with
hymns and saluting, (the worshipper) should offer the respectful
offering of water with his face turned away (from the image)
and should say ‘‘Pardon me”.
4. The liAga should be discharged by uttering the mantra
of the weap)on ending with phaf coupled with the divine ndrdeamudrd (formation with fingers representing an iron arrow),
it should be merged with the mantra of the image.
5. After having worshipped god on the platform and
having merged in himself the collection of mantras as laid down,
the worship of Ca^d^ should be made.
6. Om salutations to Gai^dciana. Salutations to the image
of Ga^da^ the centre. Om, hibn phaf oblations to Dhulica^dc4vara. Thus he should be invoked.

Agni Purd^
7. Hum phaf to Cao^a at the heart. Then om to Can^a on
the head. Om hum phaf to Cai^^a on the tuft, to Canc^a, the pro¬
tector and armour. •
8. So also to Canda as the weapon hum phaf. One should
meditate on Canda, born of the fire of Rudra and as carrying
the mace, axe, rosaries and the anchorite’s pitcher and as having
a dark complexion.
9. The four-faced deity should be worshipped in the half¬
crescent shaped axe weapon (of Canda). One should repeat (the
mantra) befitting one’s capacity, being one-tenth of the principal
worship.
10. Except the offerings such as the cow, earth, gold, clothes,
gems and ornaments, the remains of offerings should be offered
to Candesa.
1 1 . Being ordered by Siva, I have offered to you these
articles of food and drink, betels, garlands and scented pastes,
the ramnants of offering.
12. O Canda ! may all these acts of service (undertaken)
by me by your order (be agreeable to you). Any shortcoming or
redundancy out of my ignorance may be made complete always.
13. Having submitted to the lord thus and offered the
respectful water and contemplated his form, the mantras should
be merged with the self with the mantraot the destructive deity
and showing slowly the satfihSra mudrd (formation with the fingers
(representing destruction) along with the principal mantra 2ind
taking a breath. The offering such as flowers etc. should then be
removed and that place cleansed with cowdung dissolved in
waters. After ofifering water respectfully one should conclude by
rinsing one’s mouth and do any other worship.
CHAPTER SEVENTYSEVEN
Mode of worshiping Kapild (the Cow)
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe to you the mode of worsliip of Kapild (the
cow). The cow should be worshq^ed with these mea^as, Om

salutations to you O Kapil4, one makes us rejoice, the abode
-of bliss. Salutations to you.
2. Om salutations to you O Kapila of good disposition.
O Kapila, as effulgent as Surabhi (the divine cow, daughter
of Dak^ and wife of Kalyapa) . Om Kapila, the good-minded,
salutations. Om salutations to the bestower of enjoyment and
emancipation.
3. O Daughter of Surabhi ! the Mother of the universe !
Giver of ambrosia to the celestials ! Granter of boons ! Accept
this morsel of food and grant me all my desires.
4. You had been worshipped by Vasistha and the learned
Vi^vamitra. O Kapila ! Take away my sins and the bad acts
of mine.
5. (Let there be) cows always in front of me. (Let there be)
cows behind me. (Let there be) cows in my heart also. I am
dwelling in the midst of cows.
6. May you, accept the morsel of food offered by me. After
repetition (of the OTan/ra) let me be pure like Lord Siva. After
having worshipped the books of learning one should bow at the
feet of the preceptor.
7. One should bathe (again) at noon and worship (Lord)
Siva with asfapufpikd. The offapufpikd is the worship of the
image, seat and the limbs of (the image of) Siva.
8-9. The cooked food should be brought into the wellcleansed kitchen at mid-day. Then after the recitation of the
mftjmRjaya mantra (that which conquers death) seven times and
ending with the vaufafy the food should be sprinkled with drops
of water with the darbha and conch. The entire food should first
be dedicated to Siva after lifting them up.
10. Then half of the above should be set apart for oblation
a.t the fire-place. After having purified the fire-place as per rules,
the oblation (should be done).
11-12. Having made the oblation once in the fire around
one’s navel one should gather the seed of fire with the breath
drawn in and after taking it through the places of the letters,
one should meditate on it as **You are the fire of Lord Siva**
and it should be put at the fire-place. 0th hSm obeisance to firegod — as also hdm obeisance to Soma.
13. Obeisknee to Sun-god, to Jupiter, the lord of people.
(Obeisance) to all gods and to all Vi^edevas.

Agni Pttrd(fa
14. Hdm obeisance to fire-god, for offering a right sacrifice.
One should worship these in the east and other directions. After
having made oblations ending with the word wdhi one
should bid farewell after seeking forbearance.
15. One should worship (the god of righteousness) on the
right-hand side of the fire-place. “Salutations to the god of right¬
eousness. The lord of unrighteousness (should be worshipped)
on the left-handside in a vessel containing sour gruel.
16. Lord Varuna (should be worshipped) as the trans¬
former of the sap and as the lord of fire in the waters. Lord of
obstacles (Vinayaka) (should be worshipped) at the entrance.
Obeisance to Subhaga at the grinding stone.
17. Om obeisance to Raudrika 'and Girika. Obeisance;
one should worship in the mortar. Obeisance to the pestle, the
weapon dear to Bala(rama). It should be worshipped.
18-19. The two gods mentioned (should be worshipped)
in the broomstick and the god of love in the bed. Having offer¬
ed oblation to the trunk for the presiding deity of the ground
at the middle stump one should eat from a golden vessel
or in the petals of the lotus etc. The preceptor, the worshipper
and the son should maintain silence at the time of this vow.
20-22. (The leaves) of the oa/a, aivatthay arkoy vdtdriy sda
and bhalldtaka should be discarded. After having rinsed the
mouth with water, five oblations should be ofiered with the five
prditas (winds in the body) together with the pramva {om) ending
with svdhd (oblations). The fire in the belly should be kindled.
With the secondary winds (in one’s body) viz.y ndgOy kuma,
kfkaray devadatta and dhananjayay oblations (should be made).
Having offered food with the waters of dpoSdna (prayer re¬
peated before and after eating), one should drink the rest
of the water.
23. You are an ambrosial seat. Oblations for the vital winds
should be made as before. Oblations to the apdtuiy samdna,
uddnoy &nd vydna. Having eaten food, water should be sipped.
(The mantra for that) is “you are the ambrosial covering.’*
Thus the food and the winds in the body (are worshipped).

CHAPTER SEVENTYEIGHT
Mode of investiture of the sacred thread for the deity
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe the (mode of) investiture of the sacred
thread (for the deity) which completes the acts of worship etc.
(It is of two kinds), the daily routine (without any motive) and
the other being undertaken to be done with a motive.
2. It should be done on the eighth or fourteenth day of the
bright or dark fortnights in the months of isS4ha (July-August)
or SrSvat^a (August-September) or bhadrapada (SeptemberOctober).
3-4. Or it should be done on the first day of either fort¬
nights during the (above) months upto kdrttika (OctoberNovember), for (the images of) the fire god, Brahma, Ambika,
Ibhasya (Gai^esa), Naga (lord of serpents), Skanda, Arka
(Sun), iSulin, Durga, Yama, Indra, Govinda (manifestation of
Vi?nu), Smara (God of love), Sambhu (Siva) and other gods.
(The threads should be) made of gold, silver and copper in the
kfta (first one among the four eras) and other (eras).
5-6. A cotton (thread) or silk thread or the one made of
(fibres of) lotus should be used in the Aa/t (^^a) (the last). The
pranava (om), moon, fire-god, Brahma, serpent-god, Guha (son
of Siva), Hari (Vijnu), Sarve^a and other gods would reside in
the nine component strings (of the thread). The uttama
(excellent) and other classes (madhyama and adhama) would be
those which contain one hundred and eight (strings) or half of
that or a quarter of that.
7. Or it should be made to contain eighty-one or thirtyeight or fifty strings having binding knots at equal intervals.
8. The breadth of the thread should be twelve or eight or
four finger lengths or else it should be equal to the breadth of the
liAga.
9. (In length) it should be touching the pedestal (of the
image) or (should be equal) to a quarter of the length of the
deity as a whole. The descent of the Ganges should be accomp¬
lished by washing with pure (water).
10-11. The knots should be made with (the mantra of)
Vflma (deva), purified with that of Agh<mi, dyed with the paste

Agni Pwrifya
of saffron, sandal, musk, yellow pigment, camphor, turmeric
and red chalk etc. with that of (Tat) punisa. There should be
ten knots or equal to the number of strings. *
12-13. The inter-space between the knots (should be)
one, two or four finger lengths in such a way as to make it ele¬
gant. The knots are known as sada^iva, manonmanl, prakfti
(nature), pauru^I (relating to the purufa), vird (valorous),
apardjitd (invincible), jayd (victorious), vijayd (victorious),
ajitd (unconquered), saddiivd (always auspicious), manonmani
(expanding intellect), and sarvamukhl (omniscient) which
confer good.
1 4. The sacred thread for the moon, fire-god and sun should
be done similar to that for l§iva, in the heart, or in their own
image or in a book or in that of the preceptor or the gat^as.
15. In the same way there should be one in each one of the
pitchers of the door-keeper and the presiding deity of the direc¬
tions etc. The sacred thread for the lidga should measure from
one to nine cubits in length.
16-18. The number of knots (in a thread) of the vfddha
(class) should be twenty-eight, the number for other classes
being eighteen and eight respectively, their breadth in all being
proportionate with the breadth of the liAga. On the seventh or
thirteenth day of a fortnight (one should) become clean and do
his daily rites. Then (he) should adorn the place of worship with
flowers, cloth etc. in the evening and should perform the naimittika (rites done with some motive), especially the waters of ob¬
lation.
19. After having taken possession of the sacred ground, the
sim-god should be worshipped. After rinsing his mouth, the pre¬
ceptor should do the rite of accomplishment (mentioning the
names of the parts of the body along with the mantras). Water
should be offered with respect with the pra^ava (the syllable
om).
20. The threshold should be sprinkled with water with the
mantra of the weapon (and) the worship should be duly commen¬
ced from the east. Hdm (obeisance) to the entrance to the iAt/fkald (digit of peace) ; (obeisance) to the tndjfdkald (d^t of know¬
ledge).
21 . (Obeisance) to the digit of ncm-actioii, tq^ the bne digit

known as existence. The warden of the god should be worship¬
ped at the top sides of those doors, two at each (as follows) :
22. (Obeisance) to Nandin, to Mah5kkla, to Bhrngin, to
Gana, to Vr^bha, to Skanda, to Devi and to Capda. in order.
23. In the case of worship being undertaken without
any motive, the preceptor, having entered and worshipped the
guardian deities at the western entrance, and after purification
of materials, should offer water of respect.
24. After having done the sprinkling (of water) etc., and
collected the materials for the rite, consecration with darbhot
dSrvd and flowers should be made with the mantras like hfd etc.
25. After having permeated thus with the essence of Siva,
one should place it on his head. I am Siva, the first being, omni¬
scient and I have the importance in the rites.
26. The preceptor (holding) the sword of knowledge in
his hand should deeply contemplate the lord. Subsequently he
should go to the south-western direction and pour (the wash¬
ings etc.) with his face turned towards the north).
27-28. The respectful water offering, the paftcagavya (the
five things got from a cow) and all other (articles of worship)
which have been purified by means of rites at the end of cross¬
roads and by divine look etc. and put in the sacrificial pavilion,
•one should collect the bunch of kuJa lying scattered, place them
over the little jar in the north-eastern direction.
29. The presiding deities of the place should be worshipped
in the south-west and (Goddess) Lak^mi at the entrance. The
pitcher is placed on all kinds of grains facing the west.
30. Then the bull-riding God and tljc pitcher (aarddAonf')
placed on the lion (should be worshipped) with the pra^uofa (om).
Lord ^iva should be worshipped in the jar with his attendant
gods and the wesqions in the vardAani.
31-32. Indra and other guardian deities of directions,
Brahmk) Viyigiu and iSiva (should be wcurshipped) in the (differ¬
ent) directions. Having taken the vatdhanl (in the hand) behkvl the pitcher, the preceptor should read out die mandate of
Lord $iva in all direetka^ commencing with the east and
ending witk the no^'Oast. (The entire grtnind) (should be
.rondo waO ^ ^ unbroken Iknv of water (sdong) with the reci-
>tatioa of nrineuMd
3i3-35L This ahmilfi be .mnur^ anHUid in all direetkaw

Agni Purd^
for the sake of protection as if it were the weapons. Having
placed the pitcher in the east, the lord should be worshipped in
the pitcher placed foremost at the front firmly, while there should
be one for the weapons to the left of it. The weapons located
with the pranava {pm) (should be worshipped with the vardhani.
Then the union of the two, the base and the linga should be
accomplished by (showing) the linga mudrd (posture of the fingers
representing the linga). Then the sword of knowledge should be
dedicated to the (consecrated) pitcher. The principal mantra
should then be repeated.
36-37. Protection should be spelled out with a tenth (of the
mantra) in the vardhani. After having worshipped Lord Ganela
(lord of the gaiias) in the north-west and Lord Hara (Visnu)
with the five sweet things (milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey),
the fire sacred to Siva should be worshipped in the sacrificial
pit as before and bathed after having made the sacrificial gruel
duly purified by the sampata (residual) oblation.
38. It should be divided with the kuSa into three parts res¬
pectively consecrated to the god, the fire-god, and the soul, of
which the former two should be offered to Lord Siva and the
fire-god and the part consecrated to the soul should be kept apart.
39. (The stick for) cleansing the teeth should be offered
on the east by (repeating the mantras of) the weapon and arrow,
and (a piece of) earth on the west or south with the (a) ghora
and Hkhd {mantras).
40. Water reduced in quantity (should be offered) on the north
with the sadyojdta and the hfd {mantras). Perfumed water (should be
offered) on the north-east with the vSma{deva)dan.&iiras {mantras).
41. The five things got from a cow and flowers like paliSa
and lotus (should be cast) all around. Flowers should be offered
on the north-east and the yellow pigment on the south-east.
42. The agallochimi (should be offered) on the south-western
direction and all the articles for oblation in four equal proportions
on the north-west with the sadyojdta (monfra) and with the knSa.
43-44. (An anchorite’s) stick, rosary, loin-cloth, alms bowl,
collyrium, saffron, oil, a small stick (for applying the collyrium),
comb, betel (leaf), and mirror should be offered to the image of
the god. The yellow pigment (should be offered) on the north.
45. He should offer a scat, a pair of sandals, a vessel, an
upper cloth and an umbrella on the north-cast with the mantra
of the lord for the satisfaction of liana (one olthe five forms of

l§iva). The sacrificial porridge together with the clarified butter
and perfiimes etc. should be offered on the cast.
46. Having gathered the sacred threads and sprinkled them
with the waters offered as respect, they should be led to the pre¬
sence of fire after purifying them with the sarhhitS mantras.
47-48. After having covered them with the hide of the black
antelope and remembering the eternal blissful one, the witness
of all deeds, the protector, the one without any change, that
!§iva, with the application of sva and ha {mantras) and sar/ihitlt
mantras f the sacred threads should be purified. Twenty-one water
vessels (should be got ready).
49. The room (for worship) etc. should be girdled by
threads. Perfumes etc. should be offered to the sun-god, (who had
already been) worshipped. After having rinsed the mouth, and
doing the assigning, the water should be offered with respect.
50. Then (the worshipper should worship) the vdstu god
along with the weapons, the guardians of the world, Nandin
and others by (mentioning) the name of each in the pitcher of
(lord) Siva after adding perfumes.
51-52. Vardhani, lord of obstacles, the preceptor should
be worshipped. Then the sacred thread smeared with (the
paste of) all herbs and perfumed with the flowers and dUrvS
and purified with the mantras should be held between the
folded palmis. Om ! (salutation to you) the regulation for
rectifying any omission in regulations.
53. O lord ! I invoke you and that which yields the desired
boon. O lord of entity and non-entity ! You bless me,
one who worships, with that success.
54-55. O Sambhu (Siva) ! Obeisance to you at all times
and by all means. Be pleased with me. O lord of celestiab I
You have been invoked along with the goddess, lords of ga^oSf
lords of mantrasy guardians of the world and attendant gods.
I invoke you. This sacred thread is for you in the early morning.
56. O supreme lord ! By your command I shall do the
prescribed routine. Thus one should invoke the lord and do the
erniftikaraija^ rite by drawing in the breath.
57. Having recited the principal mantra for Siva, it should
be dedicated to (lord) Siva. After completing the recitatiem
1. Mental identification of the parb of oncfihody mth those aS die lord.

220 AgnPurO^
(of ffuznfra), praises, and obeisance, (lord) Sambhu (Siva) should
be bid adieu. •
58-59. Having made oblation with the third part of the
gruel in the fire (permeated with the essence) of Siva, (oblation
should be made) ibr the residents in the quarters, the lords of
the quarters, the spirits, the mothers, Rudras, guardians
of the region. Obeisance. This oblation is given. The oblation
is made for the (guardian) elephants of the quarters east etc.
and to the regions.
60. After having rinsed the mouth, the oblation should be
done for the rectification of omissions in the observances. After
doing the final oblation, the fire should be put out.
61-62. Then om oblations to fire (god), to Soma, om obla¬
tions to fire and Soma. So also to fire-god, the accomplisher.
After having made four oblations, the imion of the gods respecti-
■vely worshipped in the sacrificial pit and the mystic circle of
lord Siva should be brought about.
63-64. Then the union should be made by the method of
assigning in the different parts of the body. Then the sacred
threads should be placed in a vessel made of bamboo along with
(the mantras of) weapons and armour and consecrated with the
{mantras) of the digits. The six articles of worship should be
•consecrated with the principal brahma {mantra) {Om). (The
mantras of) the heart, armour and weapon should also be united.
65. Having girdled the vessel with threads and worshipped
it with the {mantras of) the parts of the body it should be offered
to the lord of the universe with extreme devotion for the sake of
protection.
66. Aih^ it has been worshipped with flowers, incense etc.
and two theological books ^ve been submitted, one should
go, near the feet of the preceptor and offer the sacred thread with
•Motion.
67. Having come out of the place and rinsed the mouth*
one should worship five things got fiom a cow, the gruel
and the stick finr cleansing the teeth qn three circ^ nutde with
the cow-dung.
68. Affer rinsing the one shov^ remain
a^ake singing stni^ and rcpea,ting hymns and should
deep at the epd aj^er hating on a bed of dnjka, ah the ^dthe
•omtemplatmg on the loid>

69. Even one, who is desirous of cessation of births and
deaths, should undertake in this way lying only on a bed of
ashes, £uting and self-controlled.
CHAPTER SEVENTYNINE
Investiture of the sacred thread
The Lord said :
1 . Having got up early in the morning , and finishing bath¬
ing the worshipper should enter the sacrificial shed afier com--
pleting the twilight worship and remainii^ composed.
2. Having collected the sacred thread, and the deity not
being given farewell, the sacred thread should be placed in a
spotless vessel within a mystic diagram in the north-east.
3. Then the lord of celesti^ should be bid farewell
and the materials of worship should be removed (from the body
of the deity). He should again perform the two rites as befcnre on
the cleaned groimd.
4. Then the gods — sun, the guardian deities of the entrance*
and of the directions the pitcher, likna, 8iva and the fire-god
should specially be worshipped, as usually done in the namittikl
(done with some motives) rites, elaborately.
5. (Having done) the tarpaifa (appeasing) rite with the
mantras and the oblation of expiation one hundred and eight
times with (the mantras of) the arrows, the final oblation should
be made slowly.
6. Having offered the sacred thread to the sun god and rlnsii^ the mouth, (the worshipper) should offer it to the guardian
deities of the entrance and of the directions, the sacrificial pitcher
and vardhani etc.
7. Then having sat in his own seat in the presence of lord
8ambhu (Siva), (the worshipper) shbuld offer the sacred thread
to one*s own self, the ge^ the priest and fire-god.
8-9. Om O lord ! soul of the time, whatever has been
ordained by you in my observances that which has been done,
oontradicto^, and omitted^ and that which has been done*

222 Agni Purd^
secretly O !§ambhu let the contradictory thing become normal,
the contradictory deed become refined, by/ this omniscient
sacred thread and by your wish. ,
10. Om ! Complete this sacrificial observance ! Oblations
to the lord of regulations, the principle of the soul, that which
imderlines the natural principle that is protected by the lotus*
born Brahma.
11-15. Having recited the principal mantra upto the end,
lord Siva should be worshipped with the sacred thread. Again
in the principle of knowledge which is the end of all the learning
and which is governed by Vi§nu, one should invest the sacred
thread having recited the mantras of Vi§nu. Similarly, in the
principle relating to !§iva, he should recite the mantras of Siva
and invest that deity with the sacred thread. O man of good
practices ! In the case of those governed by all the deities one
should recite the principal mantra upto the end after having
recited the mantras of l§iva and the descent of the Ganges should
be accomplished. In the case of those who desire to get release
(from the cycle of births) it is said that the sacred thread should
bcinvested with the of Siva relating to the knowledge
of the soul. For those who desire to get enjoyment it has been
pointed out (that the sacred thread should be invested) duly
with (the of) the principles of Siva. The should be
uttered ending with ‘oblation’ or ‘obeisance*.
16. Orh hdm oblations to lord Siva, the lord of the prin¬
ciple of soul. 0th hSm oblations to (lord) Siva, the lord of the
principle of learning. Orh hdm oblations to (lord) Siva, lord of
th^ principle of Siva. Orh hdm oblations to lord Siva, the lord
cf all principles (of the imiverse). Having made obeisance to
the descent of the Ganges, he should pray to it with folded palms.
“You are the refuge for all being^. You reside in the movable
and immovable beings.”
17. “O Supreme lord I You are the witness (of the acts)
of beii^ by pervading inside the beings. By deed or thought
or words I have no other being to resort to except you.^*
18-19. “O Great lord ! Whatever has been done defec¬
tive in the mandra or deeds or in the materials (of worship) or
in the repetition and worship in the daily (observancen), may
you complete them. O Supreme lord I You are well-puri¬
fied. You are pure and destroyer of sins. Every being in the

universe, the immovable and movable have been purified by
you.
20-22. “Olord ! Whatever has been made defectively by me
in my observances (let it be free) from becoming useless. By
your mandate let all of them become united, being tied in a
string.” Having conveyed the recitation (of the mantras) to the
lord and praising him devotedly, one should take up the vow
after saluting the preceptor and as directed by him. (It should
be) for four months, (or) three months, (or) three days or one
day.
23-24. After having saluted the lord and seeking excuse,
the votary should go near the sacriheial pit and cast four sacred
threads for Siva located in the fire, and worship with dowers,
incense, unbroken rice etc. The oblation and holy thread should
be presented to the Rudras.
25-26. Having entered inside and praising Siva (the lord)
should be bid adieu with salutations. Ailer having made the
expiatory oblation and oblation of sweet porridge, the final
oblation should be offered and (lord) Siva located in the dre
should be bid farewell. Having performed oblations with
the vydhftis (the syllables om bhG^, om bhuvab etc. ) , the fire should
be obstructed with niffhurd (scornful goddess).
27-31. Then four oblations should be offered to the fire-god
and others. Oblation should be given outside along with a sacred
thread to the guardian deities of all directions. Two theological
books and a sacred thread should be offered. Om, ham, bh&h
oblations. Om, him, bhuvafi oblations. Om, h&m svafi oblations.
Om, ham, bhUrbhuvab svafy oblations. After having done the obla¬
tions with the vydhjrtis, four oblations should be made (as follows ) .
Om, hdm oblations to the fire-god. Om, h&m oblations to the firegod, one who accomplishes all desires. The preceptor should
be worshipped as lord Siva with clothes, ornaments and bed.
All annual rites etc. of the performer (become) fruitful if the
preceptor gets satisfied. The Supreme lord had said so. After
having placed the thread on the body of the preceptor thus,
the brahmins should be fed and offered clothes etc. with devo¬
tion. “O lord of celestials ! May lord Siva get pleased by
this gift of mine.”
32. After having bathed in the morning (the investor)
should perform his daily rites of prayer and worship and take

224 Affti Purlk$a
leave of (god) Siva after having worshipped him and the sacred
threads with eight flowers.
33. After having performed the nitya and naifhittika rites
as before in full, the sacred threads should be placed and lord
Siva should be worshipped in the fire after obeisance.
34. The expiatory oblation should then be done with the
mantras of the weapons. The final oblation should then be given.
One who is desirous of enjoyment should then submit the firuits
of his acts to lord Siva.
35. “May this rite of mine become fruitful by your grace !**
One who is desirous of release (from the cycle of births) should
do this act (as follows) ; “O lord ! May there be no bondage
for me.”
36. (Lord) Siva located in the fire should be united with
lord Siva (in the solar plexus of the investor) by (assign¬
ment on limbs). The essence of fire should be drawn in one’s
heart and the fire should be discharged.
37. After having rinsed the mouth well, (he) should enter
inside (the shed) and permeate the water of the pitcher with
the essence of Siva and bid farewell (after saying) “Pardon
38. After having taken leave of the guardian deities of the
world, the sacred thread should be taken from the lord and plac¬
ed on the Gande^vara (form of the lord) after worship.
39. The materials of worship along with the sacred thread
should be submitted to him. In the alternative lord Canda
should be worshipped on the sacrificial ground in the prescribed
manner as before.
40. “Whatever annual rite has been done by me defectively,
may that become perfect by your mandate, O lord I Canda !
my master !”
41. Having thus submitted to the lord of celestials, he
should be given farewell after obeisance and praise. After
baying removed the materials of worship (firom the images)
and becoming pure, the votary should bathe (the image) and
worship (lord) Siva. A man who remains even at a distance of
^y^yojanas (siyojana is equal to about eight miles) firom the pre¬
ceptor (is deemed to be) pure.

CHAPTER EIGHTY
Mode of investiture with the fibres of Damanaka
The Lord said:
1 . I shall describe the mode of investiture with damanaka
fibres for the lord. It has to be performed as before. Once, the
celestials were harassed by Bhairava, a form born of the anger
of lord Hara (Siva).
2-5. Hence, he was cursed by the foe of Tripura (Siva)
(saying), “Become a stum”. Being pleased (after propitiation)
the lord said, “Whoever propitiates you would get full benefits
and not otherwise.” The votary should address the tree by the
(following) words of Bhava (Siva) after having worshipped it
with the vedic hymns on the seventh or thirteenth day (of a
fortnight). “O (tree) born of the grace of (lord) Hara (Siva) !
You be present here. For the sake of work of Siva you have
to be carried (home) as per the mandate of lord Siva.” (The
tree) should be invited home and the consecration should be done
in the evening.
6. Having worshipped the sun-god, Sankara (Siva) and
fire-god as prescribed, the root (of the tree) should be placed on
the west of the lord alongwith the (clump of) earth.
7. The stump (may be placed) on the left or on the head
(of the image), the dh&trl (myrabolan) on the north, the broken
leaves on the south and its fiower on the east.
8. The fruits and roots should be placed in a cup. Lord
Siva should be worshipped in the north-east. The lord should
be invoked after having placed the five articles of worship
in the folded palms and (later) placing them on one’s head.
9. “O lord of celestials ! You have been invoked by
me in the early morning ! O lord ! the merit of this penance
has to become fully fruitful by your mandate.”
10. Afier having kept the sacred remnants in the vessel
covered, (the votary) should worship the lord of the universe
with flowers etc., afler having bathed early in the morning.
11»12. After having performed the nitya and naimittika
rites, he should then worship with the damana. After having kept
the remnants in the folded pahm, lord Siva, fire-god and the

Agni Purd^a
preceptor should be worshipped with (the mantras) of the lord
of the principle of knowledge of soul, the principal mantras of the
lord ending with (the names of) livara, with four handfuls (of
offering). “OfA haum (obeisance) to the lord of sacrifice. Com¬
plete the sacrifice. Obeisance to the holder of the spear.”
13. “O lord ! Whatever has been in excess or in short in
my acts let all that be complete by this investiture of the damanaka by me”. (Whoever performs this) would go to heaven after
having obtained the benefits of all that is got in the month of
Caitra (April-May ) .
CHAPTER EIGHTYONE
Mode of spiritual initiation
Lord said :
1-3. I shall describe the spiritual initiation for the sake
of enjoyment and release from bondage, destroying one’s sins and
shattering bondages of impurities and illusion; by which, know¬
ledge is gained by the disciple, that initiation (is considered)
as yielding enjoyment and release. It is considered to be of three
kinds. The first one is vijMtakala (cognisant of the beatitudes).
The second one is pralayakala (a psychic state from which one can
be cognisant of those attributes). The third one is sakala (cloud¬
ed by worldly impurity). These deserve initiation in scriptures.
The first (category) among these is free from all mental impuri¬
ties, while the second is free from sinful acts.
4. The third variety can (hold communion) by prayer
with the region from kali to the earth. The initiation is also
considered to be of two kinds — devoid of any hold and possessing
a hold.
5. (The initiation) independent of any (external) aid is for
the first two categories (among the three) and that which is
dependent on any (external) aid is for (the third category)
sakala (endowed with a form). (The initiation in the first sort)
is done by the worship of Sambhu (iSiva) alone without any
dependence.

6. That which is remembered as independent (is achieved)
by an impact of strong piercing force by resorting to the image in
the form of the preceptor and by rending asunder the (veil of)
illusion.
7-8. That (initiation) in which Lord Sambhu ($tva)
does it, is spoken as dependant. The spiritual initiation is said
to be of four kinds — sabijd (together with imparting of some
mantra) t bljavarjitd (without any mantra) ^ sddhikdrd (with some
governance), anadhikard (without any governance). They are
described (now). A sabijd (type) is that in which the disciple
is subject to the control of code of conduct laid down in the scrip¬
tures.
9-10. The nirbijd (variety) is intended for the incapable
which is devoid of any code of conduct of the scriptures. The
type of initiation shall be in the case of rites of daily
nature and those done with a motive for the disciple and the pre¬
ceptor. The nirbija type of initiation is in those cases (where the
disciples) possess characteristics as my two sons.
1 1 . The niradhikdrikd type of initiation allows one to under¬
take rites in which the disciple does not aspire for the fruits.
This (initiation) may be of two kinds marked by the individual
characteristics.
12. One consists of performance of acts preceded by (pre¬
parations of) sacrificial pits and mystical diagrams. The other
one is composed of knowle^e which is achieved by the operation
of the mind.
13. In this way an initiation may be made by a preceptor
who has the right (to administer). The skandadik$d m3iy he done
by the preceptor after doing daily rites.
14-17. (The preceptor) should purify the place from the
spirits remaining in his own seat, having the argkjfa (waters of
respect) in the lotus palm and worshipping the guardian deities
of the threshold with jnta^aoa {mantra) and after removing the
obstacles and placing the wesq^ns at the threshold. The special
argl^a offering should consist of sesamum, rice, white mustard,
kuSaf dOrvdf unbroken rice> mixed with water, barley, milk and
water. Then the materials (for worship) (should be done) pure
with that water. (After puttii^) the mark and the worship of
the selfandofthe seat, the materials (of worship) such as the five

228 Agni PwrSga
things got from a cow, fried peuidy, sandal, white mustard,^
sacred ashes, dUrvUy unbrc^en rice and kuia should be purified as
before with mantras. *
18. The pure fried paddy which has been scattered should
be consecrated with mantras of weapons along with incense and
consecrated with waters with the mantras of implements and
covered by armour.
19-21. Having made darbhas into different shapes of missiles
so as to number thirtysix bunches, each measuring (the length
of) a palm, which are capable of warding off multitudes of obs¬
tacles, and after having repeated the mantra of the weapon of
8iva seven times on the sword of knowledge continuously and
having located in one’s self, lord 8iva, the basis of all crea¬
tion, the most sought after, and devoid of any form, one should
deem himself as “I am (lord) Siva”. After having placed
turban on the head one should adorn his body (in the following
way).
22. He should besmear his right arm with the sandal paste.
The lord should be worshipped in the prescribed way. This is
how the head of Siva is got ready.
23-25. Having located the luminous lord on one’s own
head with the mantras of Siva, the doer should conceive himself
as not different from (lord) Siva as follows: (He is) the witness
of all deeds in the mystic diagram, the protector of sacrifice
in the pitcher, the recipient of oblations in the fire and the
liberator of the disciple from the bonds and the benefactor in
one’s own self,” such that the lord is of six kinds of basis. One
should consider (himself) as ‘T am he”. (Lord) Bhava (Siva)
should again be made firmly established (in one).
26. (Then) that person should remain facing the south¬
west holding the sword of knowledge and sprinkle the sacrificial
shed with the waters of respectful offering and the five things got
from the cow.
27. By purification at the crossroads and by (divine) look,
{darbhas) should be purified. Having thrown the scattered
darbhas there, {darbhas) should be gathered.
28. A seat should be made ready with them in the north*^
east (direction) for the pitcher. The presiding deity of the place
and the celestials should be worshipped in ^e south-west aiui
(Goddess) Lak?m! at the entrance (of the sacrificial shed).

29-30. (Goddess) Purayanti of the form of sacrificial
shed should be worshipped in the west with gems and with the
hfd {mantra). Lord iSambhu (Siva) should be worshipped in a
pitcher placed in the north-east over the grains and containing
water, gems and a piece of cloth (over the mouth) with the face
of the worshipper turned towards the west. (GkKldess) Sakti
(should be worshipped) in the south of the pitcher. (Ck>ddess)
Vardhan!, in the form of a sword and riding a lion should be
worshipped in the west.
3 1 -32. Having worshipped (with their respective names and
the hfd {mantra) the (gods) Indra and the guardian deities of
the directions ending with Vi^^u placed on the pra$ava (om),
riding their respective vehicles and holding their respective
weapons, that (the sacrificial jar) should be carried round in
front of pitchers and an uninterrupted flow of water (should
be made) after making a circumambulation.
33. After having recited the principal mantray the mandate
’of (Lord) Siva should be conveyed to the guardian deities. The
jar should be duly consecrated and it should be held.
34. After having worshipped lord Sankara (Siva) in the
pitcher placed on a Arm seat along with the retinue, the weapon
should be worshipped in the vardhani after being placed to purify
the path.
0th hafy to the seat of the weapon hUm phaf. Om Om Saluta¬
tion to the embodiment of weapon. OiA hUm phaf obeisance to
the Pafupata weapon. Om obeisance to the heart. 0th Mth hum
phat obeisance to the head. Othyadt hum pha$ obeisance ^ the tuft.
Oth gfhh hum pha$ obeisance to the atinour. Om phaf hum phaf
obeiiance to the weapons.
35. The weapon should be meditated upon as possessing
ft^ces and having teeth in the company of the Gkxldess
Sakti, effu^nt like crores of suns and wieMing a mace, spear and
sword.
36. By (showing) Hhgammkd (a posture of fingers
denoting Hh^a), the union of the bhaga (base) and the li^a
is acoompUsheci. l%e pitcher should be touched with the littln
fin^, the weapon with the heart and vardkant with the clen¬
ch^ fist.
The tmdhaai should first be touched with die clenched
fill % the worlds e»ati»ice>.

230 Agni Pura^a
The sword of knowledge should be offered for protecting the
mouth of the pitcher. •
38. After the repetition of the principal (mantra) hund¬
red times, the weapon should be placed in the pitcher. A tenth
part of it should then be conveyed to the vardhani for the sake of
protection.
39. “O lord of the universe ! This sacrificial shed has
been raised with great effort. O lord ! the sustainer of all
sacrifices ! This has to be protected by you.”
40. The lord Gana placed on the pranava {om) and having
four arms should be worshipped in the north-west by offering
water. Having worshipped lord Siva on the ground, the
worshipper should proceed near the pit.
41-42. Remaining in contemplation for the sake of pleasing
the mantras, and having placed the water of respectful offering,
perfumes, ghee etc. on the left and the twigs, darbha, sesamum
etc. on the right, and having purified the pit, fire, ladle etc.
as before, (the worshipper) should think of the greatness of the
elevated-faced (god) in the heart and worship lord Siva in
the sacrificial fire.
43. After having performed ff^finyasa (assignment re¬
presenting creation) in one’s body, in the pitcher of lord
Siva, on the sacrificial ground, in the hid and (the body of) the
disciple, purification and meditation (should be done) in the
prescribed way.
44. Having contemplated the face of the (same) measure
of the pit, the hfd bija {mantras) are repeated and oblations made
for the seven tongues of the fire.
45-46. The principal mantras for the tongue (should have)
the last letters without (the letter )*ra’, and should have the sound
of six ‘ra’s and the moon, a point and the tuft. Hiranya, Kanaka,
Rakta, KrsnS, Suprabha, Atirikta and Bahurupa should in
order (be placed) in the directions north-east, east, south-east
and west.
47. Oblations should be done with the sweet things such as
milk etc. in the rites to appease (god) or seeking welfare and with
oil-cakes, flour, one’s dress and sour-gruel in the rites performed
for harming some one.
48. An angry man shottld offer oblations of*salt, goat’s

curd, pungent oil, thorns and crooked twigs along with vedic
syllables.
49. Yak?ini (a goddess) becomes certainly favourable by
doing oblations with the buds of kadamba. One should offer obla¬
tions with bandhSka, kimhdea and other (flowers) for attracting
and subjugating another person.
50. The bilva leaves (sacred in the worship of Siva) are
offered for getting kingdom, the pdfala and campaka (flowers)
for the sake of wealth, lotus flowers for the sake of (becoming)
a sovereign (and) eatables for wealth.
51. Durvd (is offered) for the cure of diseases, flowers
and for exercising sway over all beings, and the
Amra flower for arresting fever.
52. (An oblation made with) the mflyutljaya} mantra would
conquer death. By the oblation of sesamum there would be pros¬
perity. Propitiation of Rudra (8iva) (should be made) for
all sorts of appeasement. Then the subject of (present) discussion
is narrated.
53. Eight hundred oblations with the principal mantra
and a tenth of it with the subordinate ones should be made.
Appeasement should be made with the principal mantra. The
final oblation should be offered as before.
54. Then the repetition (of mantra) should be made hund¬
red times for each disciple for the entry of the disciple and
for the sake of good omens after the removal of bad omens.
55. As before oblation should be made two hundred times
with the principal mantra. One oblation should be made with
the principal {mantra) and the mantras, of eight weapons con¬
cluding with (the syllable) svdhd (oblation).
56. The illumination (rite) should be done with the repe¬
tition of mantras of the tuft ending with (the syllable) phaf.
Oblation should be done with the mantras like Om, krim, oblations
to 8iva.
57-58. Then the illumination should be done with (the
mantras) like Om, Arfhn, hraum^ Arfm, to !§iva, krUm^phaf. Then the
vessel for preparing the gruel should be washed with waters (made
sacred by the mantras) of 8iva and covered by an armour. It
I . Beginning widi Tryambakarii yiy&mahe etc.

Jgni Purdpa
should be besmeared with sandal paste and a girdle of darbha
consecrated with the {mantra) of armour and weapon.,
59. After having placed the seat with (the mantra of the)
armour, in a semi-circular mystic diagram, l§iva, whose presence
is accomplished in the form of an image, should be worshipped
with flowers of sentiment.
60-62. (Worship should be made) alternatively in the vessel
whose mouth has been covered with a cloth with flowers got from
outside. Over the oven placed to the right of the pit and having
its mouth facing the west and previously consecrated with the
‘syWahlts o{ ahaAk&ra (egoism) and (the two sides of the oven)
having been contemplated as made up of righteousness and
unrighteousness over which (the mantra) of the soul of man has
been repeated, the vessel should be placed after having repeated
(the mantra) of the weapon and sprinkled with the urine of cow.
The vessel (should have been) cleaned with the milk of cow and
(the mantra) of the weapon and repetition of the prds&da {mantra)
hundred times.
63. Rice and grains such as the Syiandka etc. should be cast
into it. If (the initiation) is to be given for a single disciple flve
handfuls (of grains) (should be thrown).
64. A handful of grains should be added. The above
grains should be protected with the mantras of the Are or that of
the armour.
65- 66. The gruel should be cooked in the flame of Siva on
the eastern face with (the recitation of the) principal {mantra).
Then having filled the ladle with the clarified butter and heat¬
ed in the oven, it should be ofiiered (to the fire) with the
hitd mantras ending with (the eiq^ression) *‘<^>lations for the sake
of satisfaction”. The vessel should he placed in the mystic circles
after having consecrated with the darbha.
67. Having covered it by the (uttering of) ptaaaoa
(syllable om), it should be besmeared with the kid (marUra).
Thusitwmild become cool afier having received a cool plastering.
66- 69. (Oblationi) should be ojBBned with the recitation of
sarkJ^ mantra emee towards the dueqde. Al^ having made
oblation fiur the sake aeatt etc. cd the west ai the aacrificial pit and the xnystic ddgrapbi the residdal o6^ing should
be inade with the la^ and gstrifleation shouhl he pddbfnaedby
(the recitation oO roeMiAi (iiaiNir>> Thf gfuol shoidd he

taken out from the vessel with (the recitation of) the (syllabic)
vausaf.
70. The act of making the gruel into ambrosia should be
done by showing dhenu~mudra (formation made by fingers
resembling the cow) and it must be allowed to cool on the ground.
A part of the gruel consisting of clarified butter (should be set
apart) for the disciples and a part for the lord Fire.
71. A part containing honey and clarified butter should be
made over to the guardian deities of the worlds. These are three
parts. These should be offered to them with the hfd {mantra)
ending with obeisance. The water for rinsing the mouth (should
also be given) with the same (mantra).
72-73. The final oblation should be offered as laid down
after having made hundred offerings with clarified butter along
with the recitation of mantra. Having drawn a mystic diagram
on the east of the sacrificial pit or in the midst of pitchers of
Lord Sambhu (Siva), Rudra, the divine mothers and the ganas
(attendant gods of Siva) and after having made offerings
with the hrd (mantra), the worshipper should identify himself
with God Siva in the pitcher sacred to Siva even though he has
not received a command.
74-76. He should think himself as the omniscient who stands
above all things around. (He should also think) “The place
of union is a part of mine and I am the presiding deity at the
sacrifice. I am lord Siva”. Thus the performer should come out
of the sacrificial shed with the sense of I-ness. Having made
the disciple to be seated on the seat of darbha already placed
on a mystic diagram with the mantra of the weapon and duly
consecrated with the pranava (syllable otrt), and (providing him)
with white upper garment after the bath, (the disciple) should
be made to face north for emancipation and the cast for
enjoyment.
77. Having made (the disciple) to sit erect ahd face the east,
(the preceptor) should look at him from foot to tuft if (the
initiation) is for emancipation and in the reverse direction if it is
for enjoyment.
78-7d. (The preceptor) should look (at the disciple)
graciously extending the splendour of Siva. Having sprinkled
water with (the fnantra of) the weapon in order to accomplish
purification by (means of) consecrated wateri the disciple should

Agra PurO^
be struck with the ashes (accompanied) by (the mantra of) the
weapon for the purpose of bathing with the ashes and for the
destruction of obstacles and sins by the union of cremation and
destruction.
80-81. Having sprinkled him again with the water of the
weapon for the sake of consummation and having repeated the
bathing (mantra) of the weapon above the navel with the tip of
kuSdy one should touch thrice under the navel with the
(recitation of the) principal (mantra) fo: the destroyal of sin and
with the mantra of the arrow for the breaking of bonds.
82. Then (the preceptor) should locate lord Siva in the
body (of the disciple) along with his seat and attendants by
offering worship w'ith flowers and by looking into his eyes or
by the heart.
83-84. Having tied the seat with a white cloth with (the
recitation of) mantra^ (and) having made him enter by means
of circumambulation of Siva, the seat along with the cloth
should be given. (The preceptor) should exhibit the sarhhdra
mudrd (posture with fingers indicating gathering) and communi¬
cate his own self with that form in the lotus of the heart (of the
disciple).
85. Having retained that (form of Siva) in the purified
body and having located (it there), it should be worshipped in
the east facing the forehead of the disciple with the principal
mantra.
86. The hand of the disciple should be converted into a
hand sacred to (lord Siva) and permeated with the essence of
(lord) Siva by telling the Siva mantra, such a hand being known
to convey (the worshipper) to the region of (lord) Siva, and to
supply him with the only means of worshipping (lord) Siva.
87. Then after having removed all other materials of
worship, one should cast flowers on lord Siva in the company
of attendant gods of lord Siva invoking his presence with
mantras.
88-89. The preceptor should name brahmins in the
usual order or as desired. After having made (the disciple)
to bow to the pitcher and the vardhani (a kind of vessel), (the
preceptor) should make (the disciple) seated on the right near
the sacred fire facing the north. He should theiVr meditate on

the sufumnd (an artery in the body) as emerging out of the body
of disciple.
90-93. Having placed the tip of darbha on the right hand
duly consecrated by the base of darbha and resting on the
symbol of one’s own self, that base (of kuSa) should rest on
one’s own knee while the tip (should rest) on the cock-banner.
Having entered the heart of the disciple by breathing out the
wind while repeating the mantra of the tuft and re-entered his
own heart by breathing in and having thus established commu¬
nion again with the fire of lord Siva, the preceptor) should offer
three oblations with the hfd {mantra) for the accomplishment of
that comm'inion. One should make hundred oblations with the
principal mantra for the sake of making the hand (of the disciple)
permeated with the essence of Siva. Being thus initiated in reli¬
gious practices one would become eligible to perform the worship
of lord Siva.
CHAPTER EIGHTYTWO
Mode of performing the purificatory initiation :
The Lord said :
1. “O Sanmukha (six-faced one)^ ! Listen to me ! I
shall describe the mode of performing the purificatory initiation.
The great god Siva situated in the heart and in the fire should
be invoked.
2. Having worshipped those two (God Siva situated in the
heart and the sacrificial fire) and having appeased them with
the hrd mantra^ one should offer five oblations in their presence
with the same mantra.
3. That babe (of fire) should be struck with a flower conse¬
crated by (the mantra of) the weapon with (the repetition of)
the hfd {mantra). One should contemplate the starry-like efful¬
gent form therein.
I. Son of tlie divine pair Siva and PArvati.

Agni Purdtfa
4. Having placed the syllable hum in it by exhalation of
breath and having drawn it by means of sarhhdrifil (mudrd)
(formation with fingers representing gathering), it should be
placed in the heart by the inhalation of breath.
5. Then (the above-mentioned essence of fire) should be
cast in the generative organ of goddess VdgUvarl (goddess of
speech) with>the mudrd known as udbhava^ and the repetition of
hfd mantra.
Om hdm, himt hdm obeisance to the soul.
6. Oblation should be offered in the smokeless sacrificial
fire fully ablaze (with the above mantra) for the fulfilment of
desires. Oblation made in undeveloped and smoky fire does not
get the desire fulfilled.
7. A fire which is pleasing, circling upwards and sweet
smelling is conunended. So also is the fire which touches the
ground and which emits sparks in the contrary direction.
8. Having offered oblations in this way, the impurities of
the disciple should be destroyed by doing the sin-consuming
oblation or it may be burnt with the syllables of Siva.
9-10. Five hundred oblations should be made with the
principal mantra and vaufap etc. in one-tenth of proportion for
the sake of getting the characteristics of a twice-born (for the
disciple) and to permeate him with the essence of Lord Rudra
(Siva) as well as for the purification of the food etc. and for the
(rites of) garbhddhdna, simanta^ and ndmakarana.*
11. The garbhddhdna is spoken as that which elevates the
soul of the disciple by breaking the bonds and making him
gain the sonship of Lord Rudra (Siva).
12. The puthsavana is considered as the manifestation of
independant attributes of the soul in the initiated. The dawn of
knowledge by means of discrimination in the disciple clouded
by illusion is the simmtavardhana (growth of simanta).
13. One’s birth is considered to be the evolution out of the
principle of absolute bliss etc. The wakening (of conscious¬
ness) is by means of the principle of supreme bliss in the initiated
which has become equal to the Supreme Being in the spiritual
perfection.
1. Posture of finger indicating evolution.

14. (Then the preceptor) should carry into the lotus of his
heart his own soul resembling a spark of fire by (exhibiting)
the sarhhdra mudri (formation with the fingers denoting gather¬
ing)-
15. Then the principal mantra should be uttered along with
the retention of breath and the union of God 8iva and his own
soul should be brought about in his heart.
16-17. (Then the preceptor) well-versed in the procedure
(relating to the performance of sacrifices) should carry his pure
consciousness to the region of §iva from the sacrificial perform¬
ances which are the cause of Brahma (and others) by means of
exhalation of breath and collect it by showing the udhhava
mudrd (formation with fingers denoting generation) and (repeat¬
ing) the mantra of the heart and exhaling the breath he should
locate it in the petals of lotus of the heart of the disciple.
18. The preceptor should duly propitiate Lord Siva and
the fire-god. The disciple (should be made) to bow down to the
self (preceptor). (He) should then make the disciple hear
conventions.
19. One should not blaspheme scriptures or God. One
should not leap across the materials of worship. One must
propitiate Lord Siva, the fire-god and the preceptor as long
as one is alive.
20. One has to impart these instructions to children, old
people, women, people addicted to pleasures, and sick people
according to their capacity (to preserve them) and in entirety
to those who can practise them.
21-22. After having consecrated in a vessel the symbols
of discipline — tuft, ashes, staff and loin cloth in order with
the iSanay hfd and sarhhitd mantras exiting with (the syllable)
svdhd (oblation) as before, (the preceptor) should show them to
the presiding deity of sacrificial site after having quickly cast in
the fire the residual offering.
23. Having kept them for a while under the pitcher for the
sake of protection, the preceptor should give them to the person
who takes the vow after having obtained permission of Lord
Siva.
24. Thus in this special spiritual initiation a child especially
becomes fit to have a scriptural knowledge about the fire and
oblation unto 'the fire.

Agni PurSifa
CHAPTER EIGHTYTHREE
Mode of spiritual initiation that removes one's boMage:
The Lord said :
1 . The principal mantra should be stimulated in the spiritual
initiation. In order to gain strength (to break) the bonds (of
worldly existence) one may do it by the rites of t&iana (striking
gently).
2. (Oblations should be offered) with each one of the
(principal) mantras or thrice with (them). The principal mantra
together with half the tuft man/ra (should be repeated) along with
(the syllables) A Cm, phaL etc.
3. The principal mantra should be stimulated by (the sylla¬
bles) Offz, Arfim, Arawm, Aflam, Aram, (assigning) to the
heart as well as the tuft and face with (the syllables) Om, ArCm,
hraum^ hrum, phaf.
4. One should do the rite of stimulation for each part of
the principal mantra in all ceremonies performed to cause
injury (to one’s enemy) while the (syllable) va§at is appended to
the principal mantra in ceremonies intended to bring peace and
prosperity.
5. In all instances of annual rites, oblations should be
done with religious acts for all desired results along with (the
syllables) vasaf (and) vaufaf.
6. Then after having worshipped the disciple having a pure
body and seated on a circle on the right side of one’s self, (the
preceptor) should contemplate upon a thread as the su^mnd (an
artery of human body).
7. The tuft of hair (of the disciple) should be tied with the
principal {mantra) and (one end of the string) should be led to
(touch) the toe. In the case of (the disciple) yearning for sal¬
vation (the string) should be tied on the body of the disciple
showing the sarbhdra (mudrd) (posture of fingers denoting gather¬
ing)*
8. (The String) should be attached on the right side in the
case of males and on the left side in the case of females. The
female deity should be worshipped with the irpmtra of the deity
on the head.
9. The thread should be collected with ih<^sathhibra nmdri

and placed with the same (mudrS). The nd4i (artery) should
(be mentally) collected with the principal (mantra) and placed
on the string and worshipped with the mantra of the heart.
10. Having covered it with the Rudra (mantra) ^ oblations
should be offered thrice with the mantra of the heart for accomp¬
lishing the presence. It is the same way in the case of female
deity also.
11-13. Offi, kSm obeisance to the path of letters, ham obei¬
sance to the path of residence (bhavana)^ Om^ hdm obeisance to
the path of phases. Having located the path of purification on
the thread and sprinkled water on the disciple with the weapon
and beaten gently the heart (of the disciple) with flower conse¬
crated by (the mantra of) the weapon, the preceptor should (men¬
tally) enter the body of the disciple (by pronouncing) the syllable
hum and exhaling the breath. The spirit situated in the hafhsabija should be separated by (the mantra of) the weapon: Om,
haumy humy phaf.
14. Having covered the SEune with the SaktisUtra (the thread
of energy) by (uttering) the mantra hdrfi ham oblations, it should
be joined with the thread which has become artery, by (show¬
ing) the sarhhiramudrd (posture made with the fingers indicating
gathering) Orh h&ih hath hdm salutations to the soul.
15. It should thus be conceived as pervasive. It should
then be covered by the mantra of the armour. Oblations should
be made thrice with (the mantra of) the heart for the sake of in¬
voking the presence.
16. Having located the principle of knowledge (in the
thread), one should look at it as beyond^the state of bliss. Other
principles which have become mantras as they were should be
located in that. One should look at it with (the mantra) “Ow?,
hdrhy haum obeisance to the kaldpdSa (the bondage of phases)
beyond absolute bliss”.
17-18. Two principles (out of the twentyfive), mantra of
single word, sixteen letters, eight worlds, two (principal)
arteries (idd pihgald) y (letters) and /Aa, the one object
(of sense-perception, the one fundamental attribute, the one
fundamental cause and tlie eternal blissful one (iaddiiva) should
be contemplated as having been located in the (phase of) white
colour beyond the absolute bliss.

Agni Purdija
19. Om haurh hurh phat to the katapiia beyond the region
of absolute bliss. Having collected the latter by (showing) the
sarhhAramudrd, (posture of fingers denoting gathering), it should
be placed over the thread. It should then be worshipped and
three oblations (of clarified butter) should be made for its
presence (in the thread).
20-21. Two principles (out of twenty-five), two letters
ka and fAa, two principal arteries {iiS, and piAgald), two
qualities, two mantras and one supreme lord situated in the
lotus (of the heart), twelve terms (denoting god), seventeen
worlds, one of the objects (of sense-perception) should be con¬
ceived as merged in the dark phase which is beyond the region of
bliss. (Lord) Acyuta should be meditated upon therein.
22. Having gathered it after a gentle stroking, it should
be placed at the mouths of the nerve. Oblations should be made
thrice with the respective mantras for the sake of its presence.
23-24. The seven (fundamental) principles, twentyone
words, six letters, one path-way, twentyfive worlds, three qualities
and an object for which Rudra is the cause should be located
in the principle of knowledge and the mantras ^ artery, (the latters )
ka and tha higher above.
25-26. Having taken the weapon, twenty-two words, six
worlds, six kalds (phases), four qualities, three mantras and an
object for which (Lord) Vi?nu is the cause should be meditated
at the base. The (rites of) beating should be done in the white
(phase).
27-29. Then having placed (the same) in the nerve in the navel
(region), one should offer oblations for the sake of its presence.
(The preceptor) should then locate (the syllable) hrim, hundred
worlds, twentyeight words, twice each of the mantras^ artery, the
winds as well as senses, the principle of the letter, the five objects
of sense-perception and the (first) cause governed by the brahm&f^ia-mantra^ four times the lambaras (a religious observance)
in the principle of non-action of yellow colour. It should then
be beaten.
30. The principles which were left out at the outset should
be located on the thread and worshipped. Three oblations should
be offered unto the fire for the sake of its presence.
31. Thus having gathered the principles from the body of
the disciple, they should be located in the thread,«i>In the initia-

tion with the mantras^ it should be done accompanied by religioussacrificial performances.
32. Other rites (should be undertaken) for the sake of ini¬
tial protection of the body (of the disciple) until the mantra
accomplishes the desired fruits.
33-34. The subtle soul awakening (w2fl«/ra) should be medi¬
tated in the principles of beatific knowledge. (The rites of)
arpana (pleasing) and dipana (stimulation) should be performed
in the same way with three oblations with their respective man¬
tras (such as) “Om, haum oblations to the phase of beatitude
beyond that of absolute bliss” which is (the mantra for) the
rite of pleasing; “Om, Mm, ham, hdm, hum, phaf to the phase of
beatitude beyond that of absolute bliss” which is (the mantra
for) stimulation. Then that thread should be considered as
pervading the five nerve centres.
35. (The thread) should be smeared with saffron and clari¬
fied butter and (Lord) Siva should be worshipped therein along
with his attendants with the kald-mantras ending with hum phaf
after having pierced the bondage through the occult nerve.
36. Having (mentally) entered inside (with syllables)
ending with obeisance, (the preceptor) should take hold of
(the thread) and tie it. Om, hum, hdm. Mum, Mm, hum, phaf,
I take hold of the phase exceeding that of pure bliss.
37. (The preceptor) should place that thread on the shoul¬
der of the disciple after having made him seated for the sake of
successful completion.
38. One hundred oblations should be made with the prin¬
cipal mantra for the expiation of all the sins (of the disciple ) .
(The oblation should be made) in a covered shallow saucer
(if the disciple) is a male and in a saucer of enlarged belly (in
the case of a) female (disciple).
39-42. The thread which has been covered with the mantra
of the heart should be placed and worshipped with (the mantra
of) the heart. After having been made pure by the worship of
Siva and his attendants the thread should be placed under the
pitcher (saying), ‘‘let protection be announced”. After having
placed a dower in the hands (of the disciple) and having
worshipped the pitcher and other things, the disciple should be
made to bow down and led outside the sacridcial shed. After

Agni Purd^a
having drawn three circles, the disciple should be made to sit
facing the north in the case of aspiration for emancipation
and made to sit facing the east in the case of aspiration (for
enjoyment). Three handfuls oi pancagavya (the five things got
from a cow) should be sipped at the outset.
43-44. After that, three or eight morsels of gruel unpolluted
by the touch of the teeth should be offered with the hand
holding a kuia with the leaf of pal&ia, if desirous of emancipation
and with the leaf of pippala^ if desirous of enjoyment.
45-47. Having offered profuse feeding with (the mantra of)
the heart, the pure water should be given for rinsing the mouth.
After having given the teeth stick (for cleansing the teeth)
with (the repetition of the mantra of) the heart, one hundred
and eight oblations should be offered with the principal {mantra)
for the removal of defects such as deficiency etc. After having
dedicated all acts to the lord of the ground, the deity should
be given adieu after worship and Lord Candela should be wor¬
shipped. Then the materials of worship should be removed and
the remnants of the gruel should be offered to the fire.
48. After having worshipped the pitcher and the protectors
of the world and bidding them adieu, one should bid adieu to
the attendant God and fire if they have been retained on the
periphery of the mystic circle.
49. Then having offered oblations in a condensed way to
the protector of the world at the periphery, one should enter the
sacrificial shed after bathing with ashes or pure oil.
50. (If the disciples are) householders, (they) should be
seated) on a bed of darbhas with their heads facing the east and
protected well (and if the disciples are) monks, (they should be
seated) on a bed of ashes with their heads facing the south with
(the repetition of the mantra of) the heart.
51. (Then the preceptor) should bathe the disciples who
had tied-up their tufts into knots along with the mantras of the
weapon and sapta md^vaka and walk out of the place again.
Om, hili, hilly oblations to the trident-bearer.
52. After having sipped five things got from a cow and
the gruel and having collected sticks for cleansing the teeth,
and having rinsed the mouth (with water), and contemplated
on (Lord) Siva and having reached the pure bed]!^ the preceptor

should enter (a?ain) remembering the rites performed in
connection with initiation. Thus, the mode of preliminary
consecration relating to initiation has been described briefly.
CHAPTER EIGHTYFOUR
Mode of Initiation for Emancipation
The Lord said :
1 . Then the preceptor having got-up early in the morning
should bathe and finish worship. (Seeing in the dream)
curd, ginger, meat and wine as being consumed is commended.
2. So also riding on an elephant or horse as well as seeing
a white cloth in the dream is auspicious. (Seeing in the dream)
as smearing the body with oil is inauspicious. Oblation (should
be done) with the aghora mantra for the sake of appeasement.
3. After having performed two daily rites (the two twilight
worships) and entering the sacrificial shed, (the preceptor)
should rinse (his mouth) and perform duties as in the daily
routines as laid down for the incidental rites.
4-5. After having purified his self and (the part of the fore¬
arm known as) the Hvahasta and having located in his inner being
the Gods Indra and others in order and worshipped the pitcher,
8iva worship should be done at the shed or on the ground.
Worship of fire and the (rite of) mantratarpana (offering
oblations along with the recitation of mantras) (should be done)
until the final oblation is done.
6. After having offered one hundred and eight oblations
with the mantra of the weapon, for the removal of defects due
to bad dreams, one should activate the mantra with the subtle
syllable hum.
7. Having made the antarbali (the rite of middle offering)
in between the (sacrificial) pitcher and the ground for the
entry of the disciple, and having obtained permission, the
preceptor should walk out of the shed.
8. One should do (the acts of) placing on a mystical diagram
(and other acts) in the religious initiation. The preparatory

Agni PurUtiia
oblation (should be done) with the end of darbha which
should be looked upon as the umbilical chord of the latter.
9. Having offered three oblations with the principal mantra
for accomplishing its presence, (the preceptor) should worship
lord Siva in the pitcher and take hold of the thread.
10. It should be tied on the tuft of the disciple who would
remain standing on the right-hand-side (of the preceptor) in
the manner that the thread hangs down upto the toe of the
foot.
1 1 . Having placed it and looked at it mentally as pervading
the non-action, one should know that more than one hund¬
red and eight worlds are in it.
12-25. Kapala, Aja, Buddha, Vajradeha, Pramardana,
Vibhuti, Avyaya, Sasta, Pinaki, Tridaiadhipa, Agni, Rudra,
Hutai^i, Pihgala, Khadaka, Hara, Jvalana, Dahana, Babhru,
Bhasmantaka, Ksapantaka, Yamya, Mrtyuhara, Dhata, Vidhata,
Karyarahjaka, Kala, Dharma, Adharma, Saihyokta, Viyogaka,
Nairrta, Marana, Hanta, Kruradr?ti, Bhayanaka, Drdhvamlaka, Virupak§a, Dhumralohita, Damsfravan, Atibala, Pasahasta, Mahabala, Sveta, Jayabhadra, DIrghabahu, Jalantaka,
Vadavasya and Bhima are known as (the manifestations of)
Varuna. Sighra, Laghu, Vayuvega, Suk^ma, Tik^na, K^apantaka, Pahcantaka, Paficasikha, Kapardi, Meghavahana, Jatamukutadhari, Nanaratnadhara, Nidhl^a, Rupavan, Dhanya,
Saumyadeha, Prasadakft, Praka^a, Lak$miv^n and Kamarupa,
the latter ten; Vidyadhara, Jfi^adhara, Sarvajfia, Vedaparaga,
Matrvftta, Pihgaki^, Bhutapala, Balipriya, Sarvavidyavidhata,
Sukhaduhkhahara are the ten. Ananta, Palaka, Dhira, Pataladhipati, Vrsa, Vrsadhara, Virya, Grasana, Sarvatomukha and
Lohita known as the ten (manifestations of) Rudra seated on the
hoods of snakes; Sambhu, Vibhu, Ganadhyak?a, Tryak?a,
Tridalavandita, Sariihara, Vihara, Labha, Lipsu (and) Vicaksana; (and) Atta, Kuhakakalagnirudra, Ha^aka, KQ^manda,
Satya, Brahma, Vi^nu and Rudra are the eight Rudras who all
remain in the interior of hemisphere (of tlie universe). The
names of these (Gods) as well as the names of worlds should
be remembered.
26. Bhavodbliava, Sarvabhuta, Sarvabhutasukhaprada
(Granter of felicity to all), Sarvasannidhyakrt, (all pervasive)
are worshipped by Brahmi, Vi^nu and Rudra.

27. O Adored one ! Existing prior to all beings ! Om !
The Witness ! Om- ! The Destroyer of Rudra ! Om ! Sun !
Om ! The Sound ! Om ! The Subtle I Om ! Siva ! The Granter
of all things to all beings ! The pervading life-force of all things !
The Creator of Brahma, Visnu and Rudra ! Om ! Salutations
to Siva.
O Guha (son of Lord Siva and Parvali) ! (in the thread
described above) the principle of non-action should be contem¬
plated as impregnated with the twenty-eight beatific states,
together with the eight letters of which the sadya, hfd, astra^ and
netra mantras are composed.
28. The letter ma is the emblem of the mystic seed, the two
occult nerves known as and pingald, the two vital winds
pr&na and apdna and the organs of smell and generation.
29. Among the five qualities smell etc., the quality of smell
is spoken as the matter. The principle of matter is yellow (in
colour) symbolises thunderbolt and is square-shaped.
30. Its extension is one hundred crores of yojanas (a yojana
is equivalent to eight miles). It should be known that the four¬
teen creative principles are lying concealed in this (zone).
31. It is the first being and the source of the four-fold exis¬
tence of all celestial beings, Manu, etc. animals and birds and
crawling insects.
32-33. (It is also) spoken (as the source of things born of)
the fifth, the immovable things, the sixth, the beings other than
human (such as) goblins, demons, yakfoSj gandharvas and
Indra, the seventh, the God of life (Yama) and the eighth,
Brahma. The earthly principle is considered as controlling the
eighth.
34-35. Having contemplated the absolute dissolution (of
the universe) in the prakfti (the original source of the material
world) and the intellect and Brahma, the enjc^er, as the cause,
(as well as) the non-action located along with all the worlds
continuing through his waking-state, one should unite the appro¬
priate mantras.
Om, hdm, hrUmt hdm to the thread standing for the beatitude
of non-action hOmjphafj tat. Omt hdmt ham oblatknis to the thread
standing for the beatitude oi non‘*action. Having dravm in
breath aloi]^ with (the above mantra) and shown the ahkuieh
moArd (posture made with fingers dosoting a goad), and having

Agni Purlfya
withheld the breath and carrying it up by showing the sarhh&ramudra (formation with fingers representing gathering )j^nd with
(the mantra) Om^ hrQm, hrSm, hram to the thread of beatitude of
non-action hUm, phaf and having placed it in the pitcher by
showing the udbhavamudrd (formation with fingers denoting
generation) and discharging the breath and repetition of (the
mantra) Offi, Om, hram^ hdm obeisance to the thread of beatitude
of non-action and having offered the respectful offering with
(the mantra) Om, hamy obeisance to the thread of beatitude
of non-action and worshipped, (the preceptor) should offer
three oblations with face turned away ending with (the word)
“Oblation” for the sake of accomplishing its presence and then
offer the concluding three oblations. (Lord) Brahma should
be invoked with (the mantra) Om, ham, obeisance to Brahm&
and worshipped. (He) should be appeased (with oblations)
with (the word) “Oblations”. (The preceptor should say),
“O Brahman ! I initiate (this disciple) in this (world) over
which you hold sway”.
36-37. One should submit (to the lord) “you should be
propitious to him”. Goddess Vagisvari, the deity of protection,
who is of the form of desire, knowledge and action and is of six
kinds and is the sole cause (of the universe) should be invoked
with (the mantra of) the heart. One should worship and satisfy
the Goddess as follows : —
38-40. (Goddess) Vagisvari, the cause of agitating the
receptacles should gently be struck (against) the chest (of the
disciple) with the repetition of the hft {mantra) and the principal
mantra concluding with hum phaf and the mantra of the arrow.
(The preceptor) who knows the procedure (of these rites)
should then enter into the inner self of the disciple and then
divide the effulgent consciousness (of the disciple) in the heart
endowed with the thread located in the beatitude of non-action
and resembling a spark of fire, vf\th.jye§fhd {mantra) as follows: —
Om, hdm, hSm, hah, h&m, phaf and with {the mantra) Om, him,
oblations and then with the ankuiamudrd (posture with fingers
denoting the goad).
41-43. Having drawn it with its appropriate {mantra) and
seized it, it should be united with his soul. Om, hdm, hrGm, hdm
obeisance to the soul. Having imagined the unjpn of his own
soul with discharge of the breath, it should be led to the abode of

Siva after having gradually discarded with discrimination the
cause such as Brahmii, etc. One should cast it in the womb of
(Goddess) VIgilvari with the (exhibition of) udbhava-mudrd
(posture with fingers denoting generation) after having carried
it for impregnation in all the principles simultaneously. Om,
him, ham, it&m, obeisance to the soul. One should worship with
this {mantra) and after obrafions five times.
44. One should do the purification of the body with the
mantra of the heart in the case oi all other principles. The
purhsavana (the rite of determining the sex) is not done, as there
can be a feminine form also.
45. The simantonnayana (parting of the hair) and the divine
limbs (should be treated) as the body. (The purificatory rite)
at the birth for all human beings should be done with the mantra
of the head with aversion.
46. (The preceptor) should similarly contemplate upon
the regions over which they have control, with the mantra
of Siva. The objects of sense pleasure (should be contemplated )
with the mantra of the armour and the worldly objects with (the
mantra of) the weapons.
47 AQ. One should contemplate on that one which is known
as dissolution, as the form of delusion and unbreakable. Streams
should be purified by (contemplating) the mantra of Siva and the
purification of the principles should be done with (the mantra
of) the heart. Five times five oblations should be made in respect
of the rites of garbhddhSna and others in order for the sake of
cessation of the bonds due to sinful acts.
49. One hundred oblations should be made with (the
mantra of) the heart after having accomplished expiation.
By obstructing the force of sins one can severe the bonds.
50. Five times five oblations should be offered with the
mantra of the weapon ending with oblations. By the repetition
of the {mantra of the) weapon seven times one gets free from bonds
ending with illusion.
51-53. The accomplishment by the mantra kalpa of the
weapon is like cutting with a scissor. Am, hUm, to the thread of
the beatitude of non-action, hum, phaf. Having accomplished
the cessation of bondage with the hands and with the mantra
of the arrow, the thread should be untied and laid in a circular

Agni Pufltf^
form on the sacrificial ladle filled with clarified butter. One
should then burn it with the mantra of the weapon and reduce it
into ashes with the weapon after having offered five oblations for
the removal of the goad of bondage. Om, haljL, to the weapons
Afim, phat. Expiation should then be made with eight oblations
made with (the mantra of) the weapon.
54-56. After having invoked (Lord) Brahma, he
should be worshipped and appeased. Then Om, ham^ O
Brahman, whom soul and touch cannot perceive, you take
(these oblations). Oblations. He should be informed of the
authority invested in him by offering three oblations. “O
Brahman ! you should not again bind this being whose sins
have all been burnt. You listen to the mandate of Lord Siva.”
After having bid farewell to Lord Brahma, (the preceptor)
should slowly fill ir the soul of the disciple by his own soul with
retention of breath and exhibiting sarfiharamudrd (posture with
fingers representing collection). (That soul) would then look
like the disc of the moon at the beginning of the eclipses at a
particular spot.
57. After having taken it out, it should be located in the
thread with the discharge of breath and with udbhavcmudrS (posture
with fingers denoting generation). After having worshipped it,
the preceptor should place the drop of water in the offering
vessel resembling the nectar, on the head of the disciple for the
purpose of completion.
58. After having bid farewell to the (divine) parents, the
final oblation should be made with the mantra of 8iva ending with
vousaf. Thus the mode of completion has ended. The non¬
action principle is thus purified.
CHAPTER EIOHTYFIVE
Mode of purifying the Beatific principle of establishment
The lord said :
1-2. The union of the two principles good and bad shouki
be brought about by the application of short and long

(vowels) associated with sound. Om, hOmy hrOmy hdm, water, efiulgence, wind, sky, the subtle principles, organs, intellect, the
three qualities and ego (are) the twenty-four principles (and)
the purufa (the soul) (is the twenty-fifth).
3. (The preceptor) should im^inc the letters beginning
with kha and ending with^^^a as merged in the above twentyfive principles.
4. The number of Rudras is equivalent to the bkuoanas
(Worlds), which are known to be fifty-six. They are as follows:
5-12. Amarela, Prabhava, Naimi^a, Pu^kara, Padi, Dandi,
Bhavabhuti, Nakullia the eighth, Harifoandra, l^riiaila the
tenth, Anvl^, Abhratike^, Mahakfila, Madhyama, Kedlua,
Bhairava, spoken as the second (group of) eight. Then Gayakuruk$etra-khalan5dikanadika, Vimala, Aftahiisa, Mahendra,
Bhima, Vasvapada, Rudrakoti, Aviyukta, Mahabala, Gokarna,
Bhadrakarna, Svarn5k$a, Sth^u Ajeya, Sarvajfia, Bhasvara,
Sudanantara, Subahu, Mattarupi, Viiiala, Jafila, Raudra,
Pingalak^, Kfiladamspri, Vidura, Ghora, Pr&japatya, Hut&-
i^na, Kamarupi, Kala, Kar^a, Bhayanaka, Matanga, Pingala,
Hara, Datr(samjfiiaka), iSafikukanm, Vidhana, Srikantha and
Candrafokhara.
13. Their attributes (to be used) along with their names
are also described then. O (All) pervasive ! Om, Formless !
Only Conqueror ! Only Lustre ! Om, Light I Om, (Supreme)
Being ! Om, Fire ! Om, Smokeless ! Om, Not reduced to ashes !
Om, One without a beginning ! Om, Of manifold forms ! Om,
The Agitator ! Om, The Earth ! Om, the Atmosphere ! Om,
Heavens ! Om, Deathless ! Born from dissolution ! Auspi¬
cious ! Killer I Absolute Soul ! Supreme Deity I Lord of
celestials ! Lord of Good will 1 Supreme lustre ! Presiding deity
of yoga ! (Your) release ! The first soul ! All in all ! Lord of all
beings ! are the thirty-two^ attributes. Viunadeva, SiVa, and
Sikha are the three mantras in the subtle form.
14. The two occult sychic nerves gSndhdri and supunvtdy
then the winds sarndna and uddna, the organs of taste and i^roduction (are also worshipped).
15-22. The sentiments are the material objects. The quali1. But, actually only twcQtyzune have been given.

Agni Pur^bfa'
tics are perception, hearing, touch and taste. The mystic diagram
should be circular and bear the mark of a white Ibtus.
After having contemplated on the worlds as well as those estab¬
lished along with the eagle-bannered god who is the cause for
the establishment in the dreamy state, the thread should be plac¬
ed on the body with (the recitation) of the appropriate mantra
and retained (by the preceptor). “Om, AJm, AAfim, to the
thread of the beatitude of consecration Om, phaf*'. With this
(mantra) and ending with ‘oblations’ it should be drawn while
drawing in breath and exhibiting aAkuia-mudrd (formation with
fingers denoting a goad). Then “Om, hdm, hrSm, krdm, hrOm
to the thread of the beatitude of consecration ArfZm, phaf”. With
this and retention of breath and showing sarhhdramudrd (forma¬
tion with fingers denoting gathering ) it should be taken from the
occult nerve below the heart. Om, A^m, Amm, Ar^, A<fm, obei¬
sance to the thread of the beatitude of consecration. With this
(mantra) and showing the udbhavamudrd (formation with fingers
denoting generation) and discharge of breath, it should be placed
on the pitcher. Having worshipped with the mantra ‘^Om^ AJm,
krim obeisance to the thread of the beatitude of consecration’*
ending with ‘oblations’, and offered three oblations for ensuring
its continuance (lord) Visnu should be invoked (with the
mantra) **Om, ham, obeisance to Visnu”, worshipped and offered
oblations O Vi$nu ! I initiate the disciple who is desirous
to get liberation herein under your authority”. You should be
propitious. Thus Lord Visnu should be informed. Then the
(Gkxldess) VagiiSvar! and Lord Vagina should be invoked as
before, worshipped and offered oblations and the disciple should
be gently struck on the chest. Om, kdm, hdm, ham, />Aa/. (The
preceptor) should enter with the same (mantra) and severe the
consciousness in the above-said thread with the (mantra) of
weapon and (showing) the ahkuSamudrd (formation with fingers
denoting a goad) and jyeffhd (mantra) Om, hdm, ham, ham, hrOm,
phaf. Having drawn it with (the mantra of) the heart ending
with “oblations”, it should be lodged in one’s own soul repeatii^
the same (mantra) and ending with “obeisance”. Om, hdm, ham,
horn obeisance to the soul. The imion of divine parents
should be imagined as before with the ttdAAatramudrd (posture with
fingers denoting generation) and (the seed qi the soul) should
be cast into the womb of the guddess by e^biting ^e same

(mudrd) from the left. Om, hdmt ham, hdm obeisance to the souL
the birth of the body should be (accomplished) by (the mantra
of) the heart, the postnatal (ceremony) by (the mantra of)
the head.
23. Otherwise its possession (could be accomplished) by
(the mantra of) the tuft. For the sake of enjoyment of pleasures
it should be done by the mantra of the armour. In regard to
the purity of principles (it should be done) with (the mantra
of) the heart and in the case of impregnation it is in the same way
as before.
24-25. For cutting bonds (it should be) accomplished by
(the mantra of) the head. Having cut the bonds thus, the
preceptor should repeat (the manira) hundred times. Even after
having cut the bonds thus, (the preceptor) should cut it with
the repetition of the mantra of the weapon and with a scissor
over which the mantra of the beatific principles has been
repeated. Om, Arim, to the thread of the beatitude of
consecration ha^t phaf. The thread should be removed and
kept in a circular shape as before (described in the previous
chapter) with (the repetition of the mantra of the weapon.
26. Having placed it over the sacrificial ladle filled with
clarified butter, oblations should be done with the mantra of the
beatific principles and weapons. Five oblations should be made
with (the mantra of) the weapon for the cessation of shoots of
bondage.
27. Eight oblations should be made for the sake of expia¬
tion. Om, to the weapons Lord Hrfikeia should
be invoked and worshipped and offered oblations.
28. As laid down earlier investiture df authority should
be made **om, hSm accept this fees of sentiment, oblations*’
(b the mantra which should be repeated). O Kara ! (you)
should not remain as a bond of this being (the dbciple) whose
bondage has completely been burnt away. Lbten to dib
mandate of Lord iSiva. Having bid ftuewell to Lord Govinda (Vi^^u) and united the soul of knowlet^^ which resembles
the moon’s disc half uncovered by the band by exhibitii^ the
sathhiSranmdrS (pewhure with fingers d<moting gathering) and
having bid fiurewell by showing the udSrhaaanmiril (finmation with
fogers dating generation), ^ drop otv^ker should be placed
on the thread as before. Having bid farewell to die (divine)

Agni PurS^a
parents and having worshipped the fire with flowers, etc. the
final oblation should be made as laid down. Thus the conse-
•cration also gets purified.
CHAPTER EIGHTYSIX
Mode of Purification of scriptural knowledge
The Lord said :
1. The union of the beatific principle of knowledge and
that of ancient one should be done as before, after having located
the principles. The union should be done with (the mantra)
Omy homy hfim.
2. Attachment, pure knowledge, fate, time, illusion and
ignorance together with beatific principle are (known as) the
seven unions.
3. Th^ six letters, ra, la, va, ia, and sa are said (to re¬
present) ^e branches of learning. The terms beginning with
pratyiva (Om) are twenty-one (in number) (as below) — Om
obeisance to l^iva, who is the Lord of all (created) things. Ham,
to (Lord) l§iva, to I^na at my head, to Tatpuru^a at my face,
to Aghora at the heart, to Vamadeva at the anus, to the form of
Sadyojata. Om obeisance again and again to the extremely
secret form, to the protector, to the deathless one, to the Lord
of all beings, to the form of effulgence, to the Supreme Lord
(one who pervades) the sky by thoughts Om.
4-8. Om the forms of Rudras and the Bhuvanas (worlds) are
‘described now. The first one is Vamadeva (Lord of irascible
nature), next Sarvabhavodbhava (the source of all beings),
Vajradeha (possessing a strong body), PrabhU (lord), Dh&t&
(the supporter), Klrama (order), Vikrama (conquest), Suprabha (resplendent), Va$u (youth), Praianta (tranquil),
Paramakgara (supreme knowlet^e), Siva (auspicious), Safiva
(endows with auspiciousness), Babhru (tawny-coloured),
J^faya (unperishable), Sambhu (one who b^ets peace),
Adrftarupa (having an invisible tomi), Adnl^uklma (having
an unseen name), Rupavardhana (promoter of peatuty).

Manonmana (one who agitates the mind), Mah&vlrya (the
mighty one), Gitrahga (one who is variegat^) (and) Kaly&ina
(the blessed one). Thus (the Rudras) are known by the twentyfive names (together with) Mantra (the controller of mind),
Ghora (the dreadful one) and Amara (the immortal one).
Pu^ and hastijihva are the two occult nerves in that (above*
said) beatific phase. Vy&na, n&ga and prabhafijana (are the
vital winds).
9. The only object is that of the form. The feet and theeyes are the oigans. Sound, touch and sight are known as thethree qualities.
10. Here the state is that of deep sleep. Lord Rudra is the
cause. All the worlds should be looked upon as located in this
(beatific principle of) knowledge.
1 1 . Gentle beating, cutting and entry into it should also be
done. Having pulled it from the region of the heart by means
knowledge, it should be seized.
12. It should be super-imposed on one's own soul. The
beatific principle should be firmly held and theip placed in the
fire-pit, after having invoked (lord) Rudra, the cause, and sub¬
mitted (to him) the (new bora) child.
13. Having invoked the divine parents, (the precqptor)
should gently strike the (new-born) child in the heart (of the
disciple). After having entered it with the manhra spdcen earlier,,
one should unite it with his own soul.
14. After havii^; drawn it out and taking it, it should be
united with his own soul by the method described already. It
should be united in the womb fiom the left side. After (die
repetition of) the<feAfofa (twelve) lettcn of mantra it should be
taken out.
15. The rites relating to the birth and post-natal purification
of the body, enjoyment, deep absorption^ purification of the
stream and of the principles should be peiformed.
16. One hundred oblations should be made as expiadon
as laid down for the removal of all bondages due to impurities.
17. The severance of bondage (should be done) vrith (the
mantra of) the weiqion. Hie vanishing fi>rce of impurities.

*254 Agai Purd^a
should be cut and pounded. Then the thread should be
placed in a circular form^. ^
18. Its burning and the absence of those letters as well as
•expiation should then be done. The invocation of (god) Rudra,
(and his) worship and the submission of sensibles of sight
and smell (should be done).
19. Om, hrtm O Rudra ! take this fee of the sensibles of
sight and smell. Oblations. After having conveyed the mandate
of lord Sambhu (Siva) and bidding farewell to (lord)
Rudra, the cause, the pure spirit should be located (first) in
himself and then located in the thread of bondage.
20. The subtle spedc (of the soul) should be placed on his
head and the divine) parents should be bid farewell. Then the
final oblation should be made, as laid down, which completes
all formalities.
21. The act of gently beating and other acts should be
done in the beatific knowledge as described earlier. Here the
speciality is the location of (the soul as a) speck. Thus the
beatific knowledge is purified.
CHAPTER EIGHTYSEVEN
Modi of punfieoHon of the primipU of peace
The Lord said :
1-2. The beatific knowledge should be united now with
the (principle of) peace as laid down. The two principles lie
in the (principle of) peace. Bhlive^ara and Sadaftva are spoken
as the two letters Aa mid TheRudrasare equal in number
to the worlds. They are as follows :
3. Prabhava (valiant), Samaya (time), K$udra (littjie),
Vimala (fireefirom impurity), Siva (auspicious), Ghana (heavy),
NirafijanAklura (unstained form), SvaAiva (auspicious to him¬
self), DIptik&raigA (cause brilliance), TridaAeAvara (lord of
1. Tliii act wddw succeeding <ttes an aaoie as diose described in tlie
previous chi4;>ter.

the thirty (gods), Tridaia (representing the thirty), KalasamJfiaka (known as the time), Suk$ma (minute), Ambuje^ara
(lord of the lotus). These are the Rudras firmly established in
the principle of peace.
4. (Obeisance) to the one who pervades the ether, to the
form which manifests as the ether, to the all-pervasive, to the
auspicious one, to the endless, to one who has no master, to one
who is not having any hold, to the firm one, to the eternal, to the
■one firmly established in the seat of yoga^ to the eternal yogin,
and one who partakes of such meditation (of votaries) are
the twelve terms (used in their invocation).
5. The preceptor should meditate with the two protective
mantras (known as) bindu and upakdraka^ the two occult nerves
alambusa and syasa and the two vital winds krkara and kSmaka
in the subtle phase.
6. The organs of skin and hand are considered as the two
senses of perception for this beatific principle. The attributes
of touch and soimd are the only two attributes, lord ($iva) is
the only cause of these.
7. Having contemplated upon the different worlds which are
located in the beatific principle of peace as the fourth state (of
consciousness) (in which the soul gets united with the
Supreme being), (the preceptor) should do the (acts of) gentle
beating, division, entry and union.
8. Having drawn the (beatific principle of) peace firom the
string of the face, it should be held (by the preceptor). Having
merged it in one’s own self, the beatific principle should be held
and projected in the receptacle.
9. Lord ! I am initiating this disciple desirous of
release (from bondage) subject to yoiir control. You have to
be beneficial to him.” The appeal should thus be made.
10. After having invoked the divine par^ts and doing
the gentle beating of the disciple etc. and collecting the soulforce, it should be united with his preceptor’s own soul.
11. Having invoked the divine parents as before by
(showing) nmdrd known as udbhcaa (fimnaticm with fillers
denoting generation), it should be located in the womb of the
goddess by rqieating the principal ma/Ura of the god preceded
hy the numira of the heart.

Affti PurS^
12. A corporeal frame for the beatitude should be done
with the (repetition of the mantra of the) heart five times. (The
mantra of) the head (should be repeated) for bringing it into
being. Its authority (is accomplished) by (the mantra of) the
tuft and the enjoyment by (the mantra of) the armour.
13. Its repose (is accomplished) by (the repetition of)
the mantra of weapons. The purification of the currents (is
achieved) by (that of lord) Siva. In (the case of) purifica¬
tion of the principle, (the rites of) garbhddhdna etc. (should be
done) in the same manner as before.
14. The thread is untied with that of the armour. Having
completed the purification thus, one should repeat the mantrar
hundred times. In order to compensate the mitigation of the
power of mantras five oblations should be made with (the mantra
of) the weapon.
15. After having untied the thread, it should be severed
with a knife by the repetition (of the mantra) of the weapon seven
times just as the bondage is cut off with the principal mantra.
16. (The mantra is) : “Om, haum^ to the thread of the beati¬
fic principle of peace hah^ hum^ phaf. After having untied and
made into a circle, the chord should be placed as before in the
sacrificial ladle filled with clarified butter with (the repetition
of the mantra of) the weapon. Oblation should be done with
(the mantra of) the weapon and of the beatific principle.
17. Five oblations should be made with (the mantra of)
the weapon for the sake of ending the fresh shoots of bondage.
To remedy the obstruction in expiation, eight oblations should
then (be made). Om, hafi to the weapon hSm phaf (is the mantra
for the same).
18. Having invoked god with (the mantra of) the heart,
and offered worship and appeasement, the appropriate fee
should be offered to him in the prescribed way: “Om, hdm^
O lord ! accept this fee of intellect and ego, oblations.**
19. O lord ! You should not remain as a bondage for
this being whose all bonds have been burnt away. Thus the man¬
date of (lord) l^iva should be made to be heard.
20. The god should be bid adieu and the crescent-like soul
should be united with the lord Rudra. Then it must be united
with one’s own (preceptor’s) soul in the prescribed way.

21 . The same should be united with the thread by showing
pure udbhavamudrd (formation with fingers denoting gene¬
ration). The drop of nectar should be put on the head of the
disciple with (the repetition of) the principal {mantra).
22. Having taken leave of the (divine) parents after wor¬
shipping them with flowers etc., (the preceptor) should offer
the final oblation to the fire as a concluding rite.
23. Even here the acts of gentle beating etc. should be done
as before. The distinctive feature is (the use of) its principal
mantra. Thus the purification (of the beatific principle) of peace
is done without any impediment.
CHAPTER EIGHTYEIGHT
Mode of initiation which secures nirvd^a {liberation from existence)
The Lord said :
1. (The preceptor) should blend the beatific principle
surpassing peace with the pure beatific principle of peace and
write the principles of letters with that as before. Om, hrim,
kfatmii haum^ hdm (are the syllables used for) the union.
2-5. (Gtoddess) l§akti and (God) Siva which are the two
principles (of the universe), the eight perfections of the universe
(known as) dipaka (illuminating), roeika (brightening), mocaka
(delivering from bonds), Qrdhvagami (ascending up), spa
(of the form of ether), andtha (not having any master), andirita
(not being dependent) and the eighth the syllable of om, the
mantra of (lord) H^a, the sixteen letters beginning with the
letter ‘a’ and ending with visarga (aspirated sound), the
principal mantra, the two (occult nerves) kuhB and iahkhini
which are the cause for the body and the two winds devadatta
and dhanaHjaya (should be contemplated as pervading the
above). The senses of touch and hearing are considered as the
materials of sense perception. The principle of sound is the
predominating attribute. Its state is the fifth state exceeding
that of the finirtli state (the state in which the soul becomea
one with the supreme soul).

Agni PurAgM
6. Lord Sada^iva should be known as the sole cause.
Having meditated upon the collective beatific principles
known as beyond (the beatific principle) of peace, (the rites
of) stroking gently etc. should be performed.
7. Having gently beaten the beatific principle of the thread
and dividing it (mentally) with (the recitation of the principal
numtra) ending with pkaft (the preceptor should penetrate inside
the noose (with the recitation of the above mantra) ending with
(the pronunciation of) salutations and loosen (the beatific
principle with the recitation of the above mantra) ending with
pkaf.
8. Then (the beatific principle of) the thread should be
consecrated with (the recitation of) the mantras of the tuft (and)
heart ending with **oblations” and should be drawn out of the
head of the thread with the inhalation of breath and showing
the sfigimudra (posture with fingers denoting a goad).
9. Having gathered it with the retention of breath, it should
be projected into the fire-receptacle with the exhalation of breath
(and showing the mudrS known as) udbhava (posture with fingers
denoting generation), after having consecrated with (the mon^a
of) the heart ending with “obeisance”.
10. All the worship etc. of this should be accomplished as
(it would be done) for the beatitude of non-action after having
invoked lord Sada^iva and worshipping him and making
offerings.
11. (The lord should be addressed by the preceptor as
follows) :
“I initiate this person (disciple) desirous of emancipation
in this well-known mode of life. You should be beneficial (to
him)”. I am submitting to you with devotion.
12. After having invoked the (divine) parents and having
made offerings and achieving their presence, the disciple
should gently be struck on the chest with the syllable consecrat¬
ed by (the mantra of) the heart.
13. Qm, hdMt hSm, ham, phaf. Having entered (the heart)
with (the repetition of) this (mantra), the psychic eneigy should
be divided by showing the ahlatSa mudrd (formation with
the fingers denoting a goad) and with the weapon akmgwith
the noose.

14. Om, hOmt krSm, phaf. Having drawn it (with this
mantra) duly consecrated and ending with ‘‘oblations**, it should
be united with his own soul by concluding with “obeisance**,
after having seized it.
15. Om, hdm, ham, him, obeisance to the soul. After having
meditated on the union of the (divine) parents as before by
(showing) the udbhava mudrd (posture with the fingers denoting
generation), (the preceptor) should place (the psychic princi¬
ple) in the womb of the goddess with the same (mantra) and by
the left.
16. The (rites of) garbhSdhdna etc. should be done as laid
down earlier. One should repeat (the mantra of) release and the
bondage is cut off with that of the principal (mantra).
17. As before five times five oblations should be done with
(the mantra of) weapons for the sake of cutting the bonds
and to destroy the evil forces in the disciple.
18. With the repetition of the mantra of weapons seven
times the principal mantra of beatitude the bonds should be cut,
-with the scissor.
19. Om, hdm, to the noose of beatitude beyond that of peace
hab, hOm, phaf. (Then the preceptor) should bid farewell to the
noose as described earlier, make it into a circle, place it in the
ladle filled with clarified butter and cast it into fire with the
(mantra of) weapons and of beatitude.
20. Five oblations should be made with (the mantra of)
the weapon for the removal of the goad of bonds. Eight oblations
should be made for compensating atonements.
21. Having invoked lord Sadaliva with (the mantra of)
the wreapon and done appeasement, one should submit suzerainty
as laid down before.
22. “Om, hdm, Sad8$iva, accept fees (in the form of)
the principle of mind. Oblations. O (lord) Sad&iiva 1 You
should never remain as a bond for this being whose all shackles
have been destroyed. You hear the mandate of lord Siva.**
23-24. The final oblation should be made with the princi-
(mantra). (Lord) Sadaiiva should be bid adieu. Tlien the
precepun* should unite in his soul, the pure soul in the body of
the pupil just risen like the autumnal moon by showing the
sarhhdramudrd (posture made with the fingers denoting gathering).

Agni Pursuit
after having collected the same by (showing) the udbhava--
mudrd (posture made with fingers denoting generation^.
25. Then (the preceptor) should place drops of water
of arghya (offered for washing) on the head of the disciple as
completion. Having requested the divine parents with great
devotion to forgive they should be bid adieu.
26. *‘0 Parents ! You have been put to trouble for the
sake of initiating this disciple. Having discarded that gracefully
depart with pleasure to your own place.”
27. (The preceptor) should then cut off the tuft (of the
disciple) of the form of knowledge to a lei^^ of four fingerbreadths with the scissors, the weapon of lord Siva, (duly)
consecrated with the mantra of the tuft.
28. **Om, klimi to the tuft, ASm, phaft amt hafiy to the weapon,
Aan, phaf.’’' Then those (cuttings) should be set in a ladle full
of clarified butter in which a ball of cow-dung is kept in the mid¬
dle and cast into fire with (th^ recitation of) the mantra of weapon
ending with phat.
29. After having washed the two kinds of ladles and after,
bathing the disciple, the self (preceptor) should sip waters and
gently beat the soul thus blended with the mantra of the weapon.
30. It should be disjoined, drawn and worshipped as before
to the end of twelve (kinds of worship) and placed in the petals
of the lotus of his own heart.
3 1 . The ladle is filled with clarified butter. The ladle should
be held (in such a way that the cup of the ladle) faces down¬
wards according to the rules of daily rites of worship and by show¬
ing the iankhamudrd (posture made with fingers denoting a conch) ,
32. He should have his head and neck expanded in unison
with the pronunciation of the nasal sound (om), havii^ his
sight fixed and (the heart) filled with contemplation of the
Supreme Being.
33. Having gathered the six paths^ in the form of nerves
from the pitcher, the sacrificial pit, the pupil and firom one*s
own soul, (the preceptor) should place them at the head of the
sacrificial ladle.
1; paths are ma^a,pada, vai^a, hhmmat tattw and kalA of whidi
first three are related to the sound and the rest to ^ objects according ta
according to srffihma. See Sinulfttilaka

34-35. Having contemplated the soul-energy as a point
it should be united with the (following) seven (principles) in
turn. The first one is the union of the soul. Then follows the
next one consisting of repetition of the mantras of the heart
etc. afler having done the inhalation and the retention of the
-breath with the mouth open a little.
36. The form of the sound (om), which has permeated
the sufumna (an artery of human body), is the third one.
There would be calm absorption of the mind in the seventh
cause by one’s renimciation.
37-38. The movements above the energy and the sound
known as the discordant (are the fifth one). (The sound emitt¬
ed) by the universal life, which cannot be measured by energy
and which is the discordant of time is the sixth one. The seventh
one is that beyond the (region of) energy. This is the proper
place for union and is known as the discordant principle.
39. After having inhaled the breath and retaining it while
keeping the mouth little open, (the preceptor) should utter the
principal {mantra) and (accomplish) the repose of the soul of
the disciple.
40. The letter ha (should be deemed as resting) in the
lightning stream which is the life force of six paths. The
letter u remains pervading above the navel for a length of twelve
ahgulas (an aAgula is equal to four finger breadths).
41. Then above that the letter ma (should be made to
occupy) four finger breadths over the heart. The syllable wn,
expressive of lord Vi^nu, occupies the region of the heart for
eight angulas still above.
42. The letter nuz, expressive of (lord) Rudra, occupies
the region of the palate for four ahgulas. Similarly, the nasal
phonetic sign, expressive of lord livara should occupy the
middle of the forehead.
43. The syllable om, (the essence of) LcMrd Sadaiiva, should
rest in the aperture on the head. The female enci^ should be
located in the aperture on the head. These should always be
rejected one by one.
44-45. After having experienced the divine minute contact
therein, the preceptor should ccntemplate the soul of the disciple
in that supreme twelfth principle, characterising extreme happi-

Agni Purd^a
ness, devoid of feelings, beyond the reach of mind, auspi'
cious and giving rise to eternal qualities. *
46. After having offered an oblation of clarified butter into
the fire for lord iSiva with the mantra of lord Siva ending with
vausaf for the sake of stability of the union.
47-52. Having offered final oblation as laid down,
(the preceptor) should do for the attainment of qualities. *‘0m,
hdmt oblations to the soul ! Be omniscient ! Om, hSm^ oblations
to the soul ! Be satisfied ! Om, krUm, oblations to the soul !
Be cognizant of originless existence ! Om, haum, oblations to
the soul ! Be self-dependent ! Om, hatm, soul ! Oblations !
Be undiminished in energy ! Om, ha^, oblations to the soul t
Be of endless energy !” The self, possessing six qualities, should
thus be taken out of Supreme Being and with contemplation
united in the body of the disciple as laid down. Drops of ambro¬
sia from the water-offering should be placed on the head of the
disciple to alleviate sufferings due to the projection of powerful
soul force (into the disciple). Having made obeisance to the
sacrificial pitcher relating to lord Siva, situated to the right of
(lord) Siva, and placing the disciple to the right of his self
with a pleasing face, (the preceptor) should submit to the lord
(as follows) : *'T'his (disciple) has been favoured by you only !
Being present in this form of mine, increase his devotion to the
lord, fire-god, and preceptor.'* Having paid obeisance to the
lord, the preceptor should himself bless the disciple affectiona¬
tely by saying, “May you have bliss”. The sacrifice should
be concluded after having ofifered eight flowers to the lord with
extreme devotion and bathing the disciple with (the waters of)
the pitcher of lord Siva.
CHAPTER EIGHTYNINE
Initiation of primes
Tht Lord said :
1. Then the initiation in the principles is itaparted as ii is
concise. Binding with die thread should be done suitably with,
one's soul, *

2. The fundamental principles should be contemplated as
pervading time^ fire etc. concluding with pure bliss. They
should be like the bead of rosaries, the principles distributed
evenly on the whole thread.
3. After having invoked the principle of bliss etc., the rites
of garhhidhSna etc. (should be done) as before. But the offer
of all fees should be done with the principal {mantras).
4. Then the final oblation endowed with the soundessence of all principles should be offered by which alone
the disciple gets emancipation.
5. After having offered another such final oblation to lord
Siva for the sake of union and for securing firmness, (the disciple)
should be bathed with the waters of the pitcher (consecrated)
for Siva.
CHAPTER NINETY
Anointing the disciple after worshipping Siva
The Lord said :
1. Having worshipped lord Siva, the (rite of) bathing
should be done for the welfare of the disciple. Nine pitchers
should duly be placed in the directions of north-east etc.
2. The preceptor should invoke the eight oceans of
alkali, milk, curd, ghee, molasses, wine, sweet water and sour
water in those pitchers.
3-4. The following eight Rudras should be duly located in
them : — (1) Sikhai^dln, (2) Srlka^fha, (3) Trimurta,
(4) Ekarudrak?a, (5) Ekanetra, (6) Sivottama, (7) SOkjma,
and (8) Ananta.
5. Lord Siva, the ocean and the mantra of lord Siva should
be located in (the pitcher at) the middie. Sacrificial sheds (are
erected) for the 'deities of the quarters within the pavilion.
6. A platform measuring eight inches in height and two
cubits in lei^th should be erected wherein an endless seat should
be made as also a seat of bel lieaxfis.

Agni Purd^
7<14. Having made the disciple face eastwards, and doing
the sakalikarai^^ (the preceptor) should worship (the pupil).
His body should then be rubbed with sour gruel, earth, ashes,
dUrvi (a kind of grass), cowdung balls, white mustard and curd
mixed with water. Then the pupil should duly be bathed with
the waters of the pitchers starting 'with that of alkali with
the repetition of (the mantras of) the heart, vidyeia and Samhara
with pleasure and devotion. Having clad him in white dress
/md placed him to the right of lord iSiva, the disciple should
again be worshipped as before in the cushion mentioned already.
(The preceptor should address him as follows) ; “From this day
onwards you shall test well the recipient of the dress of an anchorite such as the turban, cloth on the body while in meditation,
crown, knife, pot, rosary, book etc., initiation, exposition and
installation before you favour him. You hear the command.’*
After having saluted the disciple and prostrating (in front of
lord) Maheivara, the following submission should be made for
the removal of all impediments. *T have been commanded by
you in the form of a preceptor for doing abhifeka (anointing)
ceremony. This (disciple) who is well-versed in the scriptural
lore has been anointed by me O (Lord) Siva.” Five times
five oblations should be made for the propitiation of the chain
of mantras.
15-16. Then the final oblation should be made. The dis¬
ciple should then be made to sit on the right side of one’s self
(preceptor). Then (the preceptor) should mark the fillers of
the right hand of the disciple beginning with the thumb with the
burnt edge of darbha with the iambara {mantra) for the sake of
establishing contact. After having placed flowers on the hand,
he should be made to bow down.
17-18. The merits of performance of this rite should be
assigned to (lord) Siva, the fire, the pitcher and his own self.
fThe preceptor should address him as follows) : The disciples
who have been well examined in the scriptures should be blessed
by you. Like a monarch the desired objects are gained by
men by this anointing (with the mantra the v eapons — Om,
irSm, /rim, paSumy hSm, phaf.
1. The act of assigning the different parts of the body to die
different deities with the different mantras. ^

CHAPTER NINETYONE
Different kinds of mantras for the worship of God :
The Lord said :
1. One should worship lord Siva, (lord) Vi?nu and other
gods such as Bhaskara (Sun) after being anointed, accompanied
by the sounding of the conch, bheri (a kind of kettle-drum) and
bathe (the images) with five things got from a cow.
2-3. Whoever (worships) gods (in this manner) goes
to heaven and elevates his departed manes. Whatever sin has
acciued to him in the course of millions of years gets reduced
to ashes in the fire by anointing gods with ghee. Whoever bathes
gods with an adhaka (two maands) of ghee etc. becomes a
celestial.
4-6. After having applied sandal paste, (the lord) should
be worshipped with perfumes etc. The gods praised with
hymns with little effort always confer ability to know past and
future events, proficiency in mantra, enjoyment and emancipa¬
tion.
7. Having taken principal letters of the mantras, if they
are divisible by two, (one should know) (whether they are)
auspicious or inauspicious. (If divisible) by three (they denote)
jloa, mUla and dhalu, (and if divisible) by four (they denote
the four castes) bralimin etc. (Divisible) by five denote
the five principles (elements) (earth etc.). So also for mutter¬
ing (the mantras) etc. (one should find whether they are auspi¬
cious or inauspicious). If the man/ra consisting of groups of three
letters happens to have the letters pa, ma and ka and letter ma
comes in the middle it is inauspicious. Lord Indra and a king
occurring in the middle are auspicious.
8-9. One should write the mantras of Surya, Ganapati, Siva,
Durga (laivite goddess), Sri (consort of Visnu) and Vi?nu in a
Ir tus. One should write on that the mantras commencing with a
three-letter unit to those having four letters in the form of the
gomBtra (a particular form of writing letters) with a conse¬
crated stylus.
1 0. In the same way (one should know) the auspiciousness
etc. of {mantras) of sixtyfour letters from the fall on or contact
of the dice with the odd place.

Agni Purd^a
11. Commencing with one unit of three-lettered {mantras)
to eight units of three-lettered {mantras) ^ denoting the dhvaja
(flagstaflf) etc, even ones are inauspicious and odd ones are
auspicious.
12. The mantra known as tripurd is composed of the letter
*ka* amplified by a, i etc., and preceded by the sixteen letters
along with their vowel sounds.
13. The OTfjnhtzj having for its principal part (the syllable)
hrim^ preceded by pranava {om) and concluding with “obeisance”
used in worship are twenty-thousand one hundred and sixty.
14. The mantras *dm, hrirr*' are for (goddess) Sarasvati
(goddess of learning), Cand aur? and Durga (different
forms of consort of Siva). So t/n, i arc the mantras for
Sri (goddess Laksm i).
15. Then kfaum, kraum Zive the mantras for Snn, a.nd dm, haum
for god Siva. Am, gam are the mantras for lord Gane^a and dm
for lord Hari (Visnu).
16-17. The preceptor should after anointing repeat
one hundred and fifty times the letters 'ka* etc. as well as the
sixteen vowels. With three ‘Ara’ at the beginning along with the
vowels and ending with ^ka’ all the mantras are formed. After
contemplation (the preceptor) should initiate the disciples.
CHAPTER NINETYTWO
Mode of installation of the image of lord Siva
The Lord said :
1, O Guha (a name of the son of lord Siva and Parvati) I
I shall briefly describe the (mode of) installation of the lifiga
(representing) Siva and the pedestal (representing) the female
energy. Their union (is accomplished) by (the repetition of)
the mantras of Siva.
2. There are five different wavs of installation. I shall
describe to you their characteristics. Where there is union of
the brahmaHldy that installation is worth that name.

3. The sthdpana (fixing) is the proper manner in which (the
liAga) is placed in the pedestal. The installation in which (the
linga) is placed in pedestal with a cleave it is called sthitastMpana
(installation on a pedestal already existing).
4-5. It is (known as) utthdpana (re-installation) in which
the removal (of the old lingo) precedes. It is known as dsthdpana
in which the new lingo is placed and consecration is done by wise
men. (The installation of the images) of (lord) Visnu etc. are of
two kinds. In all these cases supreme lord Siva should be made
the soul-energy.
6. There are five divisions in the case of the temples also
on the basis of the above differences. The ground should be
examined according to the requirements for the respective
temple.
7. The earth is white (coloured) having the smell of clari¬
fied butter, blood-coloured, possessing the smell of blood, the
yellow one having sweet smell and black one having the smell
of wine, w'hich are respectively known as the brahmin etc.
8. Among these the earlier ones are commendable than the
later ones. If the ground of this type is dug upto a cubit and
filled again it would be in excess of the pit.
9. The kind of earth which is moist with water is also to be
known as excellent. The preceptor should purify well (the
ground) which is impure because (of the presence) of bones,
charcoal etc.
10. The ground where a city, village, fort, house or temple
is to be constructed (should be purified) repeatedly by digging
or by erecting cattle sheds or by ploughing.
11. The worship of the (sacrificial) shed (should be done)
as also the concluding (rite) for the satisfaction through the
mantras. Having concluded the rites, (the preceptor) should
offer one thousand oblations with the aghordstra (mantra) in the
prescribed manner.
12. After having levelled the ground and plastering the
ground, the preceptor should purify it. Encircling lines should
be drawn with gold, curd and unbroken rice.
13. (Lord) l§iva should be worshipped in the filled up
pitcher at the north-east corner from the centre. After having
worshipped the presiding spirit, those waters should be sprinkled,
on the spades etc.

Agni PurS$a
14. Having ofTered oblations to the groups ol demons in the
prescribed manner, they should be scattered in (different)
directions. Having sprinkled (water) over the ground, the spades
(and other implements) should be washed and worshipped.
15-16. Having placed a pitcher (filled with water) and
covered by a pair of clothes on the shoulder of a brahmin, being
accompanied by the sounding of musical instruments, it should
be placed at the south-east corner (of the shed) and worshipped
at the auspicious moment. The ground should be excavated with
the spade duly consecrated and sprinkled with honey.
17. The earth dug out should be deposited on the south¬
west corner and water from the pitcher should be put into the
pit. The eastern boundary of the edifice should be extended as
far as desired.
18. Then having stood there for a while, the preceptor
should make the excavations carried around and sprinkle water
over the same until the north-eastern corner of the ground is
reached.
19-20. This is spoken as the arghyaddna (offering of waters)
(accomplished) by taking round the pitcher. The ground should
thus be taken possession of. After that, (the preceptor) should
cause the ground to be excavated, if it is a virgin one, until the
stone or water (is reached), in order to ward off evils due to the
extraneous matter. The extraneous matter should be dug out
in the prescribed manner.
21. If (the extraneous matter) relates to a human being,
the (presence of) extraneous matter could be known by writing
letters, a, A:fl, ca, /a, /a, iaandha. for query and casting
the die. If it falls on the flagstaff etc. at the south-east corner,
it indicates the presence of extraneous matter.
22. The existence of that (matter) could be validly known
from the changes noticed in the body of the questioner or from
the wailing of animals in (different) directions or from their
entry (and movement) into the ground.
23. In the alternative, the presence of extraneous matter
could be known by writng the letters of the alphabet on a plank
or on the ground, dividing them into eight groups and from the
presence of the group (of letters) in the directions east to north¬
east in order.

24-25. One should declare the presence of (a piece of)
iron in the eastern part if the letter of the ‘a’ group is met.
Similarly, the presence of charcoal in the south-eastern part
from ‘Aa’ group, of ash in the southern part from *ca* group, of
bones in the south-western part from *ta* group, of bricks in the
western part from ‘/a’ group, of skull (in the north-western part)
from *pa* group, of a corpse from group and of (a piece of)
iron from ‘/a’ group (could be declared).
26-28. So also, (the presence of) silver, from *ha* group and
(the presence of) something causing harm (could be known)
from ‘a’ group. (After removal of these extraneous matters) and
after taking eight inches of earth and sprinkling water with (the
mantra of) the soul, three-quarters of the pit should be tilled with
water and earth broken by a club. Having made the ground
levelled, the preceptor should go to the sacrificial shed with the
general argha offering in the hand. After having worshipped the
two guardian deities of the entrance, the preceptor should enter
the temple through the western door.
29-30. (Then the preceptor) should purify his self as well
as the sacrificial shed and sacrificial pit. The sacrificial pitcher
along with the small sacrificial pitcher (should be placed) there.
The worship of (lord) Siva and the guardian deities of the world
and the generation of the tire and its worship and other acts
should all be done as before. (The preceptor) should go to the
bathing shed of the stones along with the yajam&na (at whose
instance the sacrifice is performed).
31-32. . The stone slabs of a temple for the lifiga are known
as thc/>5</fl or rfAama etc. They arc commended if they arc square
shaped, eight inches in height and one cubit in breadth. Those
made of bricks should be half (the size) of those made of stones.
If the temple (is built of) stones the images (should be made of)
stones and if (it is) of bricks the images (should be of) bricks.
33. (These statues) (should be) marked with nine faces
and lotus flowers known as nandiy bhadrd^jaydy riktSy and the fifth
{pBnjd).
34. Padmay mahdpadmay iaAkhay makara and samudra the five
treasures; the presiding deities of these should be located in
pitchers.
35. The names of stones are nanddy bhadrdyjaydi pUr^dy afUd, .
i^rdjitdy vijqydy maAgald and dfuara^i, the ninth.

Agni Purdista
36-37. Suhhadra, vibhadray sunanda^ pufpanandaka, jay a, vijaya,
kumbha, pUrna and uttara are the nine pitchers <Jf treasures.
Having offered the cushion to them, (the preceptor) should
(gently) beat and write on them with the mantra of the weapon.
38-39. All the stone slabs should be covered without excep¬
tion with the mantra of armour. They should be bathed with
perfumed waters mixed with earth, cow-dung and cow’s urine
with the recitation of mantra of weapon ending with hum phap.
Then they should be bathed with the five things got from a cow
and also the five sweet things (milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey)
as laid down.
40. Then they should be immersed in perfumed water with
the repetition of mantra containing their own names. Then (they
should be bathed) with water containing fruits, gems, gold and
cow’s horn.
41-48. After having applied sandal paste, the slabs should
be wrapped up with clothes. After having provided a seat made
of gold and led them to the sacrificial shed circumambulating,
they should be laid on a bed or on a mattress of kuSa with (the
recitation of the mantra of) the heart. After having worshipped,
the principles commencing with the intellect and ending with the
earth should be located therein. The three principles permeating
the three divisions should be located in order. (The first group
consists of) principles beginning with intellect and concluding
with mind, (the second group consists of principles beginning
with) thought and concluding with the subtle principles and
(the third group) begins with the subtle principles and conclu¬
des with the earth. These principles should be taken as loca¬
tion of pure bliss, knowledge and soul. The principles should
be worshipped with their respective mantras and their lords with
the mantra of the heart in their respective places marked with
garlands of flowers in order (as follows) : “Om, hUm, obeisance to
the principle of absolute bliss ! Om, hUm obeisance to (lord)
Rudra, the lord of the principle of absolute bliss ! Om, hdrp, obei¬
sance to the principle of knowledge 1 Om, hOm obeisance to
(lord) Vi§nu, lord of the principle of knowledge ! Om, hSm
obeisance to the principle of soul ! Om, hSm obeisance to (lord)
Brahm&, lord of the principle of soul 1” Each one of the princi¬
ples — earth, fire, the sacriiicer, sun, water, wincf, moon and ether

of the eight forms (of the lord) should be located in each one of
the slabs along with their presiding deities Sarva, PaiSupati,
Ugra, Rudra, Bhava, Mahei§vara, Mahadeva and Bhlma in
order. “Om obeisance to the image of the earth ! Om obeisance
to the presiding deity of the earth !” are the mantras for duly
locating the guardian deities. The pitchers should be worshipp¬
ed with their own mantras or with these mantras. The principal
mantra for (lord) Indra etc. are as narrated below : /fim, rfim,
ffim, sum. vum^yUm^ mfim, Affm, k^um.
49. (The procedure for the installation) in the case of nine
images has been told. (The procedure for installation) in the
case of five images is being told now. Each one of the five
principles of creation such as the earth etc. of the images should
be located (in the slabs).
50. As before the five presiding deities of these, Brahma,
Visnu, Rudra, livara and Sada^iva should also be worshipped
in them.
51-54. “Om obeisance to the image (of the principle) of
earth ! Om obeisance to Brahma the presiding deity (of the/prin¬
ciple) of earth” ! are the mantras. Having worshipped the five
pitchers in order with their own names, the rite of location should
be done as laid down, duly commencing with the central image
with the prdkdra mantra as well as auspicious darbhas and sesamum.
After having located the supporting edrikd (energy) in the sacri¬
ficial pit and worshipping it, the principles, the presiding deities
of the principles, the images and the presiding deities of the images
should be pleased with ghee etc. Then the slabs should be sprin¬
kled with waters of propitiation after having offered hundred
oblations upto the final one for the purification of the part (of
the slab known as) Brahma, after having touched each one of
the principles with kuSas in order and worshipped.
55. Having done the rites of invoking the presence and
union, (the principles) should be located again (in the slabs)
after purification, in the same way one should do these rites
for the three groups (of principles).
56. “Om, dm and im obeisance to the principles of soul and
knowledge.” (Reciting this mantra^ the preceptor) should duly
touch the three parts (of the stone), Brahmd etc., with the
base of the kuia etc. The union of the fundamental principles

Agni PurQxpa
should be done by the applications of short and long {mantras) .
57-59. “Om, Mm^ um obeisance to the principle»of know¬
ledge and absolute bliss.** Oblation should be made in the pre¬
sence of pitchers filled with clarified butter and honey and into
which gems have been put and on which the five things got
from a cow have been sprinkled, after having worshipped them
with their respective mantras being presided over by the guardian
deities of the world. The presiding deities of all the slabs should
then be contemplated as of the form of knowledge, as having
bathed, gold-coloured, and wearing the dress in the form of
knowledge. Hundred oblations should be offered with the mantra
of the weapon and the mantra of the head for the purification of
the sacrificial site and for the removal of defects of deficiency etc.
, CHAPTER NINETYTHREE
Mode of worshipping the presiding deity of a ground
The Lord said :
1 . Strings should be laid in the sacrificial shed so as to en¬
close it. The ground should be divided into sixty-four squares
of equal measurements.
2. Two bamboo poles should be fixed at each one of the four
corners. Strings (should be laid down) across the eight angular
points. They should enclose two squares and six squares. The
presiding deity of th6 ground should be worshipped therein.
3. At the time of worship, one should meditate on the pre¬
siding deity of the ground in the fire-pit, as the form of a demon
with curled locks and head held raised up from the ground and
facing north.
4. The knees, knee-joints and thighs (of the deity) should
be taken as lying in the directions of north-west and south-east^
the two soles of feet in the south, the head in the north and the
two folded palms in the heart.
5. The auspicious gods located in the body of this perscm
are worshipped. The presiding deities of the eightwngular points^

situated in the eight half chambers of the angular points (should
also be worshipped.) .
6. The sages Marici etc. should be located in the six squares
commencing with the east, Brahma in the four squares at the
centre. The rest of the gods are known to occupy one square
each.
7-8. The twelve joints such as the trident, svastika (a kind
of figure), thunderbolt, mahdsvastikay sampufay trikafUy maifibandha
and the pure square among all the joints of the presiding deity
of the ground should be left in the walls etc.
9. Oblations of unbroken rice along with clarified butter,
for (lord) I la, offering of water with lotus flowers for lord
Parjanya (god of rain), and a bright saffron-coloured banner
should be offered for Jayanta (son of Indra).
10. Gems (should be offered) to Mahendra (lord of the
celestials), smoke-coloured canopy for the Sun, wheat and ghee
for (the god of) truth and clarified butter alone for (lord)
Bhrsa.
1 1 . Unclean meat (should be offered) to (the lord of the sky)
and the flour of barley (first fried and then ground) for all those
gods commencing with the east. A ladleful of honey, milk and
clarified butter should be given to the fire-god.
12. Fried paddy put in golden waters should be offered to
(god of) untruth. Honey should be offered to the destroyer of
the house and palaudana for Yamaraja (god of death).
13. Perfumes (should be given) for the lord of the gandharvas (semi-divine beings), a bird’s tongue for Bhrnga (one who
wards) and lotus leaves for the beast on the south. Thus the
eight deities (should be offered offerings).
14. Sesamum mixed water and milk (should be given) for
the manes. Sticks from the trees for cleansing the teeth should
be given to the lord of the entrance by showing 'the dhenumudrd
(posture with fingers indicating a cow).
15. Cakes should be offered to Sugriva, darbha to
Puspadanta {z. yak$a)y red lotus flowers to Pracctas (lord of
waters) (and) wines to demon,
16. Ghee and rice mixed with jaggery (should be given)
to Sc§a (serpent-god), ghee mixed with baked flour or fried
paddy to disease. Thus the mode of offering for gods in the
western direction has been told.

"274 AgniPuritfa
17. A yellow banner (should be offered) to Maruta(wind
god), ndgakesara (a kind of fragrant flower) to serpent-god and
eatables and well-cooked gruel of green gram to Mukhya.
18. Sweet gruel mixed with clarified butter should be given
to Soma, root of lily flower to (goddess) Dawn, lopi to Aditi,
and pUri to Diti. These are the gods placed in the northern direc¬
tion.
19. Sweet meats (should be offered) to Brahma on the east
and to (sage) Marici in the six squares. Red flowers (should be
offered) to (god) Savitra situated below the angular square
(assigned to) the fire-god.
20. Waters along with the kuSa should be presented to god¬
dess Savitri below that square. Red sandal should be offered to
(god) Vivasvan occupying six squares on the south.
21. Turmeric mixed rice (should be offered) to lord
Indra in the corner square below that of the demon. Mixed rice
should be presented to Indra-jaya below that of Indra.
22. Rice mixed with jaggery (should be offered) to (lord)
Mitra occupying six squares on the west. Rice cooked with ghee
should be offered to (lord) Rudra at the square below the angu¬
lar point in the north-west.
23. Meat (should be offered) to the servant of Rudra below
that. An offering of black-gram should be offered to the moun¬
tain (god) occupying the six squares on the north.
24. One should duly offer curd and milk to dpas and its
progeny below the angular point (dedicated to lord) Siva after
worshipping in the proper way.
25. Brahma located at the four squares in the middle of the
place should be presented gruel along with clarified butter and
the five things got from a cow.
26. Outside the sacrificial ground the four demonesses
Caraki etc. should be worshipped in the angular points com¬
mencing with the north-cast and ending with the north-west in
order.
27. Meat with ghee should be offered to Caraki, curd with
lotus flowers to (demoness) Vidar! and meat, bile and blood to
(demoness) Putan^.
28. Bones, blood, biles and meat (should be offered) to
demoness sin. Lord Skanda should be offered rice mixed with
black gram on the east.

29. Sweet cakes along with kfsara (rice and peas boiled
together) (should be offered) to (lord)Aryanian in the southern
direction), meat along with blood to Jambhaka in the western
direction.
30. Rice mixed with blood and flowers (should be present¬
ed) to Pilipifija (monster-maiden) on the north. Otherwise all
the presiding deities of the ground should be worshipped with
water along with unbroken rice and kuia,
31. In the case of a residential building or town, worship
should be done in eighty-one squares. The lines (drawn across
the cardinal points of the diagram) should be made to occupy
(the breadth of) three squares and comprise (the breadth of)
six such squares at the other angular points.
32. The gods I^a and others should occupy one square each
in that (diagram), the serpents and others two squares each,
(sages) Marici and others six squares each, Brahma is known to
occupy nine squares.
33. The above diagram may comprise hundred squares in
the case of a city, village or hamlet. Two bamboo poles (are
known) as ‘invincible* and irresistible always,
34. The location (of the deities) in the hundred squares is
commended if the rite is done as in the case of a divine edifice.
The planets and gods such as (lord) Skanda are known to occupy
six’ squares in that (diagram).
35. Demoness Caraki and others should be located in five
squares. The lines and bamboo should occupy spaces as des¬
cribed earlier. In the case of a sacrificial ground relating to the
founding of a country, it should comprise one hundred and
thirty-four squares.
36. (In that diagram) Brahma occupies sixty-four squares,
as also (sages) Marici and others. The eight gods, &pas etc.
should occupy fiftyfour squares.
37. (Gods) liana and others should occupy nine squares.
(The gods) Skanda and others should occupy eight squares.
(Demonesses) Caraki and others, lines, bamboo should also be
located as before.
38. In a sacrificial ground comprising twenty-thousand
squares, the location of the deities should be such that they
occupy nine times more than .what has been enjoined in the
founding o country.

Agni PurOJSd
39. The diagram which is divided into twentyfive squares
is known as the vaitSla . The other diagrams are known to have
nine squares and sixteen sub-divisions.
40. There may be a square figure inscribed in a sexagon or
triangle. The location (of the gods) in the case of excavation
around should be done as in the case of (the stone slab known as)
brahmaSild..
41 . An offering of sweet gruel to all gods should be made at
the installation of the image of a deity or the burial of a dead
body.
42. In the absence of any specified measurement, the sacri¬
ficial ground should measure five cubits. The sacrificial ground
proportional to the measure of the house or divine edifice is al¬
ways held as excellent.
CHAPTER NINETYFOUR
Mode of placing the stone slabs
The lord said :
1. (Demonesses) Caraki and others should be worshipped
in the angular points of north-east etc. and outside as before.
Three oblations should be done to each one of the gods in suc¬
cession.
2. After having offered oblation to the presiding spirit, the
placing of stone slab (is done) thereafter. (Goddess of) energy
and the excellent pitcher known as ananta should be located in
the middle line.
3-5. The stone slab should be held in this pitcher with (the
recitation of) the principal {mantra) coupled with the letter ^na\
Having placed the eight pitchers known as Subhadra etc. in
order in the directions east etc. with the recitation of the mantra
of the guardian deities of the world and having located the god¬
desses in each one of the holes, the stone slabs such as Nanda
etc. should be duly placed in them by repeating the iambara
{mantra) sacred to the presiding deities of the different images,

in such a way that they are in order from the middle of the gro¬
und. The eight (deities) such as the guardian deities of virtue
etc. should be located in the different angular points in order.
6. The four pitchers Nanda etc. out of Subhadra etc. are
placed in the south-eastern corner. Ajita etc. out of the group
commencing with Jaya should be located in the east etc.
7. (Lord) Brahma should be invoked in them and (lord)
Mahesvara (Siva) should be contemplated as pervading the
internal space (of the shed ) which would serve as a receptacle
of these.
8. After having offered oblation one should repeat (the
mantra of) the weapon for warding off impediments. The pro¬
cedure in the case of five stone slabs is now described a little.
9. (The preceptor) should locate the stone slab Purna in
the pitcher (known as) Subhadra half-immersed. The stone slabs
respectively known as Nanda etc. should be placed in the pitchers
Padma etc. at the different angular points south-east etc.
10-17. Four slabs should be contemplated as located in
the middle with the exuberance of mother’s affection. “Om
Purna ! You are the great learning ! Possessor of all divine
attributes ! O Daughter of Angiras ! You make all (this under¬
taking of mine) here as complete. Om ! Nanda ! you make
men rejoice ! I establish you here. You remain in this temple as
fully satisfied as long as the moon, sun and stars shine.
O Nanda ! Daughter of Vasistha ! You grant long life, fulfil¬
ment of) desires, prosperity to men. You have to strive to pro¬
tect in this temple always. Om Bhadra ! Daughter of Kasyapa !
You always do good to the people. O Goddess ! You be
gran ter of long life, of desired (objects) (and) prosperity always.
Om ! Jaya ! O Goddesss ! You be granter of prosperity
(and) long life always. Om ! Jayd 1 Being established by me
you remain here for ever. O Daughter ofBhrgu I You become
the governess of prosperity and success. Om ! Rikta I Des¬
troyer of excessive defects ! O Auspicious one ! Granter of
accomplishment and emancipation ! One who is of the form of
the universe and one who underlies all the world, you remain
here always.’* After having contemplated upon the ethereal
mansion, (the preceptor) should locate the three principles
therein. Then the sacrifice should be completed in the prescribed
manner after having offered the expiatory oblation.

Agni Purina
CHAPTER NINETYFIVE
Mode of installation of the lihga
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe the mode of installation of a lihga in
temple which yields enjoyment and emancipation. One should
always do it for the purpose of enjoyment and emancipation on
the day of the god.
2. The installation ceremony should be performed in the
five months commencing with magha (February-March) except
(the month of) caitra (April-May) and in the first three karanas
(one of the eleven divisions of the day) at the rising of the
Jupiter and Venus.
3. (The ceremony should be undertaken) especially in the
bright fortnight or in the dark fortnight omitting the fifth, fourth,
ninth, eighth and fourteenth days (of the fortnight).
4-5. (All) the other days are auspicious except those falling
on the days of inauspicious planets. Commencement during
(the rule of) the stable stars of Satabhisak^ dhanistdy drdrS^ anuradhd,
the three uttara {uttard, uttaraphdlguni and uttarabhadrapada) ,
rohinl and Jravana yield good results. (The days fixed for the rite
should possess) the rising points of aquarius, leo, scorpion, libra,
virgo, taurus and Sagittarius.
6. Jupiter is always commendable in the above nine stars
and seven constellations. Mercury (is commendable) in the
sixth, eighth, tenth, seventh and fourth, from the lagna (rising
point in the east), while Venus (is commendable) in all the places
except the fourth.
7. The Moon is always strengthening if located in seventh,
fourth, third or tenth, the sun in the tenth, third, and sixth places
and Pdhu (ascending node of the Moon) in the third, tenth and
sixth places.
8. The Saturn, Mars, Sun and Ketu (the descending node
of the Moon) are commendable in the sixth, and third places.
Both the good and bad (planets) in the eleventh place are cruel.
9. Their aspect full in the seventh place, half in the ninth
and fifth places, one fourth in the first and tenth places and one
fourth less in the fourth and eighth places. ^

10. (The two constellations) pisces and aries have a dura¬
tion of three and three-fourth na</w (two and a half are
equal to one hour). The (constellations) taurus and acquarious
have a duration of three and three-fourth nS^is.
11. Capricorn and gemini have a duration of five {nd4is)y
Sagittarius, scorpion, leo and cancer have a duration of five and
three-fourth (nd^is) and libra and virgo have a duration of five
and a half ghafikds (synonym of nd^t)-
1 2. (The constellations) leo, taurus and acquarius are statio¬
nary and yield success. (The constellations) Sagittarius, libra
and aries are movables.. The third (constellations) have both
the characteristics.
13-14. The constellations aspected by auspicious planets
or associated with them are auspicious and are commendable.
Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in the lagna confers abundant
strength, long life, sovereignty, valour, strength, progeny,
fame and virtue. The first, fourth, seventh and tenth (places
from lagna) are known as the kendras.
15. Jupiter, Venus and Mercury in these (houses) yield
all perfections. The presence of wicked planets in the third, fourth
and eleventh houses from the lagna are beneficial.
16-17. The learned should combine these with the tithis
(the days reckoned by the phases of the Moon) for good per¬
formances. (The preceptor) should raise a square shed in front
of (the temple) leaving a space equal to or five times that (of
its measurement) at twelve cubits from the flight of steps with
four entrances. (The shed) for (sacrificial bathing) should be
half the size of that shed).
18. The shed should be constructed) in the north-cast,
east or north, (measuring) one or ten or twelve cubits respecti¬
vely and having a single entrance or four entrances.
19. The remaining eight sheds should be measuring two
cubits more than that (shed). The sacrificial altar (should
measure) four kara lengtlis in the middle and should have pillars
at the angular p»oints.
20. Leaving apart a quarter of the platform nine or five
fire pits or a single pit (should be dug up) in the north-east or
east. (The digging of one pit ) is done only in the case of the wor¬
ship of the preceptor.

Agni Pursue
21-24. (The fire pits) should be a span, an aratni (a cubit
of the middle length, from the elbow to the tip of the little finger ) ,
a cubit, a yard, four cubits and eight cubits respectively depend¬
ing on fifty, hundred, thousand, hundred thousand, lakh or a
crore oblations (are offered in the pits). (The pit) in the south¬
east (should be of) the shape of the female generative organ, in
the south (of the shape of) the crescent moon, in the south-west
(of the shape of) a triangle, in the north-west (of the shape of)
a hexagon, in the north (of the shape of) a lotus, in the north¬
east (of the shape of) an octagon. The pit made at an inclined
angle with a border above is auspicious. There should be three
borders around that respectively measuring four, three and
two fingers in breadth. Alternatively there should be a single
border measuring six fingers in breadth or the borders (should
be) of the shape of sacrificial pit.
25. The aperture should be above that. It should resemble
the leaf of the holy fig tree in its shape. (The aperture should
be) an angula in height and eight angulas in breadth.
26. Its length (should be) half the length of the pit and
(should be) in the same level as the neck. The apertures of the
fire pits on the east, south-east and south should face the north.
27. It should face the east (if the fire pits have been located)
in other directions, while those situated at the other points of
compass should have their outlets turned towards the north¬
east. The twenty-fourth of the fire receptacles is called the
angula (finger breadth).
28. The four entrances (to the sacrificial shed) on the east
etc. should be made of (woods of) plaksuy udumbara, aSvattha and
vata (trees) which duly (stand for) peace, prosperity, strength
and health.
29. (The sheds) should be eighteen cubits in length, one
cubit high and half (the length) in breadth and should be decorat¬
ed with mango leaves.
30. The banners should have (colours) resembling (the
colours) of a rainbow (or be) red, black, tawny, (or) of the
colour of the moon, (or be) white, golden coloured or resembling
that of a crystal.
31. (The banner) dedicated to the lotus-born (Braluna)
in the east (should be) red (and that) which belqpgs to Ananta

(lord of the serpents) in the south-west (should be) blue. The
banners (should be) five cubits long and half as much broad.
32-33. The rods should be commensurate with the five
cubits of banners being a cubit for every cubit. Twelve
kinds of earth from (the places such as) the ant-hill, the tips of
the tusk of elephant, horns of the bull, bunch of lotuses, pastures
of boars and cows and the cross-ways of roads should be taken in
the case (of installation of an image) of Vaiku^^ha (Vi^nu)
and eight (kinds) in the case (of installation of an image)
ofPin^in (Siva).
34. The decoctions made up from the barks of nyagrodha^
udumbara, aSvattka, cUta and jambU and eight palas (a measure of
weight) of the essence of flowers should be taken.
35-36. The waters of the sacred pools, fragrant waters and
the waters mixed with the herbs (should be taken). I shall des¬
cribe the (names of) auspicious flowers (and) fruits (after¬
wards). Waters mixed with five kinds of gems, cow’s horn and
also five things got from a cow should be taken for bathing. A
piece of cloth in which the paste has been put should be taken
for rubbing.
37. A pitcher having thousand holes should be used for
bathing and the yellow pigment for decoration. Roots of hund¬
reds of herbs (are needed). Therein (the roots of) vijayd, lakfmaffdy bald, gu^Oci, atibald, pdfhd, sakadevd, iatdvarl, fddhi, suvarcald
and vfddhi have been prescribed separately for bathing.
38-41. (Either) an incessant pouring of waters together
with the sesamum and darbka (or) merely the bathing with the
sacred ash (has been prescribed) for protection. A wiseman
should prepare a paste of powders of barley, wheat, bilva
(fruit), along with camphor. (He should also make ready)
the pitcher and (a small vessel with a narrow tube like
outlet for pouring). The bed-stead aloi^; with two mattresses,
pillow bed and cloth should be made ready suited to one’s aim
and in accordance with his means. The vessel filled with ghee
and honey and a golden brush should be made ready.
42. The sacrificial small pitcher, the pitcher (sacred to
Lord)l$iva, and the pitchers for the guardian deities of the direc¬
tions, (should be made ready). One pitcher for each of the sacri¬
ficial fire-pits^ouLd be set apart for inducing sle^ and for peace.

Agni Purd^et
43-44. The pitchers for the attendant deities at the door^
god of virtue, for Pra^anta (a deity), v&stu (presiding deity of the
ground), (goddess) Laksmi (consort of Visnu), (Lord) Ganeia
(son of the divine pair Siva and Parvati) and pitchers for others
should be pl’.ccd on heaps of grain along with the cloth and
garland and gold should be put and they should be filled with
fragrant waters.
45-51. They should be supported by vessels filled with
(rice), fruits and decorated by tender leaves and should be cover¬
ed by cloths. White mustard seeds and fried paddy should be
brought for scattering. As before the sword of knowledge should
be made ready. Sacrificial twigs, the vessel (for cooking) por¬
ridge, the sacrificial ladle made of copper and the vessel filled
with ghee and honey for anointing the feet, four seats made of
three hundred darbhas and of the measure of two cubits long,
pal&ia twigs for enclosure, and vessel for sesamum, vessel for
havis (food offering), vessel for water which can respectively hold
one, twenty and eight palas and the sacred thread (should be
made ready). A pitcher, an incense-burner, sruk and sniva (the
two kinds of sacrificial ladle), a box, a seat, a chowrie, dry fire¬
wood, flowers, leaves, scented gum resin, lamps with ghee,
incense, unbroken rice, sacred thread, clarified butter from the
cow’s milk, barley and sesamum stems of kuSa, the three sweet
things (honey, sugar and clarified butter), sacrificial twigs of
the length of ten parva (the interspace between the folds on the
fingers) are all needed for appeasement. The sacrificial ladle
{sruva) of a length of one cubit is required for the appeasement of
the sun and other planets.
52. There should be one hundred and eight sticks of arka^
paliia^ khddiray amdrga, pippala, udumbara, Sami^ durvd as also green
ku§a.
53-54. In their absence barley and sesamuhi (are used).
So also the household articles, a sthdli (a kind of vessel), a sacri¬
ficial ladle, lid etc. and two pieces of cloth for the gods, coins,
crown, apparels, necklaces, earrilitgs and bracelets should be made
ready for the worship of the preceptor. One should avoid
making them costly.
55. Worship of the. custodians of images should be a
quarter less than that stated before and that of thcae who repeat
(the mantra of) the weapon is still a fourth less th^ that. Worships.

of brahmins, astrologers and sculptors are as done for those who>
repeat (the mantras).
56. The diamond, sun-stone, sapphire, atinila, pearl, topaz,
ruby, lapis lazuli are the eight gems.
57. Uiira (the fragrant root of a plant), mddhaoakrdnUl, red
sandal, agallochum, sandalwood, sdrika, kuffha, and Saitkhint
are the (eight) kinds of herbs.
58-60. The metals (are) gold, copper, silver, bell-metal,
lead and iron. Yellow orpiment, red arsenic, red chalk, suoama
mSksika (honey-like mineral), mercury, vahnigairikay sulphur,
and mica are the eight kinds of minerals. The eight kinds of
grains are stated to be wheat, sesamum, black-gram, greengram, barley, short term paddy, Jyamaka. All these things should
be gathered.
CfiAPTER NINETYSIX
Mode of initial consecration of an image :
The Lord said :
1 . After having bathed and performed the two daily (wor¬
ships), the preceptor should enter the sacrificial shed with the
argha offering in his hand and accompanied by the brahmins
who are the protectors of the idols.
2. The doors (of the sacrificial shed) (known as the doors)
of peace should be worshipped duly as before and also the wardergods (located) in the branches (of the sacrificial trees) by the
(performance of) circumambulation.
3. (The warder-gods) Nandi and Mah&k&la (should be
worshipped) at the east, Bhrngi and Vinayaka at the south,
Vr?abha and Skanda at the west, (the warder) goddess and
Ga^d^ at the north (of the sacrificial shed).
4-5. Then the preceptor should worship two pitchers each
at the base of the branches (of the sacrificial trees) — -praSdnUt
(tranquil) and OHra (cool), parjanya (rain-cloud ) and aioka
(griefiess), sarytoana (reviving) and amfta (ambrosia), dhamida
(bestower of wealth) and friprada (bestower of prosi>erity) one

Affti Purd^a
after another with (the repetition of) their names ending in the
fourth case preceded by (the syllable) om and Cnding with
‘obeisance’.
6-7. The worlds, planets, warder gods and rivers, two in
«ach one of them, three suns, two Vedas, (goddess) Lak^m! and
(lord) Ga^pati are the gods who stay in the sacrificial shed
at each one ofthe doors for warding impediments and guarding
the sacrifice.
8. The thunder-bolt, spiear, club, sword, noose, banner,
mace, trident, disc and lotus should be duly worshipped in
the banner with the mantras Om hrim phaf obeisance. Om hrOm
phaf to the spear at the door, hritin phaf obeisance.
9-10. The eight presiding deities of the banner such as
Kumuda, Kumudak^, Pundarika, Vamana, Sahkukar^, Sarvanetra, Sumukha and Suprati^fhita should be worshipped in
the east etc. with (the offering of) oblation to all beings and
with the mantras om kaum obeisance to Kumuda etc.
11-12. In the same manner the eight guardian deities
Hetuka, Tripuraghna, Sakti, Yamajihva, Kala, Karaiin, Ekinghri and Bhima should be worshipped in the (different) direc¬
tions with offerings, flowers and incense. (The preceptor)
should contemplate them as satisfied.
13. The five fundamental principles earth etc. should be
worshipped in kakfitfi^a (a kind of fragrant grass), bamboos,
pUlars and other things in order with the mantras sadyojdteP etc.
14. The preceptor should look at the sacrificial shed as per¬
meated by the essence of (god) Sadaiiiva, hallowed by his pre¬
sence and endowed with the banners and spears in the form of
fundamental principles.
15. After having warded off the divine ethereal and earthly
•obstacles as (laid down) before, (the preceptor) should enter
(the shed) tlu'ough the western door and look at the other
remaining doors.
16. After haviz^ walked around (reverentially) and seated
on the southern side of the altar and remaining Busing the north,
one should perform the purification of elements as before.
1. Sadyo j&tam pispadyftnl, Vimadeyl^ nSmg jyesthiya amusb,
Sa^purnfftysVidmdi^ aghorebhyo^ thegliofel^yab wulIiinSi^iarravidySiiiin.

17. Then the internal sacrifice, the purification of the man¬
tras and the materials, and the worship of one’s own self (should
be done). The five things got from a cow (should be applied)
as before.
18. Then the sacrificial pitcher should be placed therein
along with the receptacle, especially for the principle- of Siva and
the three fundamental principles (soul, body and matter)
in order.
19. The preceptor should locate by means of his psychic
force, the supreme principle of Siva along with the presiding
deities Rudra, Narayana and Brahma in his body from the fore*
head and trunk to the foot.
20. Om, ham, hdm^ The images of the god and their presid¬
ing deities should be located therein as before (and contemplate
himself) as covered by the essence of Siva along with his consti¬
tuent members and forearm of Siva on his head.
21. (The preceptor) should then contemplate the efful¬
gence (of Siva) (which has permeated his body and) which has
entered the cavity of the brain as coming out dispelling darkness
and illuminating the inter-space between directions.
22. Having decked himself with flowers, garlands and
cloth along with the custodians of deities (the preceptor)
should contemplate as *T am Siva” and draw out the sword of
knowledge.
23. The sacrificial shed should be purified with the four¬
fold rites of purification. After having scattered the kufa all
around, they should again be gathered.
24. After having seated the guardian deity of the ground
etc. in the big pitcher (vardhani) as before, (the preceptor)
should worship them. The pitcher sacred to god Siva and the
weapons and the vardhani (pitcher) should be worshipped in the
fixed seat.
25. Then the guardian deities of the worlds along with their
weapons and vehicles should be worshipped in order in the pit¬
chers situated at the different directions as laid down.
26. (The preceptor) should contemplate (god) Indra as
having a golden complexion, thousand eyes, wearing the crown,
and wielding the thimderbolt.
27. (God) Sapt&rcis (Fire god) (should be contemplated)
as holding a rosary, kama^lu (a small water pitcher), and a

286 Agni PurO^
spear in the hand, red (in complexion), engulfed by garland of
flames and as riding the goat. «
28. (God) Yama (god of death) should be remembered as
riding a buffalo, carrying a club in his hand and of the form of
destructive fire and (lord) Nirrti as riding an ass, carrying a
sword in the hand and having red eyes.
29. (The preceptor) should then meditate (lord) Varuna
as seated on a crocodile and having white complexion holding
a noose of serpent in his hand and (lord) Vayu (wind god)
as riding an antelope and having blue complexion and Kubera
(god of wealth) as seated on a sheep.
30. (Lord) I^a (Siva), the trident-bearer should be contem¬
plated (as seated) on a bull, (god) Ananta, the disc-bearer (as
seated) on a tortoise, and (lord) Brahma, the four-faced and
four-armed as riding a gander.
31. (Lord) Dharma (god of virtue) and others should be
worshipped in the pitchers located at the base of the pillars at the
comers. Some also worship (the gods) Ananta and others in the
pitchers placed at the corners of different directions.
32. The injunction of (lord) Siva should be made to be
heard. The pitcher placed behind one’s own self should be gently
turned around. Then as before the pitcher should be firmly
put first and then the pitcher vardhani.
33. After having worshipped (lord) Siva (seated in) a
firm seat and (again in) a firm seat for the sake of weapons,
(the preceptor) should as before touch with the udbkavamudrd
(posture made with the fingers denoting generation).
34. “O lord of the universe you protect this sacrifice of thy
own self out of compassion for the devotee”. After having add¬
ressed these words, (the preceptor) should place the sword in the
pitcher.
35. After having worshipped the lord in the pitcher or on
the ground or in the shed relating to initiation and establishment,
(the preceptor) should go in front of the fire-receptacle.
36. The custodians of images who are seated in front of
the centre of the pit should purify the respective pits as directed
by the preceptor.
37. The reciters (of mantras) should recite (the mantras)
as many times (as laid down). Others (should recite the sark-

hitd mantra. The brahmins, well-versed in their respective bran,
ches should read the appeasing mantras.
38. A follower of the J^gveda should recite the hymns SrisUktaf
pSvamdni, maitraka and vrfdkapi on the east.
39. A follower of Sdmaveda should recite the hymns —
devavratay bhdruridat jyeffha and rathantara on the south.
40. A follower of Tajurveda should recite the hymns rudra,
purufosukta, Hokddhydya especially and the brdhmanas in the west.
41. An Atharvavedin should repeat the hymns — nilarudra,
suk^dsQkpna and the atharvaiirfa in the north.
42. After having ignited the (sacrificial) fire, the preceptor
should fill the eastern part of each one of the pit from the east in
order.
43. Incense, lamps and sacrificial porridge should be offer¬
ed to them. Then the fire should be offered. After having
worshipped Siva as before, offering unto fire should be made
(accompanied by the chanting of) mantra.
44. After having made the oblation for making the place
and time of the sacrifice as auspicious and to ward off omens
portending evil, the knower of mantras should offer the final
oblation which brings forth good.
45. After having prepared the sacrificial porridge as before,
it should be offered to each one of the pit. Then the yajamdnas
(persons at whose instance a ceremony is performed) should go to
the bathing shed well-adorned.
46. (The image of) the god should be placed on the auspi¬
cious seat and covered with the essence of the mantra after gently
stroking it. After having worshipped, it should be bathed with
mud and herbal waters.
47. The image should be bathed in between with the urine
of a cow and cowdung, sacred as and perfumed water with
(the recitation of the mantra of) the weapon ending with (the
syllable) phaf.
48. The preceptor, after having purified the casual princi¬
ples, should cover (the image) with a yellow coloured cloth
(sanctified) by the repetition of the dharma {mantra) in the com¬
pany of the protectors of the image.
49-51. After having worshipped (the ima^e) with white
flowers it should be carried to the sacrificial platform at the

Agni Purifya
north. After having laid (the image) on a seat placed over the
bed, the preceptor should mark (on the image) with lines of
saftron-smeared strings and mark (the position of) the eyes with
a golden stick. The collyrium should be put on (the eyelids)
and then the sculptor should carve out the eyes with an imple¬
ment at the spot as laid down in the technical works.
52. The eyes should be carved into a spot just at half of one
third or half of one fourth or half of half the length, for accompli¬
shing all desires and it is auspicious.
53. Taking one-fourth part of the length of the liAga and
having divided it into three parts, one such part should always
be the breadth of the body.
54. In the lihga of a cubit length, the cavity of the eyes
should be a ninth part of one eighth of d^yava (measure) both in
depth and breadth.
55. In the lihga of one and a half cubit length, the sockets of
the eyes would measure an eighth part of a.yava (measure) more
(than that of the preceding). In that (the liAga) of a cubit len¬
gth (the cayity of the eyes) would be eight (measure) in
depth and breadth.
56. In all the liAgas of l^ambhu (lord Siva) where the length
would increase by the pdda (measure), the measures of the cavi¬
ties of the eyes would also correspondingly increase by a yava
(measure).
57. The lines (on the top of the liAga) would also increase
by three parts both in depth and breadth. In all the cases the top
of the liAga would be narrow and tapering.
58-59. The region of the eyes should be divided into eight
parts and the lower part of the head into two. The two lower
parts (of the region of the eyes) should be left out. The remain¬
ing six parts should be carved into three lines taken round and
joined at the back (of the emblem). The line at the top should
be made to measure 2Lyava (measure) in the case of (a liAga)
made of gem as well as of gold.
60. The form and characteristic features of these are that
the radiance of those made of gem is spotless. (The emblem)
should be endowed with the eyesight by carving the above mark
(into the part indicated above).,
61 . After ha^g worshipped the lines brii^ii^ out the pharacteristic features of the anblem with ghee and libney with (the

repetition of) the mftyuHjayammtrt^ in order to remove the defects
due to the sculptor, the liiiga should then be worshipped after
having bathed it with mud and other things. After having g^tified the sculptor, a cow should be given to the preceptor.
62-64. After havii^ worshipped the liAga with incense and
other things, married women should sing (in praise of the lord).
After having touched the (liAga) on the left and right with the
string or with the Aafa, and rubbing with rorona (pigment), the
women should be sent away after giving gifts of molasses, salt
and brains.
65-67. The preceptor along with the custodians of idols
should bathe (the liAga) with mud, cow-dung, cow*s urine,
ashes and water with the (recitation of) hfdayamantra or prax^ava.
Then (it should be bathed) with the five things got from a cow
preceded by (bathing with) the five sweet things. After the
smearing (of decoctions) of herbs (it should be bathed) with
all herbal waters. (Then it should be bathed) with waters mixed
with white flowers, fruits, gold, gems, horn and barley. Then
(it should be bathed) with thousand pourings of divine herbal
waters.
68. Subsequently, the liiiga should be bathed with sacred
waters, waters of (river) Gaines, waters mixed with sandal and
from the pitcher representing milky ocean and that pitcher of
water sacred to lord Siva.
69-71. Rubbing and besmearing should be done with fra¬
grant sandal and other things. After having worshipped (the
linga) with flowers with the recitation of {mantra) and with
red garments with (the mantras of) armour and after having
shown a red flower preceded by the offer of protective mark, the
liiiga should be worshipped with the mantra of puru^a^ after having
appeased it with jets of ghee, water, milk, Aafa, other articles of
worship and praises. After having rinsed the mouth with (the
mantra of) the heart (the preceptor) should say, **0 lord ! May
you rise up !’*
72. Then the lord should quickly be led to the shed along
with the articles (of worship) in a divine chariot and placed in
the bed (made ready) at the western door (of the shed).
73. At the western door itself a pedestal should be placed on
1. addressed to lord Siva praying for deliverance from death.
Tryambakadi yi^taiahe tugandhim puffivaidhanam urv&rukamiva
bandU^An niftyor mukflya mfimrtAt.

Agni "PurSif^
an auspicious seat permeated with the goddesses beginning with
Sakti and ending with Mati. The brakmaiild should ^also be
bestowed therein.
74-75. The saciificial pitcher in which the psychic sleep had
been induced should be converted into the fixed seat. After
having placed it in the north-cast corner of the shed and offered
waters for washing with (the mantra of) the heart, the liftga
should be lifted (from the bed) and deposited on the seat with
the head turned towards the east and obeisance to Dharma
(god of virtue) and others (should be done) with (the mantra
•of) creation.
76. Incense should be offered. After having worshipped
the HAgay garments and household articles should be offered with
.(the mantra of) the heart befitting one’s capacity.
77-78. A vessel filled with ghee and honey should be placed
near the foot as unguent. The officiating priest who is present
therein should locate the thirtysix principles beginning with
energy and ending with the earth along with their respective
presiding deities and divide (the above body) into three parts
with garlands of flowers.
79-83. After having located the fundamental principles
beginning with the principle of illusion and ending with that of
the absolute energy, together with the principles of soul, know¬
ledge and pure bliss, in the order in which they were created,
in the different parts of the body such as the square, octagon or
circle and the presiding deities of the above three principles such
as the gods Brahma, Visnu and Siva having been pro¬
jected into each of the above said divisions and also the different
embodiments of gods such as the earth, fire, the person for
whom the sacrifice is done, sun, water, air, moon, sun,
sky together with their respective deities such as Sarva, Pa^upati, Ugra, Rudra, Bhava, Mahe^vara, Mahadeva and Bhima
and these letters respectively sacred to them such as /a, zra,
iOy fay cay sa and ha should be located therein. Thcprcu^ava
of three parts or the mantra of the heart or some other principal
mantra (are also located).
84-85. (The preceptor) who knows the mantra should locate
five deities of (the five ilmdamental principles earth, water,
lustre, wind and ether along with their five presiding;^deities, and

Brahmil, Dhara^dhara, Rudra, ISa and Sad&livain the order
of creation in the case of a sacrifice having five fire-pits.
86. (The principles of) non-action, and other things, and
their presiding deities Ajata and others or the three principles
should be located as the cause of pervading in the case of a seeker
of release (from bondage).
87. Gods known as VidyeiSas (lords of learning) should be
meditated upon in the case of one’s own soul being pure and the
Lokanayakas (lords of the world) in the case of one’s own and
being impure and also the protectors of images, enjoyers and lords
of the mantras.
88. (The fundamental principles numbering) twenty-five^,
eight*, five* and three* and their lords such as Indra and others
(should be worshipped) in order as follows:
Oifi kSm obeisance to the principle of energy etc. Ofh hdm
obeisance to the presiding deity of the principle of energy etc.
Ofh hdm obeisance to the image of kfmd (earth) . Orh kdm obeisance
to (lord) Siva, presiding deity of the image of earth etc. Orh,
hum obeisance to the image of pfthivi (earth). Orh hSm obeisance
to Brahmi, the presiding deity of the image etc. Orh hdm obei¬
sance to (lord) Rudra, the presiding deity of the principle of
Siva (auspiciousness) etc.
89-91. (The preceptor) should recite (the above mantras)
from the region of the navel, spreading like the sounds of bell,
rejecting the causes such as Brahma and others and meditate on
the mantra resting in (the lotus of) twelve petals and which is
different from the mind and which resembles the sentiment of
bliss obtained. Having collected filaments from the twelve (petalled lotuses) (lord Siva), who pervades (everything) and is
devoid of kalis, should be contemplated upon as shining re¬
splendent with thirtyeight kalis, effulgent with thousand rays,
consisting of all energies and accompanied by the attendant
gods; (he) should be then projected in the liAga.
92. The jivanyisefi in the lihga will be accomplished in this
1. The atyakta, mahat, ahahkira, pafUabhUtas, pafkatemm&tr&s, paHeakar^
nundrijtas, panu^Mrmdriyas, mams and ytgamdm.
2. The five elements, sun, moon and yajamdna.
3. The five elements.
4. The three qualities JottKi, riyas and iamas .
5. The prelection of vital energy.

292 Agni Purd^
manner. It yields all fruits. The location in the pedestal etc.
will be described now. ,
93-94. Afrer having been washed and besmeared with sandal
paste etc., the pedestal should be covered by a good cloth.
Then the stone set ready just like the liAga and placed at the north
of the liAga should be endowed with the five gems in its aperture
resembling the female organ of generation and should be wor¬
shipped as laid down.
95. The (pedestal) stone which has been bathed again
should be deposited at the foot of the liAga. So also the bull and
(others such as the goddess of) energy should be located after
doing the rites of bathing etc. (to them).
96-97. It should be done being preceded by the pra^a
(syllable om) and (followed by) any one of (the mystic letters)
Aam, pum and hrim. The pedestal stone which is of the form of the
base and which is endowed with the energy of action (should be
worshipp>ed) with sacred ashes, darbha and sesamum. Then the
three outer walls should be set up. The guardian deities with
their weapons should be worshipped outside for the sake of pro-^
tection.
Orh hlMf krSm obeisance to the energy of action. Ofh hUany
hrdniy haiji oblation to Mahagaur!, the consort of Rudra — this
(being performed) on the pedestal. OiA, hSm obeisance to the
energy of support. Om, hSm obeisance to the bull.
98-101. The (female deities) Dh^ika, Diptimatl, Ugri
Jyotsna, Balotka^a, Dh&tri and Vidhatri or the five g^desses
Varna, Jye§jha, Kriyi, Jiiana, Vedha or the three Kriya, Jfiana
and Iccha should be located as before. So also the female god¬
desses should be located in the benefic forms of gods. The five
energies Tami, Moh^, K^ml, Ni|^, Mftyu, M&ya, or Bhava
Jvara, Mahamoha, Ghora, Tritayajvara or the three presiding
female deities Kriyi, Jfiana and B&dha should be located in the
three indomitable principles of soul etc.
102. Even in this case the pedestal (should be worshipped)
in the Brahm4 — ^part (of the lihga) in the order. All routines
should be performed as before with (the goddess) Gauri and
others.
103-105. Having located in this manner, (the |n«ceptor)
should go near the (fire) pit and invoke (lord) Mahclvara at the
centre of the pit and on tihe borders, the goddess of action in the

other border and the sound (om) at the lip. Then the union of
the occult psychic force with the sacrificial pitcher, the ground,
fire and (lord) lia (should be brought about).
106-107. The preceptor should contemplate his psychic energy
resembling the fire ofa lotus rejected upwards by the rising wind,
entering by the path of the sun, emergii^ out and again enter¬
ing by the path of void. In this manner mutual union with (the
psychic forces of) the protectors of guardians should be brought
about everywhere.
108. After having worshipped the energy (known as)
Dh&rik& (ability to hold), duly the fimdamental principles
along with their presiding deities, and the im^es (of gods) aloi^
with their presiding deities with ghee etc. and offered oblation
duly in the fire-pit in their presence with the sariihitd manirast
oblation should again be made hundred or thousand or five
himdred times (concluding) with the final oblation.
109. Similarly, the guardians of deities should also satisfy
the fimdamental principles along with their presiding deities,
and the inuges (of gods) along with their presiding deities and
offer oblation.
110-111. After having satisfied the (goddess of) energy
with Brahma mantras befitting one’s capacity and time and sprink¬
led the waters of the pitcher with the ends of the kuSa and touched
the base of the liAgOt one should repeat (the mantras) as many
times as (the number of) oblations. The presence of the god
should be accomplished by (repeating) the mantra of the heart.
The act of covering (the image) should be done by (repeating)
the mantra of the armour.
112-13. After having performed (the rites) thus for the
purification of (the parts of the liAga presided over by) the g^ods
Brahmi to Vi^i^u, (the preceptor) should complete the oblation
and repetition of the mantras as many times (as mentioned above).
The middle and tip of the liAga should be touched with the middle
and tip of the hita. The mode of achieving the union is described
now:
Om, hdm. Mam, om, om, om, om, om, bhOm, bk&m obeisance to the
image outside. Om, hOm, odm, om, om, om, fdm, om, bhUm, bhUm,
o9m obeisance to the image of fire-god.
1 14. Similarly, the images of ihs jfajamOna and others should
be conteniplated (in the liAga), So also in the case of the five

294 AgniPurS^
manifestations of the god, union must be brought about with
(the repetition of the mantra of) the heart etc. *
115. It should be known that (the union) in the case of the
three fundamental principles (soul, knowledge and bliss) with
the liAga, pedestal and bull is brought about by the principal
(mantra) or with their own fundamental (letters) completely
and without any omission.
116-19. Hundred oblations should be made for the puri¬
fication of the different parts (of the liAga) and hundred and
eight (oblations) with the mantra of (lord) Siva for the removal
of any deficiency (in performing the sacrifice). After having
made oblation, whatever act has been done that should be
uttered in the ear of (lord) Siva: “This act has been completed
by me by your grace ! O lord ! Om, obeisance to lord Rudra !
Obeisance to (lord) Rudradeva ! Whether this act is complete
as laid down or incomplete, you complete it by your power and
accept it. Then the learned (preceptor) should locate in the
liAga and the act in the pedestal of the image.
120-121. The energy of the form of support should be locat¬
ed in the Brahma (part of the) stone. The (rite of) adhivdsana
(staying together) should extend over seven nights or five nights
or three nights or a single night or be done immediately. The
sacrifice performed without (the performance of) adhivSsana
does not yield any benefit even if performed.
122. Hundreds of oblations should be offered everyday
with the respective mantras. Worship of the pitcher of (lord)
Siva and offering to the quarters should be conveyed.
123. The adhivdsa is so called because the disciple stays with
the preceptor practising vows. It is said to be the attitude till
the end of the stay.
CHAPTER NINETYSEVEN
Mode of installation of the image of (lord) Siva
The lord said :
1. After having performed the daily rites in the morning
and worshipped the guardian deities, the preceptor should enter
(the temple) as described already and purify his body.

2-3. After having worshipped the lords of the quarters, the
sacrificial pitcher of (lord) Siva and the small pitcher and hav¬
ing satisfied the liAga and the fire duly with eight handfuls (of
oblation), (the preceptor) should enter the temple reciting
(the mantra of) the weapon by the command of (lord) Siva.
The obstacles therein should be removed by (the repetition of)
the mantra of the arrow ending with (the syllables) /turn, phat.
4-7. The liAga should not be established at the middle (of
the temple) to avoid the defect of injury. Hence the stone slab
should be established having left half of Ayava (a measure) or a
yava from the centre a little towards the north-east.
That slab (known as) ananta (literally without end) and which
is of the form of support of all (should be established) with the
principal {mantra). The stone slab known as Acald (without
movement) which is all-pervading and is of the form of the seat
of (lord) Siva should be placed by the use of (the mantra of)
creation or by (the repetition of) the following mantra : — “Om I
All pervading goddess ! Firm and unmovable (goddess) Acala I
obeisance. Hram, lam, hrim, oblations. You must always remain
here by the command of (lord) Siva.”
8-16. After having spoken thus and having worshipped (the
linga), (the preceptor) should arrest its movement by showing
the raudramudra (a posture made with, the fingers). After that,
(the preceptor) should place the diamond and the other gems,
fragrant root, metals like gold and bronze yellow orpiment etc.,
cereals and grains described already and respectively representing
lustre, beauty, strength and valour duly in the holes in the
(directions) east etc. after having devotedly contemplated with
the mantras of guardian deities of the world. A tortoise or bull
made of gold or silver (should be located) along with earth from
the banks of a river or from the peaks of a mountain in the central
(and other) holes facing the entrance. Otherwise a golden image
of a meru along with honey, unbroken rice and coUyrium (should
be located). Otherwise a golden or silver image of the earth
should be located along with syllables of all the rrsantras and gold.
Then a lotus stalk made of gold or silver or all metals together
with a dish consisting of sesamum and grains should be located.
After having located the seat of the lord representing the energy
it should be anointed with sweet porridge or guggulu (an aroma-

296 Agni PurO^a
tic) and covered with a cloth protected by (the recitation of)
the {mantra) of the armour and weapon. ^
17-21. After having offered oblations to the presiding deities
of the quarters and rinsing the mouth, the preceptor should offer
hundred oblations either with (the repetition of) (the mantra of
lord) Siva or with (the mantra of) the weapon along with the
final (oblation) for the removal of defects in the cavity of the
stone slab on account of contamination. After having appteased
the presiding deities of the ground by offering an oblation, the
preceptor should lift the deity along with the seat with (the reci¬
tation of the mantra of) the heart and the sounding of auspicious
notes. Then the preceptor should walk ahead of the deity and
behind the sacrificial ground of the lord along with the four
custodians of the image standing in the (different) directions and
the person at whose bidding the rite is performed. After having
done the circumambulation, the liAga should be established in
front of the door known as bhadra (welfare). After having offered
waters for washing, (the liAga) should be taken to the temple
through the door, the door frame and the region of the door.
22. The great lord should be taken only through the door
without contacting the door (in the case of an unfinished temple)
if the door frame has unfinished edges or incomplete or is half
done.
23-24. In the case of the construction of a temple being
begun, (the lingo) should be taken in through the comer also.
This is the general rule even in the case of a manifested liAga as
the worldly practice for entry into the temple through the door.
It is known that if the entry into the temple is made through
the side door it causes destruction of the race.
25-33. After having placed the liitga in the seat facing the
door with the sounding of auspicious tUrya (a kind of musical
instrument) and (offerings of) dflrvA (a kind of grass) and un¬
broken rice, (the preceptor) should recite the great pdiupata
{mantra) after uttering *Rise, O lord’ with (the recitation of the
mantra of) the heart. After having removed the sacrificial pit¬
chers from the holes, the preceptor in the company of the guar¬
dians of the image should mentally repeat the mantra and con¬
template (the liAga) besmeared with saffron and other thix^
and the union of the god and goddess as prot^ted. After having
recited the principal {mantra) till deep concentration^is gained).

(the preceptor) should touch (the liAga) and place it in the hole.
Either a portion of the Brahma-part (of the liAga) or two parts
(of the same) or half of it or one-eighth of the whole (liAgq)
should be under (the earth). After having covered (the liAga)
with lead upto the waist with concentration, (the preceptor)
should fill the cavity with sand and say, “ (You) be firm”. Then
after the liAga has become firm, (the preceptor) should contem¬
plate him who is of all the forms (of beings), recite the principal
{mantra) and locate the nifkala (devoid of attributes) upto the
energy by the (order of) creation. If the liAga that is being estab¬
lished leans towards the south, the preceptor should offer obla¬
tions with the mantras of the respective presiding deities of the
directions until the final (oblation) along with the fees. (The
preceptor) should offer hundred oblations either with the prin¬
cipal mantra or (the mantra) of manifold forms if (the liAga leans)
to the left or slips down or cracks. Even in the case of other
defects (the preceptor) should similarly perform the blissful
appeasing rite.
34. A liAga associated with the rites of location etc. in this
manner does not bring any harm. The pedestal should be con¬
secrated as possessing a part of the characteristic (mentioned
already for the liAga).
35. After having projected the mantra of (the goddess)
Gaur! (consort of lord l^iva) in the pedestal, the pedestal should
be consecrated with (the mantra) of creation. The sides (of the
linga) should be smoothened and binding cement and sand
should be put.
36-37. Then the preceptor in the company of the custo¬
dians of the image should bathe the images (with the waters)
from the pitcher of peace and other pitchers placed there as well
as the paAcdtmfta (a composition of the milk, sugar, curd, ghee
and honey) and other things. It should then be besmeared with
sandal paste and other things. After having worshipped the lord
of the universe (Siva), (the preceptor) should touch the parts
(represented by lord Siva and his consort Umi) with the reci¬
tation of the mantras of (goddess) Umi and (lord) Maheia
(Siva) and showing the liAgamudrd (a posture made with the
fingers).
38-39. Then (the preceptor) should (mentally) project

Agni Purd^a
the three (fundamental) principles^ in that preceded by the six
kinds of worship. After having located the image along avith the
presiding divinities of the (different) parts as also (lord) Brahma
in the seat of action, the learned person should bathe it. After
having besmeared it with fragrant (pastes) and showing frag¬
rant fumes, it should be located as the sole pervading principle
of (lord) Siva.
40-44. After having offered to (lord) Siva the garlands of
flowers, incense sticks, lamps, edible offerings and fruits with
(the recitation of the mantra of) the heart befitting one’s capacity
and sipping waters (thrice), water should be offered to the lord
for cleansing. After the recitation (of the mantras sacred to the
lord) and assigning the merits of the same on his right hand
(the preceptor) should address the lord in the company of the
custodians of (the image of lord) Siva as follows: “O lord !
You should stay in this temple by your own wish as long
as the sun, moon and stars (would shine in the sky).”
After having made obeisance thus, (the preceptor) should
go outside (the temple reciting) either (th^ mantra) of the heart
or the prar^aoa (syllable om). After having established (the image
of) the bull, (the preceptor) should make the offering as
before. One hundred oblations should be made with the
mTtyuhjaya (mantra) (that which conquers' death) for the removal
of defects like omission etc. In order to appease the lord obla¬
tions with sweet porridge should be done with (the recitation of
the mantra of) the heart. “O great lord ! Whatever thing has
been done by me through ignorance or inadvertance you make
it good.”
45. One should dedicate all things to the lord of the goddess
who is the cause of gold, animals, earth, songs and musical instru¬
ments with devotion and within one’s means.
46. Gifts (should be given) and then festivities should be
celebrated for four days. The preceptor should offer oblations
for three days at the three conjunctions (of time) (the morning,
midday and evening) in the company of the custodians of the
image.
47-48. And the final oblation composed of sacrificial
porridge should be offered in all pits purified with the oblaSoul, knowledge and bliss.

tion (known as) sampita (fulfilling oblation) on the fourth day
with (the recitation of) the bahurUpi {mantra). The fiowers used
should be kept for four days after that and removed afterwards.
After having bathed the image, it should be worshipped.
49-52. Worship in the case of ordinary liiigas should be done
by (the repetition of) the general mantras. Except conscious¬
ness of the liAga^ the lord should be bid adieu. In the case of
liAgas of extraordinary nature (lord) should be bid adieu (with
the repetition of words), “Pardon (us O lord I )*’ In
vocation, manifestation and dismissal (are done) befitting one’s
ability. According to some it has been stated that seven obla¬
tions for the steadiness etc. (should be cast) at the end of instal¬
lation. Steadiness, immeasurableness, cognisance of the origin¬
less existence, eternity, all-pervasiveness, deathlessness, seen
as manifested are spoken as the characteristics of (lord) Siva
for the manifestation.
53-54. “Om ! obeisance to (lord) Siva. Be thou steady.”
This is the order offering oblations. After having accom¬
plished this in this manner and having permeated the two pit¬
chers with the essence of lord Siva, the (lord) Bhava (Siva)
should be bathed with (the waters of) the one and the other
should be borne for bathing the performer.
55-57. After having made the offering, (the preceptor)
should do the dcamana (sipping of waters thrice) and go outside
with the permission of lord Siva. (The god) Ca^^a should
be located on a seat over a good pedestal in the north-eastern
direction outside the sacrificial ground and worshipped with
the brahma mantras preceded by contemplation, and rites of loca¬
tion and offering of oblations. The worship using the brahma
mantras is that in which the components are mentioned at first.
Om, Aflm, phaf obeisance to Sadyoj&ta. Om, Ai2m, phaf obei¬
sance to Vamadeva. Om, Fttm, phaf obeisance to Aghora. Om,
vatim, phaf obeisance to Tatpuru$a. Om, Ailm, phat obeisance to
liana.
58-59. After having conveyed the (merits of) repetition
(to the lord) and appeased him, (the lord) should be addressed
as follows preceded by bowing. O (lord Ca^da) I Stay (in this
temple) as long as the lord (Siva) stays here. O(lord) Ca^^daia I
Whatever has been omitted or made in excess by me out of
ignorance, make it complete by your grace,

Agni Purii}a
60. Lord Ga^dst should not be invoked in cases where a
b&nalihga (a kind of stone representing lord Siva) or a liAga placed
on the bdij,a stone or an accomplished liAga or self-originated
lifiga or images of all gods (are established).
61-66. Even in the case of rites relating to the presiding
deity of the sacrificial ground in which there is the mental atti¬
tude of union with the lord, the preceptor should worship (lord)
Candeia, and the yajamdna (the person for whom the work is
done) along with his son and wife and should bathe himself
with (the waters of) the pitcher already placed. The yajamdna
should also worship the preceptor as (the lord) Maheia (Siva)
and make gifts of parth, gold and other things without any distinc¬
tion whatever. After having satisfied befittingly the protectors
of images, those \vho repeat (the mantras)^ the brahmins, astro¬
logers and sculptors, the destitutes, forlorns and others should
be fed. “O lord ! Ocean of compassion ! Forgive me for all
the sufferings you had in being present here.” To the yajamOna
who has spoken thus, the preceptor should offer with his own
hands the merits of consecration resplendent like the
glowing star along with the kuSa^ flowers and unbroken rice.
67. After having then saluted (lord) Paramefvara (Siva)
endowed with the pdiupata {mantra) ^ (the preceptor) should
address the attendant gods (of the lord) with offerings for their
presence.
68-71. ‘‘You should stay here in as long as (the lord) Kara
(Siva) is present here. Then the preceptor should take posses¬
sion of the sacrificial shed along with the cloth etc. Then the
sculptor (should take possession of) the bathing shed along with
the articles (found therein). All other gods should be estab¬
lished with the repetition of the mantras as given in the dgamas^.
(In these establishments of other gods) the splitting of the first
letter of the (respective) names (of the gods) and the location
of fundamental principles pervading these (should be made).
The gods commencing with Sadhya, the rivers, herbs, the guar¬
dian deities of the ground, kinnaras (semi-divine beings) and
others should lie in the principle of earth. In some places the
location of the (goddesses) Sarasvatl and Lak9m! (are) in the
waters.
1 . Texts renting to worship of deities in the temples.

72. The presiding deities of the world (should be estab¬
lished) in those places where they remain firm. The place of
Brahmi is the three fundamental principles which extends to
the important cause of expansion of the (primordial) egg.
73. The place of Hari (Vi?nu) is the triad (of worlds)
which has the subtle principles as the main. The places for the
lord of dancing (Nafyefa, a form of Siva), (attendant gods),
mothers (goddesses), Yak^e^as (semi-divine beings) and (lord)
Subrahmai^ya (are as described above).
74. The place of Ganapati is that upto the principle of pure
knowledge. (The place) of splendours emitted by (lord) Siva
and (his consort) Siva (Parvati) extends to the energy in the
region of a part of the illusion.
75-77. In the case of manifested images, the place is spoken
as upto the lord (Siva). Some forms like the tortoise as well as
the five things such as the gem etc. should be put in the hole of the
pedestal except in the case of (the image of) the fiv«* brahman
forms (of lord Siva). In the hole divided into six parts one part
from the end is left out and fixing is made in the fifth part. If
it is divided into eight parts, the fixing is done in the seventh
part. This fixing in the case of images brings forth happiness.
78-79. Purification is done by meditation when the images
are fixed. In the case of plastered and painted images bathing,
placing on a pedestal, placing gems (underneath), opening of
the eyes, the (placing of) mantras^ and the offer of seats etc.
(should be done) mentally. Worship should be done with flow¬
ers without water in them so that the picture may not get spoilt.
80-82. “The mode (of fixing) the movable variety of litlga
is described now.” (The liAga) should be divided into five or
three parts separately and three or two parts (should be set
apart for fixing). On account of the different fundamental prin¬
ciples, the purification of the pedestals as well as the liAgas made
of crystals (should be done) with the mantra o£ creation as laid
down. In those cases there is no need to place the bralimatilS
and the gems etc.
83. The placing of the image on the pedestal should be done
mentally. There is no special procedure for purification in the
case of self-originated liAgas and bS^aliAgas {liAgas made of a
kind of stone).

Agni Purd^a
84. (The movable liAgas) should be bathed with (the
recitation of) the vedic mantras. So also the (rite of) assigning
an oblation should be done (with the same mantra!). The
(sacred) rivers, oceans and mountains are installed as before.
85-86. The liHgas made of earth and flours are known as
aihika (relating to this world) and kfata (perishable). Af^er
having made such a lifiga pure, one should worship as laid down
with the rites of initiation etc. Then after having withdrawn the
mantras into himself in its presence, the preceptor should cast
that liAga in the waters. It yields one’s desires within a year. The
installation of (the images of) Vi?nu etc. should be done with
separate mantras.
CHAPTER NINETYEIGHT
Mode of installation of the image of goddess Gauri
The Lord said :
1. Listen ! I shall describe the mode of installation together
with the worship (of the image) of (goddess) Gauri (consort of
lord Siva). The sacrificial shed etc. should be erected and (the
image of the goddess) should be placed therein.
2. O Guha (son of lord Siva and Parvati ) ! After having
placed the goddess on the bed, the mantras of the images (should
be located therein), and the principles commencing with the
knowledge of the soul and ending with Siva as also lord liana
(Siva) should be located.
3. After having located the goddess of absolute energy,
offered oblations and recited (the mantras) as before, the pedestal
of the form of the energy of action should be placed.
4-5. After having contemplated it as pervading the same
place and having put the gems etc., the goddess of the form of
supreme energy should be fixed therein with her own mantras.
The energy of action should be located in the pedestal and the
energy of knowledge in the image (of the goddess).
6. Then the pervading energy should be invoked and locat¬
ed therein. Then the mother goddess known also as $iva should

also be invoked and worshipped. Om, obeisance to the sustain¬
ing energy. Om, obeisance to the tortoise (supporting the uni¬
verse). Om, obeisance to (lord) Skanda (son of lord Siva and
Parvati). Om, hrim obeisance to (lord) Narayana (Vi§nu).
Om, obeisance to sovereignty. Om, am obeisance to the under¬
cover. Om, obeisance to the lotus seat. Then (the gods) Ke^ava
(Vi?nu) and others should be worshipped. Om, hrlm obeisance to
the pericarp. One should worship here with (the mantras) “Om,
kfom obeisance to the lotus eyes”. Om, h&m obeisance to nourish¬
ment, hrim (obeisance) to knowledge, krim (obeisance) to action.
Om, obeisance to the stalk of lotus. Rxm, obeisance to virtue.
Rum, obeisance to knowledge. Om, obeisance to indifference to
the world. Om obeisance to impiety. Om, Rum obeisance to igno¬
rance. Om obeisance to attachment to the world. Om obeisance
to indigence. Hum, obeisance to speech, to the passionate, kraim
to the fiery. Om, hraum obeisance to tranquility. Then hrum
obeisance to the elder (goddess). Om, hrum, raum, kraum (obei¬
sance) to (goddess) of fresh energy, gaum to the seat of Gauri.
Gaum obeisance to the form of Gauri. Then the principal mantra
of (goddess )Gaun is told. Om, hrim, sah, maha Gauri, consort
of Rudra (Siva), oblations 1 Obeisance to (goddess) Gauri.
Gdm, hrSm, hrim, Sivahi, gUm, to tuft, to armour. Gom to eye and
gom to the weapon, om, gaum to the energy of wisdom, om GUm
obeisance to the energy of action. (Gods) Indra and others (are
worshipped) in the east and other directions. Om, sum obeisance
to Subhaga (favourite wife). Hrim bija lalita then. And om,
hrim obeisance to KaminI (an affectionate woman). Om hrum
Kamaialinl. After having established (goddess) Gauri with
the mantras, worshipping (her) and repeating (the mantras),
one may get everything.
CHAPTER NINETYNINE
Mode of installation of the image of the sun-god.
The lord said :
1-2. 1 shall describe (the mode of) installation of the sungod. The sacrificial shed (and other things) should be (made

304 Agni Purd^a
ready) as before. Then after having completed the rites of ablu*
tion etc., as prescribed before, and having located the sun-god
with his attendants and (goddess) Vidya in the seat aifd bed,
(the preceptor) should locate the three (fundamental) princi¬
ples (of soul, knowledge^nd bliss) and the five (principles of)
sky etc. along with chants.
3. After having done the purification etc. as before and hav¬
ing purified the pedestal as before, (the preceptor should locate
the five principles upto their own place.
4-5. After having established (the pedestal) then along with
the (goddess of) energy (called) Sarvatomukhi as laid down,
the preceptor should establish (the image of) the sun. (god)
as laid down with the (utterance of) its mantras as permeated
with the energfy or the master. The name should be borne upto
the end of the foot. The mantras which have been described
already should be seen at (the time of) establishment also.
CHAPTER ONE HUNDRED
Rites of consecration of doors of a temple
The Lord said :
1 . Then I shall describe the mode of consecrating the doors
(of a temple). After having washed the door frames with decoc¬
tions of herbs, they should be laid on the bed.
2-3. The three fundamental principles — the soul etc. to¬
gether with their lords should be located in the lower, middle
and upper parts. After having offered oblations, and repeated
the rupa mantras^ the vdstu {the presiding spirit of the place) should
be worshipped there itself with the mantra of Ananta (an impor¬
tant serpent chief). After having placed the five things gem etc.,
the rite of appeasement should be done.
4-5. Barley, white mustard, krdntdy r^dhif vj^ddhi, mahdtila,
gomfty mustard, rdjendra, mohaniy lakfma^dy amftdy rocandy rugy vaedy
dUrvd and pdfali should be placed on the threshold under the
temple in their natural form for the sake of protection after the
recitation of (the syllable) om.

6. The northern door should be consecrated after sprinkl¬
ing water. The fundamental principle of the soul should be
located under that and the principle of knowledge on the sides.
7. The principle of bliss (should be located) in the region
of the sky as permeating the entire region. Then (lord) Mahejanatha (Siva) should be installed with (the recitation of) the
principal mantra.
8. The turrets etc. resting on the door (should be located)
with their respective names appended. Oblation to fire should
be made hundred times or half the number of times or twice that
or according to one’s ability.
9. One hundred oblations should be made with the mantra
of the weapons to ward off defects of omission etc. After
having offered oblations for the quarters, the fees etc. should
be paid.
