READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: the_vedic_experience_mantra_manjari_by_raimundo_panikkar_english_and_sanskrit_in_devanagari_script_vedas.json
Dataset number: 396 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 496,649 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: The Vedic Experience Mantra Manjari By Raimundo Panikkar English and Sanskrit in Devanagari Script Vedas Illustrated Pondicherry 1983 - All India Books
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: The Vedic Experience Mantra Manjari By Raimundo Panikkar English and Sanskrit in Devanagari Script Vedas Illustrated Pondicherry 1983 - All India Books
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Mantra Books XML
  • total_pages: 435
  • total_words: 107328
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.927
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
- | undati пепла and еСапдоїгі -
ae:
Te
aeg
i|
qx fat are at fram {
$1 жчат 45 far a ufum 4
чт + ta | |
| Капап Collection, Ha
Ead exo = Li

к 101126: у Агуа ier а) FOU a pe ennal and е ango ГІ i L.C)
А Ер ve aus tape a ee
o cmm
Ч Эн : t wy e
Ac
geaa-faawa at fafa AA sifra |
ч T чт зїйд | тшт x 88 зєн бра
ж-з TUT | ЄЛЄР,
m
«тє m uo
DEM Y. i
Pra we q-29 №
ty Sais
С сү Neu
ы ү,
СС-0 In Public Domain. Gurukul Kang ri Col lection, Haridwar

of
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ER
T
ditio ne DN
WY,
Ra їч Aue UST ЧЄВЧ TIAA Lo
Hindu Vishvavidyalaya Nepal Rajya Sanskrit Series Vol.10
| VEDIC MATHEMATICS
| OR
| ‘SIXTEEN SIMPLE MATHEMATICAL
| FORMULAE FROM THE VEDAS’
(For One-line Answers to All Mathematical Problems)
BY
JAGADGURU
SWAMI SRI BHARATI KRSNA TIRTHAJI MAHARAJA,
SHANKARACHARYA OF GOVARDHANA MATHA, PURI.
General Editor
Dr. V. 5. AGRAWALA
First Fdition. ] [ Price Rs. 10/-
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ee
(OSwrr. Mansoura TRIVEDI
Published by
Hindu Vishvavidyalaya
Sanskrit Publication Board,
Banaras Hindu University,
Varanasi—5 | |
ТҮС
Ее Л
xum LEES
n LI
Pl
ё yi A “Оо м =
v A О
: А Printed by |
х Laxsuwr Das |
. Banaras Hindu University Press,
: Varanasi—b
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

PUBLICATION ANNOUNCEMENT
I have great pleasure in associating myself with the publication of the book Vedic Mathematics or ‘Sixteen Simple Mathematical Formulae,’ by Jagadguru Swami Bharati Krishna
Tirtha, Shankaracharya of Govardhana Pitha. It was long
awaited by his disciples. Shrimati Manjula Devi, sole inheriter
of Swamiji’s right, entered into an agreement with the Banaras
Hindu University to publish it and the same is now being
done in the Nepal Endowment Hindu Vishvavidyalaya Sanskrit
Granthamala.
I feel grateful to all those who have worked for it. Shri
Arvind N. Mafatlal business magnate of Bombay and a devotee
of Swamiji has taken interest in the publication of the work.
He has taken the trouble of b being personally present in this
ceremony of publication (Prakashana Utsava). “Не has given
expression to his deep devotion to Shri Shankaracharyaji by
consenting to found a chair at the Banaras Hindu University
by the name of Shri Jagadguru Bharati Krishna Tirtha Shankaracharya Chair of Vedic Studies for which he is making a
magnificent endowment. As Vice-Chancellor of this University
I accept the donation and offer my heart-felt thanks to him
for his generosity.
N. H. BHAGWATI
Date 27-3-65 Vice-Chancellor
"d е Hindu University
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

GENERAL EDITOR’S FOREWORD
The work entitled VEDIC MATHEMATICS or ‘Sixteen
Simple Mathematical Formule from the Vedas’ was written by
His Holiness Jagadguru Sankaricarya Sri Bharati Krsna
Tirthaji Maharaja of Govardhana Matha, Puri (1884-1960).
It forms a class by itself not pragmatically conceived and worked .
out as in the case of other scientific works, but the result of the
intuitional visualisation of fundamental mathematical truths
and principles during the course of eight years of highly concentrated mental endeavour on the part of the author and therefore
appropriately given the title of “mental” mathematics appearing
more as miracle than the usual approach of hard-baked science,
as the author has himself stated in the Preface.
Swami байКатасагуа was а gifted scholar on many fronts
of learning including science and humanities but his whole
milieu was something of a much higher texture viz, that he was
a Resi fulfilling the ideals and attainments of those Seers of
ancient India who discovered the cosmic laws embodied in
the Vedas. Swami Bharati Krsna Tirtha had the same reverential approach towards the Vedas. The question: naturally
arises as to whether the Sütras which form the basis of this
treatise exist anywhere in the Vedic literature as known to us.
But this criticism loses all its force if we inform ourselves of the
definition of Veda given by Sri байКатасагуа, himself as quoted
below :
“The very word ‘Veda’ has this derivational meaning i.e. the fountainhead and illimitable store-house of all knowledge. This derivation, in effect,
means, connotes and implies that the Vedas should contain (italics mine) within
themselves all the knowledge needed by mankind relating not only to the socalled ‘spiritual’ (or other-worldly) matters but also to those usually described
as purely ‘secular’, ‘temporal’, or ‘worldly’ and also to the means required by
humanity as such for the achievement of all-round, complete and perfect success
in all conceivable directions and that there can be no adjectival or restrictive
epithet calculated (or tending) to limit that knowledge down in any sphere,
any direction or any respect whatsoever.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

“In other words, it connotes and implies that our ancient Indian Vedic
lore should be (italics mine) all-round, complete and perfect and able to throw
the fullest necessary light on all matters which any aspiring seeker after knowledge can possibly seek to be enlightened оп”.
Tt is the whole essence of his assessment of Vedic tradition
that it is not to be approached from a factual standpoint but
from the ideal standpoint viz, as the Vedas as traditionally
accepted in India as the repository of all knowledge should be
and not what they are in human possession. That approach
entirely turns the tables on all critics, for the authorship of
Vedic mathematics then need not be laboriously searched in the
texts as preserved from antiquity. The Vedas are well known
as four in number Rk, Yaju, Sama and Atharva but they have
also the four Upavedas and the six Vedangas all of which form
an indivisible corpus of divine knowledge as it once was and as
it may be revealed. The four Upavedas are as follows :—
Veda Upaveda
Rgveda Ayurveda
Samaveda Gandharvaveda
Yajurveda Dhanurveda
Atharvaveda Sthapathyaveda
| In this list the Upaveda of Sthapatya or engineering comprises all kinds of architectural and structural human endeavour
and all visual arts. Swamiji naturally regarded mathematics
or the science of calculations and computations to fall under
this category.
In the light of the above definition and approach must be
understood the author’s statement that the sixteen Sütras on
which the present volume is based form part of a Parigista of
the Atharvaveda. We are aware that each Veda has its subsidiary apocryphal texts some of which remain in manuscripts and
others have been printed but that formulation has not closed.
For example, some Parigistas of the Atharvaveda were edited
by б. M. Bolling and J. Von Negelein, Liepzing, 1909-10. But
this work of Sri баћкагасагуајї deserves to be regarded as a
new Parigista by itself and it is not surprising that the Sütras
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

T
mentioned herein do not appear in the hitherto known Рал16istas.
A list of these main 16 Sütras and of their sub-sütras or
corolaries is prefixed in the beginning of the text and
the style of language also points to their discovery by Sri
Swamiji himself. At any rate, it is needless to dwell longer on
this point of origin since the vast merit of these rules should be
a matter of discovery for each intelligent reader. Whatever is
written here by the author stands on its own merits and is
presented as such to the mathematical world.
Swamiji was a marvellous person with surpassing qualities
and was a prolific writer and eloquent speaker. I had the
good fortune of listening to his.discourses for weeks together on
several occasions when he used to visit Lucknow and attracted
large audiences. He could at a stretch speak for several hours
in Sanskrit and English with the same facility and the intonation
of his musical voice left a lasting impression on the minds of
his hearers. He was an ardent admirer of Bhartrhari the great
scientific thinker of the Golden Age of Indian history in a
different field viz, that of philosophy of grammar.
Swamiji had planned to write 16 volumes on all aspects
and branches of mathematical processes and problems and there
is no doubt that his mental powers were certainly of that calibre,
but what has been left to us is this introductory volume which
in itself is of the highest merit for reason of presenting a new
technique which the author styles as “mental” mathematics
different from the orthodox methods of mathematicians all over
the world. Arithmetical problems usually solved by 18, 28 or
42 steps in case of such vulgar fractions as 1/19, 1/29, 1/49 are
here solved in one simple line and that is possible to be done
even by young boys. The truth of these methods was demonstrated by this saintly teacher before many University audiences
in India and in the U.S.A. including learned Professors and every
one present was struck with their originality and simplicity.
We are told in his Preface by Swami байКатасйгуа that
he contemplated to cover all the different branches of matheСС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

matics such as arithmetic, algebra, geometry (plane and solid)
trigonometry (plane and spherical) conics—geometrical and
analytical, astronomy, caleulus—differential and integral etc.,
with these basic Sütras. That comprehensive application of
the Sütras could not be left by him in writing but if some one has
the patience and the genius to pursue the method and implications of these formulae he may probably be able to bring
these various branches within the orbit of this original style.
A full fledged course of his lecture-demonstrations was
organised by the Nagpur University in 1952 and some lectures
were delivered by Swamiji at the B.H.U. in 1949. Tt is, therefore, in the fitness of things and a happy event for the B.H.U.
to be given the opportunity of publishing this book by the
courtesy of Srimati Manjula Devi Trivedi, disciple of Sri Swamiji
who agreed to make over this manuscript to us through the
efforts of Dr. Pt. Omkarnath Thakur. The work has been
seen through the Press mainly by Dr. Prem Lata Sharma, Dean,
Faculty of Music & Fine Arts in the University. To all of
these our grateful thanks are due. Dr. Brij Mohan, Head of the
Department of Mathematics, B.H.U., took the trouble, at my
request, of going through the manuscript and verifying the
calculations for which I offer him my best thanks. I also
express gratitude to Sri Lakshmidas, Manager, B.H.U. Press,
for taking great pains in printing this difficult text.
We wish to express our deepest gratitude to Sri Swami
Pratyagatmananda Saraswati for the valuable foreword that
he has written for this work. Today he stands pre-eminent in
the world of Tantric scholars and is a profound mathematician
and scientific thinker himself. His inspiring words are like
fragrant flowers offered at the feet of the ancient Vedic Réis
whose spiritual lineage was revealed in the late Sankaracarya
Sri Bharati Krsna Tirtha. Swami Pratyagatmanandaji has
not only paid a tribute to Sri Sankaracaryaji but his ambrocial
words have showered blessings on all those who are lovers
of intuitional experiences in the domain of metaphysics and
physics. Swamiji, by a fortunate chance, travelled from Calcutta
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

to Varanasi to preside over the Tantric Sammelan of the Varanaseya Sanskrit University (8th to 11th March 1965) and although
he is now 85 years of age, his innate generosity made him accept
our request to give his foreword.
I am particularly happy that I am able to publish this
work under ‘the Nepal Endowment Hindu Vishvavidyalaya
Publication Series, for I entertained an ardent desire to do so
since our late President Dr. Rajendra Prasadji spoke to me about
its existence when I once met him in New Delhi in the lifetime
of $11 Swamiji.
Ү. 5. AGRAWALA,
M.A., Ph.D., D.Litt.
Banaras Hindu University General Editor,
Varanasi-5 Hindu Vishwavidyalaya
March 17, 1965. Nepal Rajya Sanskrit
Granthamala Series.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

dation Chennai and eGangotri

FOREWORD
Vedic Mathematics by the late Sankarücarya (Bharati
Krsna Tirtha) of Govardhana Pitha is а monumental work.
In his deep-layer explorations of cryptic Vedic mysteries relating specially to their caleulus of shorthand formulae and their
neat and ready application to practical problems, the late
Sankarücarya shews the rare combination of the probing insight
and revealing intuition of a Yogi with the analytic acumen and
synthetic talent of a mathematician. With the late Sankaracarya we belong to a race, now fast becoming extinct, of diehard believers who think that the Vedas represent an inexhaustible mine of profoundest wisdom in matters both spiritual
and temporal ; and that this store of wisdom was not, as regards
its assets of fundamental validity and value at least, gathered
by the laborious inductive and deductive methods of ordinary
systematic enquiry, but was a direct gift of revelation to seers
and sages who in their higher reaches of Yogic realization were
competent to receive it from a Source, perfect and immaculate.
But we admit, and the late Sankaracarya has also practically
admitted, that one cannot expect to convert or revert criticism,
much less carry conviction, by merely asserting one’s staunchest
beliefs. То meet these ends, one must be prepared to go the
whole length of testing and verification by accepted, accredited
methods. The late Sankaracarya has, by his comparative
and critical study of Vedic mathematics, made this essential
requirement in Vedic studies abundantly clear.: So let us agree
to gauge Vedic mysteries поб ав we gauge the far-off nabulae
with the poet’s eye or with that of the seer, but with the alert,
expert, scrutinizing eye of the physical astronomer, if we may
put it as that.
That there is a consolidated metaphysical background in the
Vedas of the objective sciences including mathematics as regards
their basic conceptions is a point that may be granted by a
thinker who has looked broadly and deeply into both the realms.
In our paper recently published—The Metaphysics of
Physics’—we attempted to look into the mysteries of creative
emergence as contained in the well-known cosmogenic Hymn
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(Rg. X.190) with a view to unveiling the metaphysical background
where both ancient wisdom and modern physics may meet on
a common basis of logical understanding, and compare notes,
discovering, where possible, points of significant or suggestive
parallelism between the two sets of concepts, ancient and modern.
That metaphysical background includes mathematics also ;
because physics as ever pursued is the application of mathematics to given or specified space-time-event situations. There we
examined Tapas as a fundamental creative formula whereby
the Absolute emerges into the realms of measures, variations,
limits, frame-works and relations. And this descent follows
a logical order which seems to lend itself, within a framework
of conditions and specifications, to mathematical analysis.
Ratri in the Hymn represents the Principle of Limits, for example, Ríafica Satyaiica stand for Becoming (Calana-kalana) and
Being (vartana-kalana) at a stage where limits or conditions
or conventions do not yet arise or apply. The former gives the
unconditioned, unrestricted how or thus of cosmic process ;
the latter, what or that of existence. Tapas, which corresponds to
Ardhamàtrà in Tantric symbolism, negotiates, in its role specially
of critical variation, between what is, ab-initio, unconditioned
and unrestricted, and what appears otherwise, as for instance,
in our own universe of logico-mathematical appreciation.
This is, necessarily, abstruse metaphysics, but it is,
nevertheless, the starting background of both physics and
mathematics. But for all practical purposes we must come down
from mystic nabulae to the terra firma of our actual apprehension
and appreciation. That is to say, we must descend to our own
pragmatic levels of time-space-event situations. Here we
face actual problems, and one must meet and deal with these
squarely without evasion or mystification. The late Sankaracarya has done this masterly feat with an adroitness that
compels admiration.
tt follows from the fundamental premises that the universe
ee 2 са S gm structure, and
а ee p ean a P tam a result herein, to any
, ust obey the rule of matheСС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

matical measures and relations. This, however, one may do
consciously or semi-consciously, systematically or haphazardly.
Even some species of lower animals are by instinct gifted mathematicians ; for example, the migratory bird which flies thousands
of miles off from its nest-home, and after a period, unerringly
returns. This implies a subconscious mathematical talent that
works wonder. We may cite the case of a horse who was a
mathematical prodigy and could ‘tell’ the result of a cube root
(requiring 32 operations, according to M. Materlink in his
‘Unknown Quest’) in a twinkle of the eye. This sounds like magic,
but it is undeniable that the feat of mathematics does sometimes
assume a magical look. Man, undoubtedly, has been given his
share of this magical gift. And he can improve upon it by
practice and discipline, by Yoga and allied methods. This is
undeniable also. Lately, he has devised the ‘automatic brain’
for complicated calculations by science, that looks like magic.
But apart from this ‘magic’, there is and has been, the
‘logic’ of mathematics also. Man works from instinct, talent,
or even genius. But ordinarily he works as a logical entity
requiring specified data or premises to start from, and more
or less elaborate steps of reasoning to arrive at a conclusion.
This is his normal process of induction and deduction. Here
formule (Sütras) and relations (e.g. equations) must obtain as
in mathematics. The magic and logic of mathematics in some
cases get mixed up ; but it is sane to keep them apart. You can
get a result by magic, but when you are called upon to prove,
you must have recourse to logic.
Even in this latter case, your logic (your formule and
applications) may be either simple and elegant or complicated
` and cumbrous. The former is the ideal to aim at. We have
classical instances of master mathematicians whose methods of
analysis and solution have been regarded as marvels of cogency, ·
compactness and elegance. Some have been ‘beautiful’ as a
poem (e.g. Lagrange’s ‘Analytical Mechanics.’)
The late Sankaracirya has claimed, and rightly we may `
think, that the Vedic Satras and their applications possess these
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

virtues to a degree of eminence that cannot be challenged.
The outstanding merit of his work lies in his actual proving of
this contention.
Whether or not the Vedas be believed as repositories of
perfect wisdom, it is unquestionable that the Vedic race lived
not as merely pastoral folk possessing a half-or-quarter-developed
culture and civilization. The Vedic seers were, again, not mere
‘navel-gazers’ or 'nose-tip-gazers. They proved themselves
adepts in all levels and branches of knowledge, theoretical and
practical. For example, they had their varied objective science,
both pure and applied.
Let us take a concrete illustration. Suppose in a time of
drought we require rains by artificial means. The modern
scientist has his own theory and art (technique) for producing
the result. The old seer scientist had his both also, but
. different from these now availing. He had his science and
technique, called Yajfia, in which Mantra, Yantra and other
factors must co-operate with mathematical determinateness and
precision. For this purpose, he had developed the six auxiliaries
of the Vedas in each of which mathematical skill and adroitness,
occult or otherwise, play the decisive role. The Sūtras lay-
„dowa the shortest and surest lines. The correct intonation of
the Manira, the correct configuration of the Yantra (in the
making of the Vedi etc., e.g. the quadrature of a circle), the
correct time or astral conjugation factor, the correct rhythms
etc., all had to be perfected so as to produce the desired result
effectively and adequately. Each of these required the calculus
of mathematics. The modern technician has his logarithmic
tables and mechanics’ manuals ; the old Үар Ка had his Satras.
How were the Süfras obtained ?—by magic or logic or both ?—is
a vital matter we do not discuss here. The late Sankaracarya
has claimed for them cogency, compactness and simplicity.
This is an even more vital point, and we think, he has reasonably
made it good.
Varanasi, SWAMI PRATYAGATMANANDA
22-3-1965 SARASWATI
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Л.
A HUMBLE HOMAGE
The late Sankaracdrya’s epoch-making work on VedicMathematics brings to the notice of the intelligentsia most
strikingly а new theory and method, now almost unknown,
of arriving at the truth of things which in this particular case
concerns the truth of numbers and magnitude, but might as well
cover, as it undoubtedly did in a past age in India, all sciences
and arts, with results which do not fail to evoke a sense of awe
and amazement today. The method obviously is radically
differnt from the one adopted by the modern mind.
Musie and not Mathematics is my field (although the
philosophy of numbers, cosmic and metaphysical correspondences with musical numbers, the relation of numbers
with consonant, dissonant and assonant tonal intervals eto.,
closely inter-relate music and mathematics), but study of the
traditional literature on music and fine arts with which I have
been concerned for the last few years has convinced me of one
fundamental fact regarding the ancient Indian theory and
method of knowledge and experience vis a vis the modern.
While all great and true knowledge is born of intuition and
not of any rational process or imagination, there is a radical
difference between the ancient Indian method and the modern
Western method concerning intuition.
The divergence embraces everything other than the fact .
of intuition itself—the object and field of intuitive vision, the
method of working out experience and rendering it to the
intellect. The modern method is to get the intuition by suggestion from an appearance in life or nature or from a mental idea
and even if the source of the intuition is the soul, the method
at once relates it to a support external to the soul. The ancient
Indian method of knowledge had for its business to disclose
something of the Self, the Infinite or the Divine to the regard
of the soul—the Self through its expressions, the infinite through
its finite symbols and the Divine through his powers. The
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

process was one of Integral knowledge and in its subordinate
ranges was instrumental in revealing the truths of cosmic
phenomena and these truths were. utilised for worldly ends.
These two methods are based on different theories of
knowledge and experience, fundamentally divergent in outlook
and approach. The world as yet knows very little of the
ancient Indian method, much less of its secret techniques.
Sri Sankaracarya’s remarkably unique work of Vedic mathematics has brought to popular notice demonstrably for the
first time that the said method was usefully employed in ancient
India in solving problems of secular knowledge just as for solving
those of the spiritual domain.
I am happy that in the printing and publication of this
monumental work and the preceding spade-work I had the
privilege to render some little service.
PREM LATA SHARMA
Varanasi-5. Dean, Faculty of Music & Fine Arts,
23-3-65. Banaras Hindu University.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CONTENTS
Page
I INTRODUCTORY No.
1. My Beloved Gurudeva—(Srimati TEE Trivedi) ... i
2. Author’s Preface xiii
A.—A Descriptive Prefatory Note xiii
B.—Explanatory Exposition XX
: C.—Illustrative Specimen Samples xxii
II TEXT
Sixteen Sütras and their Corollaries 1
Prolegomena 1b
CHAPTER
I. Actual Applications of the Vedic Sūtras lf
II. Arithmetical Computations 13
III. Multiplication 40
Practical Application (бош шш И ЫШ 49
Practice & Proportion ( ) 51
IV. Division by the Nikhilam mehcd 55
V. Division by the Parāvartya method 64
VI. Argumental Division 79
Linking note (Recapitulation & бона и 84
VII. Factorisation (of simple quadratics) 86
VIII. Factorisation (of harder quadratics) 90
IX. Factorisation of Cubics etc. 93
X. Highest Common Factor 98
XI. Simple Equations (First Principles) 103
XII. Simple Equations (by Sünyam etc.) 107
XIII. Merger Type of Easy Simple CPUS 126
Extension method 131
XIV. Complex Mergers 134
XV. Simultaneous Simple Horain 140
XVI. Miscellaneous (Simple) Equations 145
XVII. Quadratic Equations 157
XVIII. Cubic Equations 168
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTERS
DORN.
ХХХ.
KOX
XXXVIII.
Bi-quadratic Equations
Multiple Simultaneous Equations
Simultaneous Quadratic Equations
Factorisation & Differential Calculus
Partial Fractions
Integration by Partial Fractions
The Vedic Numerical Code
Recurring Decimals
Straight Division
Auxiliary Fractions
Divisibility & Simple O ato
Divisibility & Complex Multiplex ооа
Sum & Difference of Squares ...
Elementary Squaring, Cubing etc.
Straight Squaring
Vargamüla (square root)
Cube Roots of Exact Cubes
Cube Roots (General)
Pythagoras’ Theorem etc.,
Apollonius’ Theorem
Analytical Conics
Miscellaneous Matters
Press Opinions
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

MY BELOVED GURUDEVA
SMTI. MANJULA TRIVEDI
[In the lines that follow the writer gives a short biographical
sketch of the illustrious author of Vedic Mathematics and a short
account of the genesis of his work now published, based on intimate personal knowledge—RnprrOoR.]
Very few persons can there be amongst the cultured people
of India who have not heard about HIS HOLINESS JAGADGURU SHANKARACHARYA SRI BHARATI KRISHNA
TIRTHAJI MAHARAJ, the magnificent and divine personality
that gracefully adorned the famous Govardhan Math, Puri,
his vast and versatile learning, his spiritual and educational
attainments, his wonderful research achievements in the field
of Vedic Mathematics and his consecration of all these qualifications to the service of humanity as such.
His Holiness, better known among his disciples by the
beloved name "Jagadguruji' or ‘Gurudeva’ was born of highly
learned and pious parents in March, 1884. His father, late
Sri P. Narasimha Shastri, was then in service as a Tahsildar at
Tinnivelly (Madras Presidency) who later retired as a Deputy
Collector. His uncle, late Shri Chandrashekhar Shastri, was
the Principal of the Maharaja’s College, Vizianagaram and his
great-grandfather was late Justice С. Ranganath Shastri of the
Madras High Court.
Jagadguruji, named as Venkatraman in his early days,
was an exceptionally brilliant student and invariably won
the first place in all the subjects in all the classes throughout his
educational career. During his school days, he was a student
of National College, Trichanapalli; Church Missionary Society
College, Tinnevelli and Hindu College, Tinnevelli. He passed
his matriculation examination from the Madras University
in January, 1899, topping the list as usual.
He was extra-ordinarily proficient in Sanskrit and oratory
and on account of this he was awarded the title of SARASWATI’
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

by the Madras Sanskrit Association in July, 1899 when he was
still in his 16th year. One cannot fail to mention at this stage
the profound impression left on him by his Sanskrit Guru
Shri Vedam Venkatrai Shastri whom Jagadguruji always
remembered with deepest love, reverence and gratitude, with
tears in his eyes.
After winning the highest place in the B.A. Examination,
Shri Venkatraman Saraswati appeared at the M.A. Examination
of the American College of Sciences, Rochester, New York, from
Bombay Centre in 1903 ; and in 1904 at the age of just twenty
he passed М.А. Examination in further seven subjects simultaneously securing the highest honours in all, which is perhaps
the all-time world-record of academic brilliance. His subjects
" included Sanskrit, Philosophy, English, Mathematics, History
and Science.
Аз a student Venkatraman was marked for his splendid
brilliance, superb retentive memory and ever-insatiable curiosity.
He would deluge his teachers with myriads of piercing questions
which made them uneasy and forced them frequently to make
a frank confession of ignorance on their part. In this respect,
he was considered to be a terribly mischievous student.
Even from his University days Shri Venkatraman Saraswati had started contributing learned articles on religion,
philosophy, sociology, history, politics, literature etc., to
late W. T. Stead’s “REVIEW OF REVIEWS” and he was
specially interested in all the branches of modern science. In
fact, study of the latest researches and discoveries in modern
science continued to be Shri Jagadguruji’s hobby till his very
last days.
Sri Venkatraman started his public life under the guidance
of late Hon’ble Shri Gopal Krishna Gokhale, C.I.E. in 1905 in
connection with the National Education Movement and the
South African Indian issue. Although, however, on the one
hand, Prof. Venkatraman Saraswati had acquired an endless
fund of learning and his desire to learn ever more was still
unquenchable and on the other hand the urge for selfless service
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

of humanity swayed his heart mightily, yet the undoubtedly
deepest attraction that Venkatraman Saraswati felt was that
towards the study and practice of the science of sciences—the
holy ancient Indian spiritual science or Adhyatma-Vidya. In
1908, therefore, he proceeded to the Sringeri Math in Mysore
to lay himself at the feet of the renowned late Jagadguru
Shankaracharya Maharaj Shri Satchidananda Sivabhinava
Nrisimha Bharati Swami.
But he had not stayed there long, before he had to assume
the post of the first Principal of the newly started National
College at Rajmahendri under a pressing and clamant call of
duty from the nationalist leaders. Prof. Venkatraman Saraswati continued there for three years but in 1911 he could not
resist his burning desire for spiritual knowledge, practice and
attainment any more and, therefore, tearing himself off suddenly
from the said college he went back to Shri Satchidananda
Sivabhinava Nrisimha Bharati Swami at Sringeri.
The next eight years he spent in the profoundest study of
the most advanced Vedanta Philosophy and practice of the
Brahma-sadhana. During these days Prof. Venkatraman
used to study Vedanta at the feet of Shri Nrisimha Bharati
Swami, teach Sanskrit and Philosophy in schools there, and
practise the highest and most vigorous Yoga-sadhana in the
nearby forests. Frequently, he was also invited by several
institutions to deliver lectures on philosophy ; for example he
delivered a series of sixteen lectures on Shankaracharya’s
Philosophy at Shankar Institute of Philosophy, Amalner (Khandesh) and similar lectures at several other places like Poona,
Bombay etc.
After several years of the most advanced studies, the deepest
meditation, and the highest spiritual attainment Prof. Venkatraman Saraswati was initiated into the holy order of SAMNYASA
at Banaras (Varanasi) by his Holiness Jagadguru Shankaracharya Sri Trivikram Tirthaji Maharaj of Shàradàpeeth on the '
4th July 1919 and on this occasion he was given the new
name, Swami Bharati Krishna Tirtha.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
AEE iiiiiiii———
SS a ee А RD

This was the starting point of an effulgent manifestation
of Swamiji’s real greatness. Within two years of his stay in the
holy order, he proved his unique suitability for being installed
on the pontifical throne of Sharada Peetha Shankaracharya and
accordingly in 1921, he was so installed with all the formal
ceremonies despite all his reluctance and active resistance.
Immediately, on assuming the pontificate Shri J agadguruji
started touring India from corner to corner and delivering
lectures on Sanatana Dharma and by his scintillating intellectual
brilliance, powerful oratory, magnetic personality, sincerity of
purpose, indomitable will, purity of thought, and loftiness of
character he took the entire intellectual and religious class of
the nation by storm.
Jagadguru Shankaracharya Shri Madhusudan Tirtha of
Govardhan Math Puri was at this stage greatly impressed by
Jagadguruji and when the former was in failing health he
requested Jagadguruji to succeed him on Govardhan Math
Gadi. Shri Jagadguruji continued to resist his importunate
requests for a long time but at last when Jagadguru Shri Madhusudan Tirtha's health took a serious turn in 1925 he virtually
forced Jagadguru Shri Bharati Krishana Tirthaji to accept the
Govardhan Math’s Gadi and accordingly Jagadguruji installed
Shri Swarupanandji on the Sharadapeeth Gadi and himself
assumed the duties of the ecclesiastical and pontifical head of
Sri Govardhan Math, Puri.
In this capacity of Jagadguru Shankaracharya of Govardhan Math, Puri, he continued to disseminate the holy spiritual
teachings of Sanatana Dharma in their pristine purity all over
the world the rest of his life for 35 years. Months after months
and years after years he spent in teaching and preaching, talking
and lecturing, discussing and convincing millions of people all
over the country. He took upon himself the colossal task
of the renaissance of Indian culture, spreading of Sanatana
Dharma, revival of the highest human and moral values and
enkindling of the loftiest spiritual enlightenment throughout
the world and he dedicated his whole life to this lofty and
noble mission.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Shi = aa LA ae

From his very early days Jagadguruji was aware of the
need for the right interpretation of “Dharma” which he defined
as “the sum total of all the means necessary for speedily making
and permanently keeping all the people, individually as well
as collectively superlatively comfortable, prosperous, happy,
and joyous in all respects (including the physical, mental,
intellectual, educational, economic, social, political, psychic,
spritual etc. ad infinitum)”. He was painfully aware of -the
“escapism” of some from their duties under the garb of spirituality and of the superficial modern educational varnish of the
others, divorced from spiritual and moral standards. He,
therefore, always laid great emphasis on the necessity of harmonising the ‘spiritual’ and the ‘material’ spheres of daily
life. He also wanted to remove the false ideas, on the one
hand, of those persons who think that Dharma can be practised
by exclusively individual spiritual Sadhana coupled with more
honest bread-earning, ignoring one’s responsibility for rendering
selfless service to the society and on the other hand of those
who think that the Sàdhan& can be complete by mere service
of society even without learning or practising any spirituality
oneself. He wanted a happy blending of both. He stood for
the omnilateral and all-round progress simultenaously of both
the individual and society towards the speedy realisation
of India’s spiritual and cultural ideal, the lofty Vedantic ideal
of “Рагпабуа” (perfection and harmony all-round).
With these ideas agitating his mind for several decades
he went on carrying on a laborious, elaborate, patient and dayand-night research to evolve finally a splendid and perfect scheme
for all-round reconstruction first of India and through it of the
world. Consequently Sri Jagadguruji founded in 1953 at Nagpur
an institution named Sri Vishwa Punarnirmana Sangha (World
Reconstruction Association). The Administrative Board of the
Sangha consisted of Jagadguruji’s disciples, devotees and admirers of his idealistic and spiritual ideals for humanitarian service
and included a number of high court judges, ministers, educationists, statesmen and other personage of the highest calibre
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
EE ee
КА ада = ——— a

in Indian public life. It was, however, after a long and incessant search that Guruji had found his General Secretary Sri
Chimanlal Trivedi whom he called his Scipio Africanus and who
truly thought, worked, planned and dreamt unceasingly for the
Sangha’s welfare and progress. Although this Sangha could
not function very effectively in the beginning on account of
Jagadguruji’s failing health, various pre-occupations and other
unfóreseen hurdles, it is actively engaged now in disseminating
Jagadguruji’s message and teachings with Justice B. P. Sinha,
the Chief Justic of India as its President and Dr. C. D. Deshmukh, (1.0.5.) the ex-Finance Minister of India and ex-Chairman, University Grants Commission as its Vice-President.
With a view to promote the cause of world peace and to
spread the lofty Vedantic spiritual ideals even outside India
Shri Jagadguru went on а tour to America in February, 1958,
the first tour outside India by a Shankaracharya in the history
of the said Order. The tour was sponsored by Self Realisation
Fellowship of Los-Angeles, the Vedantic Society founded by
Paramhansa Yoganandjiin America. Jagadguruji stayed there
for about three months and during this period addressed rapt
audiences in hundreds of colleges of universities, churches and
other public institutions. He was also invited to give talks
and mathematical demonstrations on the television. In fact,
he released an exceptionally powerful current of moral and
spiritual enlightenment, peace and harmony throughout America
during his tour which proved а phenomenal success comparable
perhaps with that of Swami Vivekananda only. А request
was also received by him from Dr. Hornday, the Minister for
Church of Religious Science to open a branch of Sri Vishwa
Punarnirmana Sangha in America with a view to establish
one religion all over the world. The suggestion, however,
could not materialise at that time for certain reasons. On
his way back Jagadguruji gave some lectures in U. K. also.
and returned to India m May, 1958.
Guruji had been undergoing a terrific strain for more
than five decades in devoting his body, mind, heart and soul
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ln i la ac i aN
Y

Ма GG or XN T T
z to the cause of service of humanity, spreading of spiritual
enlightenment and revival of Vedantic ideals. This had already
undermined his health but still Guruji never devoted any attention to his personal comforts. The excessive strain of the
vast hurricane tour abroad came as a severe blow to his health
but still he refused to take rest and incessantly continued to
pursue his studies, talks, lectures and writings with unabated
and youthlike vigour and enthusiasm. In fact it required a
great vigilance and heroic effort to prevent him from giving
» ‘darshan’, advice and talks to his devotees and disciples even
when he could hardly speak on account of strain. As a result
he fell seriously ill in Novembr, 1959 and despite the best available treatment shed off his mortal frame and took Mahasamadhi
at Bombay on Feb. 2nd 1960.
From the very day of his assuming the throne of J agadguru
Shankaracharya, Sri Bharati Krishana Tirthaji had become the
cynosure of all eyes. His winning personality, his charming
innocence, his eager thirst for knowledge, his religious zeal, his
earnest belief in the “автав”, his universal kindness, his retentive memory, all these attracted towards him every living soul
that came in contact with him. People flocked to him in crowds
X and waited at his doors for hours together just to get a glimpse
of that.divine countenance. It was nothing but the divine
lustre that shone in his face. It was nothing but the marvellous
superhuman milk of kindness that flowed from his heart.
He was always perfectly impartial Every one was equal
in his eyes. He cared not for riches. Не cared not for position.
Nothing but Bhakti could attract people to him, rich or poor,
high or low, everybody had to go through the portals of Bhakti
to approach his august presence. Exhibiting his divinity, he
loved as himself every one that came to him. Every one who
had even two minute’s conversation with him went out with
the full conviction that he was the object of some special love
of His Holiness.
Of such a divine personality it is impossible to draw a
sketch. His activities were many-sided. To hear him was a
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

( vin )
pleasure. To see him was a privilege. To speak to him was
a real blessing and to be granted a special interview—Ah ! that
was the acme of happiness which people coveted most in all
earnestness. The magnetic force of his wonderful personality
was such that one word, one smile, or even one look was quite
enough to convert even the most sceptic into his most ardent
and obedient disciple. He belonged to all irrespective of caste
or creed and he was a real Guru to the whole world.
People of all nationalities, religions and climes, Brahmins
and non-Brahmins, Hindus and Mahomedans, Parsis and Christians, Huropeans and Americans received equal treatment at
the hands of Mis Holiness. That was the secret of the immense
popularity of this great Mahatma.
He was grand in his simplicity. People would give anything and everything to get his blessings and he would talk
words of wisdom as freely without fear or favour. He was
most easily accessible to all. Thousands of people visited
him and prayed for the relief of their miseries. He had a kind
word to say to each, after attentively listening to his or her tale
of woe and then give them some ‘prasad’ which would cure their
malady whether physical or mental. He would actually
shed tears when he-found people suffering and would pray to
God to relieve their suffering.
He was mighty in his learning and voracious in his reading.
A sharp intellect, a retentive memory and a keen zest went to
mark him as the most distinguished scholar of his day. His
leisure moments he would never spend in vain. He was always
reading something or repeating something. There was no branch
of knowledge which he did not know and that also 'shastrically'.
He was equally learned in Chandahsastra, Ayurveda and
Jyotish Sastra. He was a poet of uncommon merit and wrote
a number of poems in Sanskrit in the praise of his guru, gods
and godesses with a charming flow of Bhakti so conspicuous in
all his writings.
I have got a collection of over three thousand slokas forming part of the various eulogistic poems composed by Gurudeva
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
E

in adoration of various Devas and Devis. These Slokas have
been edited and are being translated into Hindi. They are
proposed to be published in three volumes along with Hindi
translation.
The book on “Sanatana Dharma" by H. H. Swami Bharati
Krisna Tirtha Maharaja has been published by Bharatiya
Vidya Bhavan, Bombay.
Above all, his Bhakti towards his Vidyaguru was something beyond description. He would talk for days together
about the greatness of his Vidyaguru. He would be never
tired of worshipping the Guru. His Guru also was equally
attached to him and called our Swamiji as the own son of the
Goddess of Learning, Shri Sarada. Everyday he would first
worship his guru’s sandals. His “Gurupaduka Stotra ' clearly
indicates the qualities he attributed to the sandals of his guru.
Shri Bharati Krisna Tirtha was a great Yogin and a
“Siddha” of a very high order. Nothing was impossible for him.
Above all he was a true Samnyasin. He held the world but as
a stage where every one had to play a part. In short, he was
undoubtedly a very great Mahatma but without any display of
mysteries or occultisms.
I have not been able to express here even one millionth
part of what I feel. His spotless holiness, his deep piety,
his endless wisdom, his childlike peacefulness, sportiveness
and innocence and his universal affection beggar all description.
His Holiness has left us a noble example of simplest living and
highest thinking. May all the world benefit by the example
of a life so nobly and so simply, so spiritually and so lovingly
lived.
Introductory Remarks on the Present Volume
I now proceed to give °а short account of the genesis
of the work published herewith. Revered Guruji used to
say that he had reconstructed the sixteen mathematical
formulae (given in this text) from the Atharvaveda after
assiduous research and ‘Tapas’ for about eight years in the
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar n
"ӨВ ЭээЭЭЭЭэ..йсэээгэггэөаэээ

forests surrounding Sringeri. Obviously these formulae are
not to be found in the present recensions of Atharvaveda ; they
were actually reconstructed, on the basis of intuitive revelation,
from materials scattered here and there in the Atharvaveda.
Revered Gurudeva used to say that he had written sixteen
volumes (one for each Sütra) on these Sütras and that the
manuscripts of the said volumes were deposited at the house
of one of his disciples. Unfortunately, the said manuscripts
were lost irretrievably from the place of their deposit and this
colossal loss was finally confirmed in 1956. Беуегей Gurudeva
was not much perturbed over this irretrievable loss and used to
say that everything was there in his memory and that he could
re-write the 16 volums ! |
My late husband Sri C. M. Trivedi, Hon. Gen. Secertary
V. P. Sangh noticed that while Sri Jagadguru Maharaj ' was
busy demonstrating before learned people and societies
Vedic Mathematics as discovered and propounded by him,
some persons who had grasped a smattering of the new
Sütras had already started to dazzle audiences as prodigies
claiming occult powers without aknowledging indebtedness
to the Sütras of Jagadguruji. My husband, therefore, pleaded
earnestly with Gurudeva and persuaded him to arrange for
the publication of the Sütras in his own name.
In 1957, when he had decided finally to undertake a
tour of the U.S.A. he re-wrote from memory the present
volume, giving an introductory account of the sixteen formulae reconstructed by him. This volume was written in
. his old age within one month and a half with his failing health
and weak eyesight. He had planned to write subsequent volumes, but his failing health (and cataract developed in both
eyes) did not allow the fulfilment of his plans. Now the present
volume is the only work on Mathematics that has been left over
by Revered Guruji ; all his other writings оп Vedic Mathematics
have, alas, been lost for ever.
The typescript of the present volume was left over by
Revered Gurudeva in U.S.A. in 1958 for publication. He
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

had been given to understand that he would have to go to the
U.S.A. for correction of proofs and personal supervision of
printing. But his health deteriorated after his return to India
and finally the typescript was brought back from the U.S.A.
after his attainment of Mahasamadhi, in 1960.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I owe a deep debt of gratitude to Justice N. H. Bhagwati,
the enlightened Vice-Chancellor of the Banaras Hindu University and other authorities of the B.H.U. who have readily undertaken the publication of this work which was introduced to them
by Dr. Pt. Omkarnath Thakur. I am indebted to Dr. Thakur
for this introduction. My hearty and reverent thanks are due
to Dr. V. S. Agrawala (Professor, Art & Architecture, B.H.U.)
the vateran scholar, who took the initiative and throughout
kept up a very keen interest in this publieation. It is my
pleasant duty to offer my heartfelt gratitude to Dr. Prem Lata
Sharma, Dean, Faculty of Music and Fine Arts, B.H.U. who
voluntarily took over the work of press-dressing of the
typescript and proof-reading of this volume after a deadlock
had come to prevail in the process of printing just at the outset.
But for her hard labour which she has undertaken out of a
sheer sense of reverence for the noble and glorious work of
Revered Gurudeva this volume would not have seen the light
of the day for a long time. I trust that Revered Gurudeva’s
Holy Spirit will shower His choicest blessings on her. My
sincere thanks are also due to Sri 8. Nijabodha of the Research
Section under the charge of Dr. Sharma, who has ably.assisted
her in this onerous task.
The Humblest of His Disciples
Smti. MANJULA TRIVEDI
Nagpur, | Hony. General Secretary
16th March, 1965. Sri Vishwa Punarnirmana
: | Sangha, Nagpur.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
i- A NEEE A

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

The Author
Jagadguru Sankaracarya
Sri Bharati Krsna Tirtha Maharaja
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| AUTHOR’S PREFACE
А.А DESCRIPTIVE РЕКЕАТОВҮ NOTE ·
THE ASTOUNDING WONDERS... ВА t
ANCIENT INDIAN VEDIC MATHEMATICS
| - In. the course. of our discourses: "on manifold.. and
: ы: +: subjects: (spiritual, metaphysical,: philosophical,
psychic, psychological, ethical, educational, -scientific; mathematical, historical, political, economic,’ -social - ete:, etc. „ from
time to time and from place to place during the last: five decades
and more, we have been repeatedly pointing out that ‘the Vedas
(the most ancient Indian scriptures, nay, the oldest “Religious”
scriptures of the whole world) .claim to deal with all branches
of learning (spiritual and temporal) and. to. give ` the earnest
seeker after knowledge all the requisite instructions and guidance
in full detail and ^on scientifically—nay,.: mathernafieally—
accurate lines in them all and. so on.
. 2. The very word “Veda” has this дей йо meaning
i.e. the fountain-head and illimitable. store-house of all .knowledge. This derivation, in effect, means, connotes and. implies that
the Vedas should contain within themselves all the knowledge
needed by mankind relating not only to: the so- -ealled ‘spiritual’
(or ШО жо matters. but oe to. those usually described
as purely “secular”, “temporal”, Ё . “wordly” ;. and .also to
the means required by humanity-as is auch for the achievement
of all-round, complete and -perfect :success in all conceivable
directions and that theré cari be no-adjectival or restrictive
epithet caleulated (or tending) to limit that knowledge down in
any sphere, any direction or any respect whatsoever.
3. In other words, it connotes and implies that our
ancient Indian Vedic lore should be all-round complete and
P. perfect and able to throw the fullest necessary light on all
matters which any aspiring seeker after knowledge can possibly
seek to be enlightened on.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

4. Tt is thus in the fitness of things that the Vedas include ^
(i) Ayurveda (anatomy, physiology; hygiene, sanitary science,
medical science, surgery etc., etc.,) not for the purpose of achieving perfect health and strength in the after-death future but |
in order to attain them here and now in our present physical
bodies; (ii) Dhanurveda (archery and other military sciences)
not for fighting with one another after our transportation to
heaven but in order to quell and subdue all invaders from
abroad-and all insurgents from within; (ii) Gandharva Veda pe:
(the science and art of music) and (iv) Sthapatya Veda (engineer- к
ing, architecture etc.,and all branches of mathematics in general).
. All these subjects, be it noted, are inherent parts of the Vedas |
le. are reckoned as “spiritual” studies and catered for as |
such therein.
5. Similar is the case with regard to the Vedäńgas (i.e.
grammar, prosody, astronomy, lexicography ete., etc.,) which, |
according to the Indian cultural conceptions, are also inherent
parts and subjects of Vedic (i.e. Religious) study. |
6. As a direct and unshirkable consequence of this
analytical and grammatical study of the real connotation
and full implications of the word “Veda” and owing to various
other historical causes of a personal character (into details of
which we need not now enter), we have been from our very
early childhood, most earnestly and actively striving to study |
the Vedas critically from this stand-point and to realise and |
prove to ourselyes (and to others) the correctness (or otherwise)
of the derivative meaning in question. ` |
7. There were, too, certain personal historical reasons |
why in our quest for the discovering of all learning in all its |
departments, branches, sub-branches _ etc., in the Vedas, our
gaze was riveted mainly on ethics, psychology and metaphysics
on the one hand and on the "positive" sciences and especially
mathematics on the other. |
| 8. And the contemptuous or, at best patronising attitude
adopted by some so-called Orientalists, Indologists, antiquarians, research-scholars etc., who condemned, or lightСС-0. In Public Domain. СигиКи! Kangri Collection, Haridwar

heartedly, nay; irresponsibly, frivolously and flippantly dismissed, several abstruse-looking and recondite parts of the
Vedas as *sheer-nonsense"—or ав "infant-humanity's prattle”,
and so on, merely added fuel to the fire (so to speak) and further
confirmed and strengthened our resolute determination to
unravel the too-long hidden mysteries of philosophy and science
contained in ancient India's Vedic lore, with the consequence
that, after eight years of concentrated contemplation in forestsolitude, we were at long last able to recover the long lost keys
which alone could unlock the portals thereof.
9. And we were agreeably astonished and intensely gratified to find that exceedingly tough mathematical problems
(which the mathematically most advanced present day Western scientific world had spent huge lots of time, energy and
money on and which even now it solves with the utmost difficulty
and after vast labour involving large numbers of difficult, tedious
and cumbersome "steps" of working) can be easily and readily
solved with the help of these ultra-easy Vedic Sütras (or mathematical aphorisms) contained in the Parigigta (the Appendixportion) of the ATHARVAVEDA in а few simple steps and by
methods which can be conscientiously described as mere “mental
arithmetic".
10. Eversince (i.e. since several decades ago), we have
been carrying on an incessant and strenuous campaign for
the India-wide diffusion of all this scientifico knowledge, by
means of lectures, blackboard- demonstrations, regular classes
and so on in schools, colleges, universities etc., all over the
country and have been astounding our audiences everywhere
with the wonders and marvels not to say, miracles of Indian
Vedie mathematics.
11. We were thus at last enabled to succeed in attracting
the more than passing attention of the authorities of several
Indian universities to this subject. And, in 1952, the Nagpur
University not merely had a few lectures and blackboarddemonstrations given but also arranged for our holding regular
classes in Vedic mathematics (in the University's Convocation
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

(хм y
Hall) for the benefit of all in general and especially of the Uni- |
versity and college professors of mathematics, physies etc. Y
12. And, consequently, the educationists and the cream
of the English educated section of the people including the
highest officials (e.g. the high-court judges, the ministers
etc.,) and the general public as such were all highly impressed ; |
nay, thrilled, wonder-struck and flabbergasted! And not
only the newspapers but even the University’s official reports
described the tremendous sensation caused thereby in superlatively eulogistic terms ; and the papers began to refer to us as
“the Octogenarian Jagadguru Shankaracharya who had taken
Nagpur by storm with his Vedic mathematics”, and so on!
ft
13. It is manifestly impossible, in the course of а short
note (in the nature of a ''trailer"), to give a full, detailed, thorough-going, comprehensive and exhaustive description of
the unique features and startling characteristics of all the
mathematical lore in question. This can and will be done
in the subsequent volumes of this series (dealing seriatim and
in extenso with all the various portions of all the various branches
of mathematics).
14. We may, however, at this point, draw the earnest
attention of every one concerned to the following salient items |
thereof :— |
(i) The Stitras (aphorisms) apply to and cover each |
and every part of each and every chapter of each
and every branch of mathematics (including arithmetic, algebra, geometry—plane and solid, trigonometry—plane and spherical, conics—geometrical
and analytical, astronomy, calculus—differential
and integral etc., etc. In fact, there is no part of
mathematics, pure or applied, which is beyond their
jurisdiction ;
(i) The Sutras are easy to understand, easy to apply
and easy to remember ; and the whole work can be
truthfully summarised in one word “mental” !
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

( хуп )
(iii) Even as regards complex problems involving a good
number of mathematical operations (consecutively
or even simultaneously to be performed), the time
taken by the Vedic method will be a third, a fourth,
a tenth or even a much smaller fraction of the time
required according to modern (i.e. current) Western
methods ; i
(iv) And, in some very important and striking cases,
sums requiring 30, 50, 100 or even more numerous
and cumbrous “steps” of working (according to the
current Western methods) can be answered in a
single and simple step of work by the Vedic method !
And little children (of only 10 or 12 years of age)
merely look at the sums written on the blackboard
(on the platform) and immediately shout out and
dictate the answers from the body of the convocation
hall (or other venue of the demonstration). And
this is because, as a matter of fact, each digit automatically yields its predecessor and its successor! and
the children have merely to go on tossing off (or
s reeling off) the digits one after another (forwards or
5 backwards) by mere mental arithmetic (without
needing pen or pencil, paper or slate etc)!
On seeing this kind of work actually being performed
by the little children, the doctors, professors and
other “big-guns” of mathematics are wonder struck
and exclaim :— "Is this mathematics or magic" ? And
we invariably answer and say: “It is both. Tt is
magic until you understand 16: and it is mathematics
thereafter"; and then we proceed to substantiate
and prove the correctness of this reply of ours! And
(vi) Às regards the time required by the students for
mastering the whole course of Vedic mathematics
as applied to all its branches, we need merely state
from our actual experience that 8 months (or 12
months) at an average rate of 2 or 3 hours per day
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar л

( хуш )
should suffice for completing the whole course of
mathematical studies on these Vedic lines instead of
15 or 20 years required according to the existing -
systems of the Indian and also of foreign universities.
15. In this connection, it is a gratifying fact that unlike
some so-called Indologists (of the type hereinabove referred to)
there have been some great modern mathematicians and historians ‘of mathematics (like Prof. G. P. Halstead, Professor
Ginsburg, Prof. De Moregan, Prof. Hutton etc.,) who have,
as truth-seekers and truth-lovers, evinced a truly scientific
attitude and frankly expressed their intense and whole-hearted
appreciation of ancient India’s grand and glorious contributions
to the progress of mathematical knowledge (in the Western
hemisphere and elsewhere).
16. The following few excerpts from the published writings
of some universally acknowledged authorities in the domain
of the history of mathematics, will speak eloquently for
themselves :—
(i) On page 20 of his book “On the Foundation and
Technique of Arithmetic", we find Prof. G.P. Halstead
saying “The importance of the creation of the
ZERO mark can never be exaggerated. This giving
of airy nothing not merely a local habitation and a
name, à picture but helpful power is the characteristic
of the Hindu race whence it sprang. It is like
coining the Nirvana into dynamos. No single
mathematical creation has been more potent for the
general on-go of intelligence and power".
(i) In this connection, in his splendid treatise on “Тһе
present mode of expressing numbers" (the Indian
Historical Quarterly Vol. 3, pages 530-540) B. B.
Dutta says: “The Hindus adopted the decimal
scale vary early. The numerical language of no
other nation is so scientific and has attained as high
a state of perfection as that of the ancient Hindus.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ЕЕ

( хх)
In symbolism they succeeded with ten signs to express
any number most elegantly and simply. It is this
beauty of the Hindu numerical notation which attracted the attention of all the civilised peoples of the
world and charmed them to adopt it”.
In this very context, Prof. Ginsburg says :—
“The Hindu notation was carried to Arabia about
770 A.D. by a Hindu scholar named КАМКА who
was invited from Ujjain to the famous Court of Baghdad by the Abbaside Khalif Al-MANSUR. Kanka
taught Hindu astronomy and mathematies to the
Arabian scholars; and, with his help, they translated
into Arabic the Brahma-Sphuta-Siddhanta of Brahma
Gupta. The recent discovery by the French savant
M.F. Nav proves that the Hindu numerals were well
known and much appreciated in Syria about the middle
of the 7th Century A-D”. (GinsBuRe’s “new LicHT
on our numerals", Bulletin of the’ American Mathematical Society, Second series, Vol. 25, pages 366-369).
On this point, we find B. B. Dutta further saying :
“Trom Arabia, the numerals slowly marched
towards the West through Egypt and Northern
Arabia; and they finally entered Europe in the
11+ Century. The Europeans called them the Arabic
notations, because they received them from the
Arabs. But the Arabs themselves, the Eastern ав
well as the Western, have unanimously called them
the Hindu figures. (Al-Arqan-Al-Hindu".)
The above-cited passages are, however, in connection
with and in appreciation of India's invention of the “ZERO”
mark and her contributions of the 7th century А.Ю. and later
to world
mathematical knowledge.
In the light, however, of the hereinabove given detailed
description of the unique merits and characteristic excellences
of the still earlier Vedic Sütras dealt with in the 16 volumes of
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

this series!, the conscientious (truth-loving and truth-telling)
historians of Mathematics (of the lofty eminence of Prof. De
Morgan etc.) have not been guilty of even the least exaggeration
in their candid admission that “even the highest and farthest
reaches of modern Western mathematics have not yet brought
the Western world even to the threshold of Ancient Indian Vedic
Mathematics". :
18. It is our earnest aim and aspiration, in these 16
volumes!, to explain and expound the contents of the Vedic
mathematical Sütras and bring them within the easy intellectual
reach of every seeker after mathematical knowledge.
B.—EXPLANATORY EXPOSITION
OF
SOME SALIENT, INSTRUCTIVE AND
INTERESTING ILLUSTRATIVE SAMPLE SPECIMENS
BY WAY OF
COMPARISON AND CONTRAST
Preliminary Note :—
With regard to every subject dealt with in the Vedic
Mathematical Sütras, the rule generally holds good that the
Sütras have always provided for what may be termed the
‘General Case’ (by means of simple processes which can be easily
and readily—nay, instantaneously applied to any and every
question which can possibly arise under any particular heading.
2. But, at the same time, we often come across special
cases which, although classifiable under the general heading
in question, yet present certain additional and typical characterestics which render them still easier to solve. And, therefore,
special provision is found to have been made for such special
cases by means of special Sütras, sub-Sütras, corollaries etc.,
relating and applicable to those particular types alone.
.1 Only one volume has been bequeathed by His Holiness to posterity
ef p. х above—General Editor.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

A
p E d
3. And all that the student of these Sütras has to do
is to look for the special characteristics in question, recognise
the particular type before him and determine and apply the
special formula prescribed therefor.
4. And, generally speaking it is only im case no special
case is involved, that the general formula has to be resorted to.
And this process is naturally a little longer. But it need
hardly be pointed out that, even then, the longest of the methods
according to the Vedie system comes nowhere (in respect of
length, cumbrousness and tediousness etc.,) near the correspond-.
ing process according to the system now current everywhere.
5. For instance, the conversion of a vulgar fraction
(say py ог gy or gy eto.) to its equivalent recurring decimal
shape involves 18 or 28 or 42 or more steps of cumbrous working (aecording to the current system) but requires only one
single and simple step of mental working (according to
the Vedic Sütras)!
6. This is not all. There are still other methods and
processes (in the latter system) whereby even that very small
(mental) working can be rendered shorter still! This and
herein is the beatific beauty of the whole scheme.
7. To start with, we should naturally have liked т begin
this explanatory and illustrative exposition with a few processes in arithmetical computations relating to multiplications
and divisions of huge numbers by big multipliers and big divisors
respectively and then go on to other branches of mathematical
calculation.
8. But, as we have just КЫШ referred to a particular but wonderful type of mathematical work wherein 18,
28, 42 or even more steps of working can be condensed into a
single-step answer which can be written down immediately
(by means of what we have been describing as straight, singleline, mental arithmetic) ; and, as this statement must naturally
have aroused intense eagerness and curiosity in the minds of the
students (and the teachers too) and especially as the process is
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

КООШ iti сз з
based on elementary and basic fundamental principles and |
requires no previous knowledge of anything in the nature fof an indispensable and inescapable pre-requisite chapter, |
subject and so on, we are beginning this exposition here with |
an easy explanation and a simple elucidation of that particular
illustrative specimen.
9. And then we shall take up the other various parts,
one by one, of the various branches of mathematical computation
and hope to throw sufficient light thereon to enable the students |
to make their own comparison and contrast and arrive at
correct conclusions on all the various points dealt with.
C. ILLUSTRATIVE SPECIMEN SAMPLES
(Comparison and Contrast)
SAMPLE SPECIMENS
OF
ARITHMETICAL COMPUTATIONS [
I. Multiplication : The “Sanskrit Sutra? (Formula) is—
(i) Multiply 87265 by 32117 Il red атат, |
By current method : By Vedic mental one-line method :
87265 Note: Only the answer is writ- |
P ER | ten automatical do |
ane S SERRE by Ordhwa Tiryak P
Sutra (forwards or back- |
wards).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

IL Division :
(2) Express 4, in its full recurring decimal shape (18 digits) :
By the current method: The "Sanskrit Sutra” (Formula) is ;
СС-0. In Public Domain. СигиКи! Kangri Collection, Haridwar
п Ста ҶЯЧ 11
By the Vedic mental one-line method :|
(by the Ekadhika-Pirva Sūtra)
(forwards or backwards), we merely
write down the 18-digit-answer :—

Division continued :
Note: 4 gives 42 recurring decimal places in the answer but
these too are written down mechanically ш the same
way (backwards or forwards). And the same is the |
case with all such divisions (whatever the number of |
digits may be):
By the current method : By the mental Vedic one-line method Э
4115 DINI |
(4) Divide .0003147 by 814256321 (to 6 decimal places ) :
The current method is notoriously too long, tedious, cumbrous and clumsy and entails the expenditure of enormous time f.
~ and toil. Only the Vedic mental one-line. method is given here. |
" = The truth-loving student can work it out by the other method |
eK and compare the two for himself. "t |
(5) Find the Reciprocal of 7246041 to eleven Decimal places :
By the Vedic mental one-line-method. )
(by the Ürdhwa-Tiryak Sūtra) |.
erase р +
N.B. :—The same method can be used for 200 or more places :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
нА у
Ж» Жу

TIL: Divisibility : ;
(6) Find out whether 5293240096 is divisible by 189:
By the current method, nothing less than complete
division will give a clue to the answer (Yes or No).
But by the Vedic mental one-line method (by ied
Ekadhika-Pirva Sütra), we can at once say :—
IV. Square Root:
(7) Extract the square root of 738915489 :
By the current method : By the Vedic mental one-line method:
2 bd (By the Urdhwa-Tiryak Sütra)
*. The square root is 27183.
(8) Extract the square root of 19:706412814 to 6 decimal places :
The current method is too cumbrous and may.be tried by
the student himself. ;
The Vedic mental one-line method (by Ordhiva- Tiryak
Sitra) is as follows :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

V. Cubing and Cube-Root : The “Sanskrit Sitra’ , a
(Formula) 4s :—
(9) Find the cube of 9989. п aagi agga EU CPU MT
The current method is too cumbrous.
The Vedic mental one-line method (by the YàvadünamTüvadünam Sūtra) is as follows :—
(10) Extract the Cube-Root of 355045812441 :
The current method is too cumbrous. а.
The Vedic mental one-line method is as follows :—
SAMPLE SPECIMENS FROM ALGEBRA
I. Sample Equations :. The “Sanskrit Sütra"
(Formula) 4s :—
(11) Solve: 3х-4 xl Бш шекер 1
By the current method: Ву the Vedic method (by the.
Sünyam-Samuccaya Sütra `
6x2-L19x-L-7 А
The current method is too cumbrous.
The Vedic method simply Says: 2х-9--0
The current method is horribly cumbrous.
The Vedic method simply says: 4x—94—0 . х==6
ЇЇ. Quadratic-Equations (and Calculus) :
The same is the case here.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
er л

ste = ptrs“ . X—0 or —7/2,
By Vedic method (by “Calana-kalana’’ Sūtra; Formula у,
ie. by Calculus-Formula we вау: 14х—11= 20 7) a
N.B. :—Every quadratic can thus be broken down into two
binomial-factors. And the same principle can be
utilised for cubic, biquadratic, pentic etc., expressions.
ПІ. Summation of Series :
.. The current methods are horribly cumbrous. The Vedic
mental one-line methods are very simple and easy.
(17) setra tso - rto —4[77
(18) Potrgotevetssto=rors —
SPECIMEN SAMPLES FROM GEOMETRY
(19) Pythogoras Theorem is constantly required in all mathematical work, but the proof of it is ultra-notorious for its
cumbrousness, clumsiness, etc. There are several Vedic proofs
thereof (every one of them much simpler than Huchd’s). І
give two of them below :—
E, F, G and H are points 2
оп АВ, ВО, ОР апа ЮА впоһ 12228288
that AE=BF=CG=DH. Thus
ABCD is split up into the
square ЁЕСН and 4 congruent з
triangles. Маз —
Their total area —H?--4x3 x mn
==H?+2mn
But the area of ABCD is (m+n)?
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
—BM a e —

` (20) Second Proof :
( ххуш )
Draw BD 1 to AC.
Then АВО, ADB and ~
BDC are similar.
.ADB АВ. ,BDC BC?
SABO AC ABC. AC?
. ADB+BDC_AB?+BC* в. ADB-BDC—ABC
"pu ABC AC?
г.АВ?2--ВС2--АС2, Q.E.D.
Note :—Apollonius Theorem, Ptolemy's Theorem, etc., etc.,
are all similarly proved by very simple and easy
methods.
SIMPLE SPECIMENS FROM CONICS AND CALCULUS
(21) Equation of the straight line joining two points :
For finding the equation of the straight line passing through
two points (whose co-ordinates are given).
By the Current. Method : |
Let the equation be y =mx-+tc,
Solving this simultaneous-equation in m and c.
Substituting ; these, values, we have y—91x— 681
е. 2y=19x—137 .". 19n—2y=137. But this method is
cumbrous.
Second method using the formula үз (х—х1)
is still more cumbrous (and confusing).
But the Vedic mental one-line method by the Sanskrit
Sūtra (Formula), U erae ASAT 1 (“Pardvartya-Siitra’’) enables
us to write down the answer by a mere look at the given
co-ordinates. AD.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
— йл Ци a Гу

(22) When does a general-equation represent two straight lines v
By the Current Method.
Prof. 5. L. Loney devotes about 15 lines (section 119,
Ex. 1 on page 97 of his “Elements of Co-ordinate Geometry”)
to his ‘‘model” solution of this problem as follows :—
'. abc+2fgh —af?—bg?—ch? turns out to be zero.
=19(х—10) (х— БОГТ, кш) а аи (3
The equation represents two straight lines.
Solving it for х, we have :—
да ES E H 24 | |
(Aa)
gu = Т |
e gol DUE ee
' The two straight lines ате 3x—2y —7 and 4x— —5 y 4-5.
By the Vedic method, however, we at once apply the “Adyam- —
adyena" Sūtra and (by merely looking at the quadratic) write
down the answer :
Yes; and the straight lines are 3х—9у=-7 арі.
(23) Dealing with the same principle and adopting the same
procedure with regard to hyperbolas, conjugate hyperbolas and
asymptotes, in articles 324 and 325 on pages 293 and 294 of his
"Elements of Co- ordinate Geometry" Prof. S. L. Loney devotes
27--14(—41 lines) to the problem and says : —
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

( ххх )
As 3х2--5ху--2у2-ь5х-11у-8--0 is the equation to
the given hyperbola. E
.. The equation to the asymptotes is 3x? —5xy—2y?-+
5x—lly—12=0
and the equation to the conjugate-hyperbola is 3x?—5xy —2y?-- |
/ By the Vedic method, however, we use the same ( “Афуат-айуета?) |
| Sutra and automatically write down the equation to the asymp- Г
“totes and the equation to the conjugate-hyperbola. |
The Vedic methods ате so simple that their very simplicity
18 astounding, and, as Desmond Doig has aptly, remarked,
48 4s dificult for any one to believe it until one actually sees it. |
It will be our aim in this and the succeeding -volumes! |
to bring this long-hidden treasure-trove of mathemetical |
knowledge within easy reach of everyone who wishes to obtain it
and benefit by it.
1 Tu is the only volume left by the author—Editor. |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

————— lp tS oll a
TEXT
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

мы
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

BE
139 ft I
VEDIC MATHEMATICS
OR
SIXTEEN SIMPLE MATHEMATICAL FORMULAE
FROM THE VEDAS
SIXTEEN SUTRAS AND THEIR COROLLARIES
Sütras
талаа чат
Ekddhikena Prvena (also
a corollary)
fates чачса чач:
Nikhilam Navatascaramam Dasatah
Ordhva-tiryagbhyam
quer nn
Paràvartya Yojayet
Sünyam Sümyasamuccüge ~~
(spec) spam
(Anurtipye) Sünyamanyat
Sankalana-vyavakalanabhyam (also a corollary)
Püranüpüranábhyàm
HUM |
Calana-Kalanabhyam |
Sub-Sütras or Corollaries
EY
о
Anurtipyena
ос aea:
Sisyate Sesasamjiah
ASAT aA aT
Adyamadyendntya-mantye- _
na
Has: ач UTR
Kevalaih Saptakam Gunyat
БХ
Vestanam
атат «ят
Yaàvadünam Tdavadinam
атаң «ае а ч ча
Yaàvadunam Татаййтлkriya Vargatica Yojayet
HATA HST
Antyayordasake qi
атаа
Antyayoreva
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

Sütras
Wag 10.
Yavadinam
әде: 11.
Vyastisamastih
TASH чач 12.
Sesanyankena Caramena
SAE LS ER Ei DSe Gi
Sopäntyadvayamantyam
Uer ҶаЧ
Ekanytinena Pirvena
iaaa:
о У
Gumitasamuccayah
STET:
Gunakasamuccayah
Sub-Sütras or Corollaries
чата:
Samuccayagunitah
STATA TAT ATA
Lopanasthapanabhyam
faeta
Vilokanam .
qira: «=ч:
Gunitawuccayah
Samuccayaguyitah
[Note—This list has been compiled from stray references
- in the text—EDITOR.]
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ee

П и
PROLEGOMENA
In our “Descriptive, Prefatory Note on the Astounding
Wonders of Ancient Indian Vedic Mathematics”, we have
again and again, so often and at such great length and with such
wealth of detail, dwelt on the almost incredible simplicity
of the Vedic Mathematical Sütras (aphorisms or formulae)
and the indescribable ease with which they can be understood,
remembered and applied (even by little children) for the solution
of the wrongly-believed-to-be-“‘difficult”’ problems in the various
branches of Mathematics, that we need not, at this point, traverse
the same ground and cover the same field once again here.
Suffice it, for our present immediate purpose, to draw
the earnest attention of every scientifically-inclined mind
and researchward-attuned intellect, to the remarkably extraordinary and characteristic—nay, unique fact that the Vedic
system does not academically countenance (or actually follow)
any automatical or mechanical rule even in respect of the
correct sequence or order to be observed with regard to the
various subjects dealt with in the various branches of Mathematics (pure and applied) but leaves it entirely to the convenience and the inclination, the option, the temperamental
predilection and even the individual idiosyneracy of the teachers
and even the students themselves (as to what particular order
or sequence they should actually adopt and follow) !
This manifestly out-of-the-common procedure must
. doubtless have been due to some special kind of ` historical
back-ground, background which made such a consequence not
only natural but also inevitable under the circumstances in
question. | ; |
Immemorial tradition has it and. historical research
confirms the orthodox belief that the Sages, Seers and Saints of
ancient India (who are accredited with having observed, studied
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

and meditated in the Aranya (i.e. in forest-solicitude)—on physical Nature around them and deduced their grand Vedantic
Philosophy therefrom as the result not only of their theoretical
reasonings but also of what may be more fittingly described as
True Realisation by means of Actual VISUALISATION) seem
to have similarly observed, studied and meditated on the
mysterious workings of numbers, figures etc. of the mathematical
world (to wit, Nature) around them and deduced their Mathematical Philosophy therefrom by a similar process of what one
may, equally correctly, describe as processes of True-Realisation
by means of Actual VISUALISATION.
And, consequently, it naturally follows that, in-as-much
as, unlike human beings who have their own personal prejudices, .
partialities, hatreds and other such subjective factors distorting
their visions, warping their judgements and thereby contributing to their inconsistent or self-contradictory decisions and
discriminatory attitudes, conducts etc.), nwmbers (in Mathematics) labour under no such handicaps and disadvantages
based on personal prejudices, partialities, hatreds etc. They
are, on the contrary, strictly and purely impersonal and objective
in their behaviour etc., follow the same rules uniformly, consistenly and invariatly (with no question of outlook, approach,
personal psychology etc. involved therein) and are therefore
absolutely reliable and dependable. |
This seems to have been the real historical reason why,
barring a few unavoidable exceptions in the shape of elementary,
basic and fundamental first principles (of a preliminary or prerequisite character), almost all the subjects dealt with in the
various branches of Vedic Mathematics are explicable and
expoundable on the basis of those very ‘basic principles’ or
‘first principles’, with the natural consequence that no particular
subject or subjects (or chapter or chapters) need necessarily
precede or follow some other particular subject or. subjects
(or chapter or chapters). | >
‚ Nevertheless, it is also undeniable that, although any
particular sequence is quite possible, permissible and feasible,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
нны

ar
yet, some particular sequence will actually have. to be adopted
by a teacher (and, much more therefore, by an author). And
80, we find that subjects like analytical conics and even calculus
(differential and integral) (which is usually the bugbear and
terror of even the advanced students of mathematics under the
present system all the world over) are found to figure and fit
in at а very early stage in our Vedic Mathematics (because of
their being expounded and worked out on basic first principles.
And. they help thereby to facilitate mathematical study.
especially for the small children).
And, with our more-than-half-a-century's actual БЕКОШ
experience of the very young mathematics-students and their
difficulties, we have found the Vedic sequence of subjects and
chapters the most suitable for our purpose (namely, the eliminating from the: children’s minds of all fear and hatred of mathematics and the implanting therein of a positive feeling of
exuberant love and enjoyment thereof)! And we fervently
hope and trust that other teachers too will have a similar
experience and will find us justified in our ambitious description ў
of this volume.as “Mathematics without tears".
From the herein-above described historical back-ground
to our Vedic Mathematics, 16 is also obvious that, being based
on basic and fundamental principles, this system’ of mathematical study cannot possibly come’ into conflict with any
other branch, department or instrument of science and
scientific education. -In fact, this is the exact reason why all
the other sciences have different Theories to propound but
Mathematics has only THOEREMS to expound!
And, above all, we have our Scriptures categroically
laying down the wholesome dictum :—
afari Tat are тет рта |
лїктї язгкште «ата ЇЧ 11
(i.e. whatever is consistent with right reasoning should be
‘accepted, even though it comes from a boy or even from a
parrot; and whatever is inconsistent therewith ought. to be
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

rejected, although emanating from an old man or even from the
great sage Shree Shuka himself.
In other words, we are called upon to enter on such a |
scientific quest as this, by divesting our minds of all
pre-conceived notions, keeping our minds ever open and, in all
humility (as humility alone behoves and befits the real seeker
after truth), welcoming the light of knowledge from whatever
direction it may be forthcoming. Nay, our scriptures go so far
as to inculcate that even thir expositions should be looked upon
by us not as “teachings” or even as advice, guidance etc. but :
as acts of “thinking aloud” by a fellow student. |
It isin this spirit and from this view-point that we now
address ourselves to the task before us, in this series of volumes?
(i.e. a sincere exposition of ‘the mathematical Sütras under
discussion, with what we may call our “running comments”
(just as in a blackboard demonstration or a magic lantern
lecture or a cricket match etc. etc.). `
In conclusion, we appeal to our readers (as we always,
appeal to our hearers) to respond hereto from the same standpoint and in the same spirit as we have just hereinabove
described. ;
We may also add that, inasmuch as we have since long !
promised to make these volumes? “self-contained”, we shall |
make our explanations and expositions ав full and clear as
possible. Brevity may be the soul of wit ; but certainly not ‘at
the expense of CLARITY (and especially in mathematical
treatises like these).
Ne qq Aq
. 3 * Unfortunately,
only one volume has been left i i
2 eft over by His Бора
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Ws? srl
ACTUAL APPLICATIONS
OF
THE VEDIC SUTRAS:
TO
CONCRETE MATHEMATICAL PROBLEMS
CHAPTER I
A SPECTACULAR ILLUSTRATION
For the reasons just explained immediately hereinbefore
let us take the question of the CONVERSION of Vulgar E Ne
into their equivalent decimal form.
First Example :
Case 1. | And there, let us first deal with the сазе of a fraction
1/19 (say 1/19) whose denominator ends in 9.
By the Current Method. By the Vedic one-line mental
95 (947368421 A. First method.
хер COLE B. Second method.
ee 1: E ba I ЕЛ
2 10 80 This is the whole working.
—— — - And the modus operandi is
110 70 40 explained in the next few pages.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

КО ул ы. .
It is thus apparent that the 18-digit recurring-decimal
answer requires 18 steps of working according to the current
system but only one by the Vedic Method.
Explanation :
The relevant байга reads: эйч gay (Hkadhikena
Pürvena) which, rendered into English, simply says: “By
one more than the previous one”. Its application and modus
operandi are as follows :— |
(i) The last digit of the denominator in this case being
1 and the previous one being 1, “one more than the
previous one" evidently means 2.
(1) And the preposition “by” (in the Sütra) indicates
that the arithmetical operation prescribed is either
multiplieation or division. For, in the case of
addition and subtraction, to and from (respectively)
would have been the appropriate preposition to use.
But “Бу” 18 the preposition actually found used in the
Sütra. The inference is therefore obvious that
either multiplication or division must be enjoined.
And, as both the meanings are perfectly correct and
equally tenable (according to grammar and literary
usage) and as there is no reason—in or from the text—
for one of the meanings being accepted and the other
one rejected, it further follows that both the processes
are actually meant. And, as a matter of fact, each
of them actually serves the purpose of the Sütra and
fitis right into it (as we shall presently show, in the
immediately following explanation of the modus
operandi which enables us to arrive at the right
answer by either operation)
A. - The First method :
: The first method is by means of multiplication by 2
(which is the *Ekàdhika Parva” le. the number which is just
one more than the penultimate digit in this case)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

a д БЭ ЁЧ -—P—SÀÁ элй ы ne nm
EIER. gauge eo Lt lp РРР ct SUE Ды сс
Here, for reasons which will become clear presently, |
we can know beforehand that the last digit of the answer is
bound to be 1! For, the relevant rule hereon (which we shall
explain and expound at a later stage) stipulates that the product
of the last digit of the denominator and the last digit of the
decimal equivalent of the fraction in question must invariably
end in 9. Therefore, as the last digit of the denominator in this
case is 9, it automatically follows that the last digit of the decimal
equivalent is bound to be 1 (so that the product of the multiplicand and the multiplier concerned may end in 9).
We, therefore, start with 1 as the last (1.6. the right-handmost) digit of the answer and proceed leftward continuously
multiplying by 2 (which is the Ekadhika Pürva i.e. one more
than the penultimate digit of the denominator in this case)
until a repetition of the whole operation stares us in the face
and intimates to us that we are dealing with a Recurring Decimal
and may therefore put up the usual recurring marks (dots) and
stop further multiplication-work.
Our modus-operandi-chart is thus as follows :—
(i) We put down 1 as the right-hand most
digit 1
(ii) We multiply that last digit (1) by 2 and
put the 2 down as the immediately
preceding digit 21
(11) We multiply that 2 by 2 and put 4 down
as the next previous digit 421
(iv) We multiply that 4 by 2 and put it
down, thus 8421
(у) We multiply that 8 by 2 and get 16 as
the product. But this has two digits.
We therefore put the 6 down immediately to the left of the 8 and keep the
1 on hand to be carried over to the left 68421
at the next step (as we always do in 1
all multiplication e.g. of 69 х 2— 138
and so on).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(vi) We now multiply the 6 by 2, get 12 as
the product, add thereto the 1 (kept
to be carried over from the right at the
last step), get 13 as the consolidated
product, put the 3 down and keep the 1
on hand for carrying over to the left
at the next step.
(vii) We then multiply the 8 by 2, add the
one carried over from the right one, get
7 as the consolidated product. But,
as this is a single-digit number (with
nothing to carry over to the left), we put
it down аз our next multiplicand.
(viti- We follow this procedure continually
Xvili) until we reach the 18th digit (counting
leftwards from the right), when we find
that the whole decimal has begun to
repeat itself. We therefore put up the
usual recurring marks (dots) on the first
and the last digits of the answer (for
betokening that the whole of it is a
Recurring Decimal) and stop the multiplication there. |
Our chart now reads ав follows :—
МЕТЕ Gd т
We thus find that this answer obtained by
aid of our Vedic one-line mental arithm
the same as we obtained by the current method
steps of Division-work).
process not only takes 18 steps of working for
18 digits of the answer not to talk of the time,
In passing, we may also just mention that
us with the
etic is just exactly
(with its 18
the current
getting the
the energy,
the paper, the ink etc. consumed: but also suffers under the
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Sea «|
es ee Oe ae r aT e A a ИШ ды. Ga aaa л.
additional and still more serious handicap that, at each step,
a probable “trial” digit of the Quotient has to be taken on trial
for multiplying the divisor which, is sometimes found to have
played on us the scurvy trick of yielding a product larger than
the dividend on hand and has thus—after trial—to be discarded
in favour of another “trial” digit and so on. In the Vedic
method just above propounded, however, there are no subtractions at all and no need for such trials, experiments etc., and no
scope for any tricks, pranks and so on but only a straightforward
multiplication of single-digit numbers; and the multiplier
is not merely a simple one but also the same throughout each
particular operation. All this lightens, facilitates and expedites
the work and turns the study of mathematics from a burden and
a bore into a thing of beauty and a joy for ever (so far, at any
rate, as the children are concerned).
In this context, it must also be transparently clear that
the long, tedious, cumbrous and clumsy methods of the current
system tend to afford greater and greater scope for the children’s
making of mistakes (in the course of all the long multiplications,
subtractions etc. involved therein); and once one figure goes
wrong, the rest of the work must inevitably turn out to be an
utter waste of time, energy and so on and engender feelings of
fear, hatred and disgust in the children’ в minds.
B. The Second method :
As already indicated, the second method is of division
(instead of multiplication) by the self-same “Hkadhika Pūrva”,
namely 2. And, as division is the exact opposite of
multiplication, it stands to reason that the operation of division
should proceed, not from right to left (as in the case of multiplication as expounded hereinbefore) but in the exactly opposite
direction (i.e. from left to right). And such is actually found to
be the case. Its application and modus operands are as follows :—
(i) Dividing 1 (the first digit of the dividend) by 2, we
see the quotient is zero and the remainder is 1. We,
therefore, set 0 down as the first digit of the quotient
and prefix the Remainder (1) to that very digit of the
Quotient (as a sort of raverse-procedure to the
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| carrying-to-the-left process used in multiplication)
and thus obtain 10 as our next Dividend 2,
(ii) Dividing this 10 by 2, we get 5 as the second digit
of the quotient ; and, as there is no remainder (to be
prefixed thereto), we take up that digit 5 itself as
our next Dividend. .05
(Ш) So, the next quotient—digit is 2; and the remainder
is 1. We, therefore, put 2 down as the third digit
of the quotient and prefix the remainder (1) to that
quotient-digit (2) and thus have 12 as our next
Dividend. .052
ТТ
(iv) This gives us 6 аз quotient-digit and zero as
Remainder. So, we set 6 down as the fourth digit
of the quotient; and as there їз no remainder to
be prefixed thereto, we take the 6 itself as our next
digit for division. 5 0 “з 6 23
(v) That gives us 1 and 1 ав Quotient and Remainder
respectively. We therefore put 1 down as the 5thquotient-digit, prefix the 1 thereto and have 11
ав our next Dividend. . 0526315
dus 11
(vi-xvii) Carrying this process of straight, continuous division
by 2, we get 2 as the 17th quotient-digit and 0 as
remainder.
(xviii Dividing this 2 by 2, we getlas .059631578
18th quotient digit and 0 as 1 1 1111
remainder. But this is exactly 94736842]
what we began with. This- 125121
means that the decimal begins
to repeat itself from here.
So, we stop the mentaldivision process and put down
the usual recurring symbols (dots
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
-— Ra 2кг
Í

on the Ist and 18th digits) to
show that the whole of it is a
circulating decimal.
Note that, in the first method (i.e. of multiplication), each
surplus digit is carried over to the left and that, in the second
method (i.e. of division), each remainder is prefixed to the
"right (i.e. just immediately to the left of the next dividend digit).
СО. A Further short-cut.:
This is not all. As a matter of fact, even this much
or rather, this little work (of mental multiplication or division)
is not really necessary. This will be self-evident from sheer
observation.
Let us put down the first 9 digits of . 05263157 8
the answer in one horizontal row above 947368421
and the other 9 digits in another horizontal ———————-——
row just below and observe the fun of it. 999999999
We notice that each set of digits (in the ----------
upper row and the lower row) totals 9. And this means that,
when just half the work has been completed (by either of the
Vedic one-line methods), the other half need not be obtained
by the same process but is mechanically available to us by
subtracting from 9 each of the digits already obtained! And
this means a lightening of the work still further (by 50%).
Yes; but how should one know that the task is exactly
half-finished so that one may stop the work (of multiplication or
division, as the case may be) and proceed to reel off the remaining half of the answer by subtracting from 9 each of the digits
already obtained? And the answer is—as we shall demonstrate
later on—that, in either method, if and as soon as we reach the
difference between the numerator and the denominator (i.e.
19 —1—18), we shall have completed exactly half the work ; and,
with this knowledge, we know exactly when and where we may
stop the multiplication or division work and when and where
we can begin reeling off the complements from 9 (as the remaining digits of the answer) |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar >

1177 (Jo MDa Se SS aE I DM рт.
Thus both in the multiplication method and in the division
method, we reach 18 when we have completed half the work
and can begin the mechanical-subtraction device (for the other
half).
Details of these principles and processes and other allied
matters, we shall go into, in due course, at the proper place. In
the meantime, the student will find it both interesting and profitable to know this rule and turn it into good account from time
to time (as the occasion may demand or justify).
Second Example :
Case 2 | Let us now take another case of a similar type (say,
1/29 ) 1/29) where too the denominator ends in 9.
By the Current method :— By the Vedic one-line
87 96551724137931 A. First Method
me зээ--
B. Second Method.
-- — —— —— This is the whole working
110 190 120 90 ` (by both the processes). The
procedures are explained on the
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

A. Explanation of the First Method :
Here too, the last digit of the denominator is 9; but
the penultimate one is 2; and one more than that means 3.
So, 318 our соттот-—1.е. apne —-multiplier this time. And,
following the same procedure as in the case of 1/19, we put
down, 1 ав the last (i.e. the right-hand-most) digit of the answer
and carry on the multiplication continually (leftward) by
3 (“carrying”’ the left-hand extra side-digit—if any— over to
the left) until the Recurring Decimal actually manifests itself
as such. And we find that, by our mental one-line process,
we get the same 28 digit-answer as we obtained by 28 steps of
cumbrous and tedious working according to the current system,
as shown on the left-hand side margin on the previous page.
Our modus-operands-chart herein reads as follows :—
B. Explanation of the Second Method :
The Division—process to be adopted here is exactly
the same as in the case of 1/19 ; but the Divisor (instead of the
multiplier) is uniformly 3 all through. And the chart reads as
follows :—
C. The Complements from Nine:
Here too, we find that the two halves are all complements
of each other (from 9). So, this fits in too.
а,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Нил EID MA C CENE
Third Example : |
Case 8 |
1/49 | By the current system. |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

By the Vedic one-line Mental Method ғ
Our multiplier or divisor (as the case may be) is now 5
(1.6. one more than the penultimate digit). So, A. (By multiplication leftward from the right) by 5, we have—
OR B. (By DIVISION rightward from the left) by 5:—
Note :—А% this point, in all the 3 processes, we find that
we have reached 48 (the difference between the
numerator and the denominator). This means that
half the work (of multiplication or division, ав the
case may be) has been completed and that we may
therefore stop that process and may begin the easy
and mechanical process of obtaining the remaining
digits of the answer (whose total number of digits is
thus found to be 21--21—42). And yet, the remarkable thing is that the current system takes 42 steps
of elaborate and cumbrous dividing (with a series of
multiplications and subtractions and with the risk
of the failure of one or more “trial digits" of the
Quotient and so on) while a single, straight and
continuous process—of multiplication or division—(by
a single multiplier or divisor) is quite enough in the
Vedic method.
The complements from nine are also there. ~
Butthisisnotall Our readers will doubtless be surprised
to learn—but it is an actual fact—that there are, in the Vedic
system, still simpler and easier methods by which, without
doing even the infinitely easy work explained hereinabove, we
can put down digit after digit of the answer, right from the
very start to the very end.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

то a CDM ата узу... = rS ч Т ал Un pomme
But, as these three examples (of 4, зу, and zy) have been |
dealt with and explained at this stage, not in the donbemplated [
regular sequence but only by way of preliminary demonstration
for the satisfaction of a certain, natural and understandable, |
“nay, perfectly justifiable type of purely intellectual curiosity,
we do not propose to go—here and now—into a further detailed
and elaborate, comprehensive and exhaustive exposition of the
other astounding processes found adumbrated in the Vedic |
mathematical Sütras on this particular subject. We shall |
hold them over to be dealt with, at their own appropriate place,
in due course, in a later chapter.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ARITHMETICAL COMPUTATIONS
CHAPTER II i
MULTIPLICATION (by ‘Nikhilam etc. Sütra)
Pass we now on to à systematic exposition of certain
salient, interesting, important and necessary formulae of the
utmost value and utility in connection with arithmetical
calculations etc., beginning with the processes and methods
described in the Vedic mathematical Sutras.
At this point, it will not be out of place for us to repeat
that there is a GENERAL formula which is simple and easy
and can be applied to all cases; but there are also SPECIAL
cases—or rather, types of cases—which are simpler still and
which are, therefore, here first dealt with.
We may also draw the attention of all students (and
teachers) of mathematics to the well-known and universal
fact that, in respect of arithmetical multiplications, the usual
present-day procedure everywhere (in schools, colleges and
universities) is for the children (in the primary classes) to be
told to cram up—or “get by heart"—the multiplication-tables
(up to 16 times 16, 20X20 and so on). But, according to the
Vedic system, the multiplication tables are not really required
above 5x5. And а schoolgoing pupil who knows simple
addition and subtraction (of single-digit numbers) and the
multiplication-table up to five times five, can improvise all
the necessary multiplication-tables for himself at any time and
can himself do all the requisite multiplications involving bigger
multiplicands and multipliers, with the aid of the relevant
simple Vedic formulae which enable him to get at the required
products, very easily and speedily—nay, practically, immediately. The Sütras are very short; but, once one understands
them and the modus operandi inculcated therein for their
practical application, the whole thing becomes 8 sort of
children’s play and ceases to be a “problem”.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ПИЛИ ЕЕ НЫД Мэн...
1. Let us first take up a very easy and simple illustrative
example (1.6. the multiplication of single-digit numbers above 5)
and see how this can be done without previous knowledge of the
higher multiplications of the multiplication-tables.
The Sūtra reads: бе «ame aaa: (Nikhilam Navataścaramarh Dagatah) which, literally translated, means;
“all from 9 and the last from 10”! We shall give a detailed
explanation, presently, of the meaning and applications of this
cryptical-sounding formula. But just now, we state and
explain the actual procedure, step by step.
Suppose we have to multiply 9 by 7. (10)
(i) We should take, as Base for our calcu- 9-1
lations, that power of 10 which isnearestto 7—3
the numbers to be multiplied. In this 6/3
10 itself is that power ; ——
(ii) Put the two numbers 9 and 7 above and below on the
lefthand side (as shown in the working апды
here on the right-hand side margin) ;
(їп) Subtract each of them from the base (10) and write
down the remainders (1 and 3) on the right-hand
side with a connecting minus sign (—) between them,
to show that the numbers to be multiplied are both
of them less than 10.
(iv) The product will have two parts, one on the left side
and one on the right, - A vertical dividing line may be
drawn for the purpose of demarcation of the two
parts.
(v) Now, the left-hand-side digit (of the answer) can be
arrived at їп one of 4 ways :—
(a) Subtract the base 10 from the sum of the given
numbers (9.and 7 1.е.-16). And put (16— ч)
Le. 6, as the left-hand part of `
the answer ; 9+7—10=6
OR (5) Subtract ah sum of the two deficiencies (1--3--4) from the base (10).
You get the same answer (6) again ; :
' CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

OR (c) Cross-subtract deficiency (8) on the
Į second row from the original
| number (9) in the first row.
And you find that you have got .
OR (d) Cross-subtract in the converse
way (ie. 1 from 7). And you
get 6 again as the left-hand side
portion of the required answer. 7—1=6
! Note :—This availablity of the same result in several easy
| ways is a very common feature of the Vedic system
and is of great advantage and help to the student
(as it enables him бо test and verify the correctness
of his answer, step by step).
(vi) Now, vertically multiply the two deficit figures
(1 and 3). The product is 3. And this is the righthand-side portion of the answer. (10) 9—1
This method holds good in all cases and is, therefore,
4 capable of infinite application. In fact, old historical traditions
describe this cross-subtraction process as having been responsible for the acceptance of the x mark as the sign of
multiplication. (10)
As further illustrations of the same rule, note the following
| ехаш'р]ев:— сс а са акш us
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Luc м айй |

Thisiproves the correctness of the formula. The algebraical
explanation for this is very simple :—
(x—a) (x—b) = x (x—a—b)+ab.
A slight difference, however, is noticeable when the .
vertical multiplication of the deficit digits (for obtaining the
right-hand-side portion of the answer) yields a product consisting of more than one digit. For example, if and when we
have to multiply 6 by 7, and write it down as usual :—
we notice that the required vertical multiplication (of 3 and
4) gives us the product 12 (which consists of 2 digits; but, as
our base is 10 and the right-hand-most digit is obviously of
units, we are entitled only to one digit (on the right-hand side).
This difficulty, however, is easily surmounted with the
usual multiplicational rule that the surplus portion on the
left should always be ''carried" over to the left. Therefore,
in the present case, we keep the 2 of the 12 on the right hand
side and “carry” the 1 over to the left and change the 3 into
4, We thus obtain 42 as the actual product of 7 and 6.
A similar procedure will naturally be required in respect
of other similar multiplications :—
This rule of multiplication (by means of cross-subtraction
for the left-hand portion and of vertical multiplication for the
right-hand half), being an actual application of the absolute
algebraic identity :—(х--а) (x--b)- x(x+a-+b)+ab, can be
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

B -—— tse
extended further without any limitation. Thus, as regards
numbers of two digits ши we may notice the following specimen
examples :—
N.B. The base now required is 100.
Note 1:—In all these cases, note that both the cross-subtractions always give the same remainder (for the
left-hand-side portion of the answer).
Note 2 :—Here too, note that the vertical multiplication (for
the right-hand side portion of the product) may, in
some cases, yield a more-than-two-digit product ;
but, with 100 as our base, we can have only two
digits on the right-hand side. We should therefore
adopt the same method as before (i.e. keep the
permissible two digits on the right-hand side and
“carry” the surplus or extra digit over to the left)
(as in the case of ordinary addition, compound
addition etc.) Thus—
Note :—Also, how the meaning of the Sūtra comes out in all
the examples just above dealt with and tells us how
to write down immediately the deficit figures on the
right-hand side. The rule is that all the other digits
(of the given original numbers) are to be subtracted
from 9 but the last (ie. the right-hand-most one)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ы: ЗЛ

should be deducted from 10. Thus, if 63 be the
given number, the deficit (from the base) is 37; and
so on. This process helps us in the work of ready
on-sight subtraction and enables us to put the deficiency
down immediately.
“А new point has now to be taken into consideration ie.
that, just as the process of vertical multiplication may yield
a larger number of digits in the product than is permissible
(and this contingency has been provided for), so, it may similarly
. yield a product consisting of a smaller number of digits than we
are entitled to. What is the remedy herefore ? Well, this
contingency too has been provided for. And the remedy is—as
in the case of decimal multiplications—merely the filling up of
all such vacancies with Zeroes. Thus,
With these 3 procedures (for meeting the 3 possible
contingencies in question ie. of normal, abnormal and subnormal number of digits in the vertical-multiplication-products)
and with the aid of the subtraction-rule (i.e. of all the digits from
9 and the last one from 10, for writing down the amount of the
deficiency from the base), we can extend this multiplication-rule
to numbers consisting of а larger number of digits, thus—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
х

-r
Yes; but, in all these cases, the multiplicand and the
multiplier are just a little below a certain power of ten (taken
as the base). What about numbers which are above it ?
And the answer is that the same procedure will hold good
there too, except that, instead of cross-subtracting, we shall have
to cross-add. And all the other rules (regarding digit-surplus,
digit-deficit etc.,) will be exactly the same as before. Thus,
А
In passing, the algebraical principle involved may be
explained as follows :—
(х--а) ТЫ М
Yes; but if one of the numbers is above and the other
is below a power of 10 (the base taken), what then ?
The answer is that the plus and the minus will, on multiplication, behave as they always do and produce a minus-product
and that the right-hand portion (obtained by vertical multi-
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
| ts
і

plication) will therefore have to be subtracted. A vinculum
may be used for making this clear. Thus,
Note:—Note that even the subtraction of the vinculumportion may be easily done with the aid of the Sutra
under discussion (i.e. all from 9 and the last from 10).
Multiples and. sub-multiples :
Yes ; but, in all these cases, we find both the multiplicand
and the multiplier, or at least one of them, very near the base
taken (in each case); and this gives us а small multiplier and
thus renders the multiplieation very easy. What about the
multiplication of two numbers, neither of which is near a convenient base?
The needed solution for this purpose is furnished by а
small ‘Upasiitra’ (or sub-formula) which is so-called because
of its practically axiomatic character.
This sub-siitra consists of only one word этет
(Anurüpyena) which simply means “Proportionately”. In
actual application, it connotes that, in all cases where there
.is a rational ratio-wise relationship, the ratio should be taken
into account and should lead to a proportionate multiplication
or division as the case may be.
In other words, when neither the multiplicand nor the
multiplier is sufficiently near а convenient power of 10 (which
can suitably serve us as a base), we can take a convenient mulСС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

7 ase муна _. Sad E acces - ccv Pe. Сиыр
tiple or sub-multiple of a suitable base, as our “Working Base”,
perform the necessary operation with its aid and then multiply
or divide the result proportionately (i.e. in the same proportion
as the original base may bear to the working base actually used
by us). A concrete illustration will make the modus operandi
clear.
Suppose we have to multiply 41 by 41. Both these numbers
are so far away from the base 100 that by our adopting that
as our actual base, we shall get 59 and 59 as the deficiency from
the base. And thus the consequent vertical multiplication
of 59 by 59 would prove too cumbrous a process to be permissible under the Vedic system and will be positively inadmissible.
We therefore, accept 100 merely as a theoretical base and
take sub-multiple 50 (which is conveniently near 41 and 41)
as our working basis, work the sum up accordingly and then
do the proportionate multiplication or division, for getting
the correct answer. |
Our chart will then take this shape :— |
ӨЛ 50
(i) We take 50 as our working base. 41—9
(ii) By cross—subtraction, we get 32 on 41—9
the left-hand side. ————-
(ii) As 50 is a half of 100, we therefore
divide 32 by 2 and put 16 down as the
real left-hand-side portion of the
answer.
(iv) The right-hand-side portion (81)
remains wn-affected. 3
(у) The answer therefore is 1681. fer Ээ» Зу
OR, secondly, instead of taking 100 P Ü Ns Y
as our theoretical base and its half (50) à * ( qim үү ^
ха t 2 E 4
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar Soe

| шилжин — MÀ Mme, Me Fs a a b o -
as our working base (and dividing 10Х5--50 |
32 by 2), we may take 10, аз our ————
theoretical base and its multiple 50 as 41—9
our working base and ultimately 41—9 |
multiply 82 by 5 and get 160 for the : |
left-hand side. Апа аз 10 was our 39 1 1 |
theoretical base and we are therefore x 5
entitled to only one digit on the right 169/,1—1681 |
hand side, we retain 1 (of the 81) on — — — — B
the right hand side, "carry" the 8 (of the 81) over |
to the left, add it to the 160 already there and thus “7
obtain 168 as our left-hand-side portion of the answer. 21
The product of 41 and 41 is thus found to be 1681 |
(the same as we got by the first method).
OR, thirdly, instead of taking 100 or 10 as our theoretical
base and 50 (a sub-multiple or multiple thereof) as
our working base, we may take 10 and 40 as the bases
respectively and work at the multiplication as shown
(on the margin) here. And we find 10x4—40
that the product is 1681 (the same as 414-1
we obtained by the first and the second ^ 41--1 |
methods). ; = 3
Thus, as we get the same answer (1681) by all the three |
E nons; we have option to decide—according to our own |
convenience—what theoretical base and what working base |
we shall select for ourselves. |
As regards the principle underlying and the reason behind |
the vertical-multiplication operation (on the right-hand-side)
remaining unaffected and not having to be multiplied or |
divided “proportionately” a very simple illustration will suffice |
to make this clear. |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ЭЭ

Suppose we have to divide 65 successively by 2, 4, 8, 16,
32 and 64 (which bear a certain internal ratio or ratios among
themselves). We may write down our table of answers as
follows :—
65 l "65. c1. on aul бр
ao gr цы а. Dec 16-16”
ата
8238 ; and 647 "Ga R 48 constant.
We notice that, as the denominator (i.e. the divisor) goes
on increasing in a certain ratio, the quotient goes on decreasing,
proportionately ; but the remainder remains constant. And this
is why it is rightly called the remainder (Ёаў ч: 11).
The following additional examples will serve to illustrate
the principle and process of аттечїт (ie. the selecting of a
multiple or sub-multiple as our working base and doing the
multiplication work in this way).
Working Base 100/2=50 Working Base 10 х5=50
Working Base 100/2=50 Working Base 10 х5--50
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Working Base 10X5=50
Working Base 10x 6—60
б
Working Base 100/2--50
Working Base 10x 5—50
Хб
Working Base 100/2--50
Working Base 10x 5—50
Working Base 10x 2—20
х2
Working Base 100/2--50
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ян

Working Base 10x 2=20
Working Base 10x 4—40
Working Base 10x 5=50
хб
Working Base 10x 3к-30
Working Base 10x1
Working Base 10x 6=60
Working Base 100/2=50
Working Base 10x 2—20
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Working Base 1000/4=250 Working Base 10x 5=50
мм xB
Working Base 100/2--50
Note :—Here 47 being odd, its division by 2 gives us a
. fractional quotient 234 and that, just as half a rupee
or half a pound or half a dollar is taken over to the
right-hand-side (as 8 annas or 10 shillings or 50 cents),
so the half here (in the 234) is taken over to the righthand-side (as 50). So, the answer is 23/52.
т.
Working Base 1000/4250 Working Base 1000/4250
Note :—In the above two cases, the 1 on the left hand side is
carried over to the right hand „(аз 250).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| The following additional (worked out) examples will serve
| to further elucidate the principle and process of multiplication
according to the Vedic Sūtra (‘NV ikhilan’ etc) and facilitate the
student's practice and application thereof :—
| ane GUN CE =46/ 56
| оез DET: 299— 1
XI| j X7 | уво
aaa
аа
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

x5] S ie
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

a
| —— SER
| Note :—Most of these examples ате quite easy, in fact much
| easier-by the зэ аа (Ordhva-Tiryagbhydm) Sütra
| ' which is to be expounded in the next chapter. They
have been included here, merely for demonstrating
| that they too can be solved by the *Nokhilamv Sutra
expounded in this chapter.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

иг eee
But before we actually take up the ‘Ordhva-Tiryak?
formula and explain its modus operandi for multiplication, we |
shall just now explain a few corollaries which arise out of the |
“М лат? Sūtra which is the subject-matter of this chapter. |
The First Corollary : |
The first corollary naturally arising out of the \
‘Nikhila Sūtra reads as follows:—aragi атаач m ч |
Фа 1 which means :—‘“whatever the extent of its deficiency,
lessen it still further to that very extent ; and also set up the |
square (of that deficiency)”. |
This evidently deals with the squaring of numbers. A |
few elementary examples will suffice to make its meaning and |
application clear :—
Suppose we have to find the square of 9. The following |
will be the successive stages in our (mental) working :— |
(i) We should take up the nearest power of 10 (i. e. 10 |
itself) as our base.
(1) As 9 is 1 less than 10, we should decrease it still
further by 1 and set it (the 8) down as our left-side
portion of the answer. 8/
(iii) And, on the right hand, we put down
the square of that deficiency (1?) 8/1
Now, let us take up the case of 82. As SESER
8 is 2 less than 10, we lessen it still
further by 2 and get 8—2 (i. e. 6) for the 6/ |
left-hand and putting 2? (=4) оп the 8) ж 2 |
right-hand side, we вау 82--64 8—9 |
In exactly the same manner, we say 25,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Lun | туш с ES ш сааж лэ сс NR
| Yes; but what about numbers above 10 ? We work
exactly as before ; but, instead of reducing still further by the
deficit, we increase the number still further by the surplus
| and say :—
| : EN анн ышы Ыы ee 00 eg
And then, extending the same rule to numbers of two or
more digits, we proceed further and say :—
| Lhe Algebraical Explanation for this is as follows :—
| (a:Lb)?=a?-2ab-+b?
| A Second Algebraical Explanation is as follows :— -
| рсе (a—b)
| Ж So, if we have to obtain the square of any number (a),
b | же сац add any number (b) to it, subtract the same number
| (5) from it and multiply the two and finally add the square
of that number (b) (on the right hand side). Thus, if 97 has
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

жи КЕ |
to be squared, we should select such a number (b) as will, by
addition or by subtraction, give us a number ending in a zero
(or zeros) and thereby lighten the multi-multiplication work.
In the present case, if our (b) be 3, a+b will become 100 and
8-4 will become 94. Their product is 9400: and b?—9
/.972--94|09. This proves the Corollary. |
The Third Algebraical Explanation is based on the Nikhila |
Sutra and has been indicated already. |
The following additional sample-examples will further
serve to enlighten the student (on this Corollary) :—
х8 x5] ay dt 1

Note :—All the cases dealt with hereinabove are doubtless of
numbers just a little below ог just a little above a
power of ten or of a multiple or sub-multiple thereof.
This corollary is specially suited for the squaring of
such numbers. Seemingly more complex and “difficult” cases will be taken up in the next chapter
(relating to the Urdhva-Tiryak Sūtra); and still
most ‘‘difficult” will be explained in a still later
chapter (dealing with the squaring, cubing etc., of
bigger numbers).
The Second Corollary.
The second corollary is applicable only to a special case
under the first corollary (1. е. the squaring of numbers ending
in 5 and other cognate numbers). Its wording is exactly the
same as that of the байга which we used at the outset for the
conversion of vulgar fractions into their recurring decimal
equivalents (i. e. патча qdw). The Sūtra now takes a totally
different meaning altogether and, in fact, relates to а wholly
different set-up and context altogether.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Its literal meaning is the same as before (1. е. “by one
more than the previous опе”); but it now relates to the
squaring of numbers ending in 5 (e. g. say, 15). 1/ 5
Here, the last digit is 5 ; and the “previous” one TT
is 1. So, one more than that is 2. Now, the Sütra 2/25
in this context tells us to multiply the previous ———
digit (1) by one more than itself (i¢by 2), So the
left-hand side digit is 1x2 ; and the right-hand
side is the vertical-multiplication-product (i. e.
25) as usual.
The Algebraical Explanation is quite simple and follows |
straight-away from the Nikhilam Sūtra and still more so from
the Ordhva-Tiryak formula to be explained in the next
chapter (q.v.).
A sub-corollary to this Corollary (relating to the squaring
of numbers ending in 5) reads: эй (Antyayor- |
Daśakepi) and tells us that the above rule is applicable 5
not only to the squaring of a number ending in 5 but also to the М
multiplication of two numbers whose last digits together total i
10 and whose previous part is exactly the same. 2
cco. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar \ |

For example, if the numbers to be multiplied are not 25
and 25, but, say 27 and 23 [whose last digits i.e. 7 & 3 together
total 10 and whose previous part is the same namely 2], even
then the same rule will apply (1. e. that the 2 should be multiplied by 3 the next higher number. Thus we have 6 as our
left-hand part of the answer; and the right-hand one is, by
vertical multiplication (as usual)
We can proceed further on the same lines and say :—
This sub-corollary too is based on the same Nikhilam Sutra;
| and harder examples thereof will more appropriately come under
| the Ordhva-Tiryak formula of the next chapter (or the still later
chapter on more difficult squarings and cubings).
At this point, however, it may just be pointed out that
the above rule is capable of further application and come in
handy, for the multiplication of numbers whose last digits (їп
sets of 2,8 and so on) together total 100, 1000 etc. For -
example—
N. B.—Note the added zero at the end of the left-hand-side of
the answer.
| The Third Corollary :
1 - Then comes а Third Corollary to the Лат, Sutra,
au which relates to а very special type of multiplication and which
ih is not frequently in requisition elsewhere but is often required
[o in mathematical astronomy etc. The wording of the subex sūtra (corollary) waa чат (Ekanyiinena Pürvena) sounds ав
dram
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ог

т
if it were the converse of the Hkadhika Sütra . It actually is ;
and it relates to and provides for multiplications wherein the
multiplier-digits consist entirely of nines. It comes up under
three different headings as follows :—
The First case :
The annexed table of products produced by the singledigit multiplier 9 gives us the necessary clue to ап understanding of the байга :— |
We observe that the left-hand-side is invariably .
one less than the multiplicand and that the
85 T 3 right-side-digit is merely the complement of the
9x 4=3 | 6 | left-handside digit from 9. And this tells us
ЛЭ E : what to do to get both the portions of the
9x 76 | 3 product.
ue ов! : The word ‘Pirva’ in this context has another
9x10—9 | р | technico-terminological usage and simply means
the 'fmultiplieand" (while the word ‘Apara’
signifies the multiplier).
The meaning of the sub-corollary thus fits in smoothly
into its context i. e. that the multiplicand has to be
decreased by1; and as forthe right-hand side, that is
mechanically available by the subtraction of the left-handside from 9 (which is practically a direct application of the
Nikhilam Sütra).
As regards multiplicands and multipliers of 2 digits each,
we have the following table of products :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

риси a TNE
And this table shows that the rule holds good here too.
And by similar continued observation, we find that it is
uniformly applicable to all cases, where the multiplicand and
the multiplier consist of the same number of digits. In fact,
it is а simple application of the Nikhila Sutra and is bound
to apply.
We are thus enabled to apply the rule to all such cases
and say, for example :—
Such multiplications (involving multipliers of this special
type) come up in advanced astronomy 610, and this subformula (Ekanyünena Pürvena) is of immense utility therein.
The Second Case :
The second case falling under this category is one wherein
the multiplicand consists of a smaller number of digits than the
multiplier. This, however, is easy enough to handle ; and.all
that is necessary is to fill the blank (on the left) in with the
required number of zeroes and proceed exactly as before and
then leave the zeroes out. Thus—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ee te Jo Да —— L|

текэ = =
if
сэ PETAT IURI D Tee RN
The Third Case : |
(To be omitted during a first reading)
The third case coming under this heading is one where
the multiplier contains a smaller number of digits than the
multiplieand. Careful observation and study of the relevant
table of products gives us the necessary clue and helps us to
understand the correcb application of the Sütra to this kind of
‚ examples.
Column 1 Column 2 Column 3
We note here that, in the first column of products where
the multiplicand starts with 1 as its first digit the left-handside part (of the product) is uniformly 2 less than the multiplicand ; that, in the second column (where the multiplicand
begins with 2,) the left-hand side part of the product is exactly
3 less; and that, in the third column (of miscellaneous firstdigits) the difference between the multiplicand and the lefthand portion of the product is invariable one more than the
excess portion to the extreme left of the dividend.
The procedure applicable in this case is therefore evidently
as follows :—
(i) Divide the multiplicand off by a vertical line—into
a right-hand portion consisting of as many digits as
the multiplier; and subtract from the multiplicand
one more than the whole excess portion (on the left).
This gives us the left-hand-side portion of the product.
OR take the Ekanyüna and subtract therefrom the
previous (i. e. the excess) portion on the left ; and
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

o emm
ч ннен ан
(ii) Subtract the right-hand-side part of the multiplicand
by the Nikhilam rule. This will give you the righthand-side of the product.
The following examples will make the process clear :—
ПЕС З
Пого
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER Ш
MULTIPLICATION
(by Ürdhva-Tiryak Sütra)
Having dealt in fairly sufficient detail with the application
of the Nikhilam Sutra etc., to special cases of multiplication, we
now proceed to deal with the зе чахетн (Ordhoa Tiryagbhyäm)
Sütra which is the General Formula applicable to all cases of
multiplication (and will also be found very useful, later on,
in the division of a large number by another large number).
The formula itself is very short and terse, consisting of
only one compound word and means “vertically and crosswise”. The applications of this brief and terse Sūtra are
manifold (as. will be seen again and again, later on). . First we
take it up in its most elementary application (namely, to Multiplication in general).
A simple example will suffice to clarify the modus
operandi thereof. Suppose we have to multiply 12 by 13.
(i) We multiply the left-hand-most 19
digit (1) of the multiplicand verti- 13
cally by the left-hand-most digit ———— ——
(1) of the multiplier, get their 1 : 3+2 : 6=156
product (1) and set it down as the
left-hand-most part of the answer.
(ü) We then multiply 1 and 3, and 1 and 2 cross-wise,
add the two, get 5 as the sum and set it down as the
middle part of the answer ; and
(ш) We multiply 2 and 3 vertically, get 6 as their product
and putit down as the last (the right-hand-most)
part of the answer.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ia НЫ E
rA TEUER
A few other examples may also be tested and will be
found to be correct :—
Шинээ
Note :—When one of the results contains more than 1 digit,
the right-hand-most digit thereof isto be put down
there and the preceding (i. e. left-hand-side) digit (or
digits) should be carried over to the left and placed
under the previous digit (or digits) of the upper row
until sufficient practice has been achieved for this
operation to be performed mentally. The digits carried
over may be shown in the working (as illustrated
below) :—
„7 The Algebraical principle involved is as follows :—
Suppose we have to multiply (ax--b) by (ex--d). The
product is асх2-|-х (ad-4-bc)--bd. In other words, the first term
(i. e. the coefficient of x?) is got by vertical multiplication of а
and c; the middle term (i.e.the coefficient of x) is obtained
by the cross-wise multiplication of a and d and of b and c and
the addition of the two products; and the independent term
is arrived at by vertical multiplication of the absolute terms.
And, as all arithmetical numbers are merely algebraic expresСС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

sions in x (with х--10), the algebraic principle explained above
is readily applicable to arithmetical numbers too. Now, if our
multiplicand and multiplier be of 3 digits each, it merely
means that we are multiplying (ax?+bx-+c) by (dx?+-ex-+-f)
(where x—10) :—
ax?--bx4-c
dx?+-ex-+f
adx*-|-x? (ae+-bd)-+x? (af--be-+cd)+-x (bf-+-ce)+ef
We observe here the following facts :—
(i) that the coefficient of x* is got by the vertical multiplication of the first digit (from the left side) ;
(1) that the coefficient of x?is got by the cross-wise
multiplication of the first two digits and by the
addition of the two products ;
(10) that the coefficient of х? is obtained by the multiplication of the first digit of the multiplicand by the
last digit of the multiplier, of the middle one by the
middle one and of the last one by the first one and by
the addition of all the 3 products ;
(iv) that the coefficient of xis obtained by the crosswise multiplication of the second digit by the third
one and conversely and by the addition of the two
products ; and
(v) that the mdependent term results from the vertical
multiplication of the last digit by the last digit.
We thus follow a process of ascent and of descent (going
forward with the digits on the upper row and coming rearward
with the digits on the lower row). If and when this principle
(of ordinary Algebraic multiplication) is properly understood
and carefully applied to the Arithmetical multiplication on
hand (where x stands for 10), the Отдйла Tiryak Sūtra may be
deemed to have been successfully mastered in actual practice.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

A few illustrations will serve to illustrate this OrdhvaTiryak process of vertical and cross-wise multiplications :—
N.B.—It need hardly be mentioned that we can carry out this
(Ordhva-Tiryak) process of multiplication from left to
right or from right to left (as we prefer). All the diffeСС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

lication will be necessary (at least mentally) while, in
the latter case, one-line multiplication will suffice., (but
careful practice is necessary).
rence will be that, in the former case, two-line multip- |
Owing to their relevancy to this context, а few Algebraic
examples (of the Urdhva-Tiryak type) are being given.
———MM ee
-ууы-/о
Note :—If and when a power of x is absent, it should be .
given a zero coefficient; and the work should be
proceeded with exactly as before. For example, for
(7x?--5x--1)(3x3--x?--3), we work ав follows :—
ел ы Да
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |

The use of the Vinculum :
It may, in general, be stated that multiplications by digits
5 may some times be facilitated by the use of the
higher than
vinculum.. The following example will illustrate this :—
(1) 576 (2) OR 624 : But the vinculum process is
214 214 : one which the student must
шэг ————— : very carefully practise, before
109944 122446 : he resorts to it and relies
1332 Tl. 2 on it.
| Miscellaneous Examples :
There being so many methods of multiplication one of them
(the Urdhva-Tiryak one) being perfectly general and therefore
applicable to all cases and the others (the Nikhilam one, the *
Yavadiinam etc.) being of use in certain special cases only, it is
for the student to think of and weigh all the possible alternative
processes available, make up his mind as to the simplest method
in each particular case and apply the formula prescribed therefor.
We now conclude this chapter with a number of miscellaneous examples and with our own “running comments"
thereon, giving the students the necessary experience for making
the best possible selection from amongst the various alternative
methods in question :—
(i) Ву Urdhva-Tiryak rule, 73
r (ii) by the same method but with 133
the use of the vinculum. 043
Evidently, the former is better. =
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(i) By Ordhava-Tiryak, 94. (ii) Or 114
(ш) Ву ibid (with the —
use of the Vinculum)
Evidently the former is better ; but Or
(ш) The Nikhilam Method is still better :—81—19
-ууee ш 2-2
coe — — c NN
(i) 652 (Ш) The Vinculnm method ів manifestly
043 cumbrous in this case and need not
——— be worked out.
(ii) The Nikhilam method may be used and will be quite
easy ; but we will have to take a multiple of 43 which will bring
it dd near 1000. Such a multiple is 43 23—989.
and we can work with it and finall 88 --
divide the whole thing out by 23. =
This gives us the same answer (23/036).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
—— ——X " A—Óe——— Doo

Therefore, the Urdhva (general) process is obviously the
best (in this case).
(5) 123х112 (Nikhilanı)
| (i) 123 (п) Авай the digists (iii) 123--23
| 112 are within 5, the 112--12
| Vinculum method шээг
! 18276 is manifestly out 135 /,76
Both the first and the third methods seem equally good.
99 = method is
8121 ==9801 appropriate” appropriate
| (In all these 4 cases (Nos. 7—10), the General formula fits
in at once).
Note ;—Here in (iti) Nekhilam method, the vertical multiplication of 111 and 102 is also performed in the same
manner (as shown in the *marked margin).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
eo I

have made
use ofit &
then divided out by3
Or (iv) (Yavadtinam).
121 This is
the best.
Or (ii)
Or 213+ 13 N. B. The. digits being
small, the
general
formula is
always
best.
(19) (i) 576 Or (ii) Vineulum —— Or (ii)
X 328 method
inappro- 984— 16
151288 priate: ——
(i) 817 (ii) Vinculum От (ш)...
882 method may
also be used.
(i) 989 Vinculum method 989— 11
989 also useful | 989— 11
814641 шиг празе
didis 1011 /
1308147 ол WE SSE eee
(i) 213 Vinculum 213+ 13
213 method not aes ыу...
suitable. 226 | ,69
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ng л саагшииллчалннлилэгс

PRACTICAL APPLICATION
IN
“COMPOUND MULTIPLICATION”
A. Square Measure, Cubic Measure Еіс.
This is not a separate subject, all by itself. But it is often
of practical interest and importance, even to lay people and
deserves our attention on that score. We therefore deal with it
briefly. |
Areas of Rectangles.
Suppose we have to know the area of a Rectangular piece
of land whose length and breadth are 7’ 8” and 5’ 11" respectively.
According to the conventional method, we put both these
measurements into uniform shape (either as inches or as vulgar
fractions of feet—preferably the latter) and say :—
In the Vedic method, however, we make use of the
_ Algebraical multiplication and the Adyam Sūtra and say :—
Area=5x+11
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Splitting the middle term (by dividing by 12), we get 9
and 9 as Q and R
=45 sq. ft'+52 sq. in.
And the whole work can be done mentally :
(2) Similarly 3’ 7” эн х2--65 х--70
Volwmes of Parallelepipeds :
We сап extend the same method to sums relating to 3
dimensions also. Suppose we have to find the volume of a
parallelepiped whose dimensions are 877”, 5' 10" and 7' 2".
By the customary method, we will say :—
4891086 (with all the big multiplication and
1025 х жо «(with а
0.0 12 12 12 divisions involved). But, by the Vedic
process, we have :—
—149 cub. ft and 1388 cub. in.
Thus, even in these small computations, the customary
method seems to have a natural or ingrained bias in favour of
needlessly big multiplications, divisions, vulgar fractions etc.,
etc., for their own sake. The Vedic Sitras, however, help us
to avoid these and make the work a pleasure and not an
infliction. :
* СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

у
PRACTICE AND PROPORTION
IN
COMPOUND MULTIPLICATION.
The same procedure under the seal (Ordhva-Tiryak
Süira) is readily applicable to most questions which come
under the headings ‘Simple Practice" and “Compound
Practice", wherein “ALIQUOT” parts are taken and many steps
of working are resorted to under the current system but wherein
according to the Vedic method, all of it is mental Arithmetic,
For example, suppose the question is :—
«In a certain investment, each rupee invested brings
Rupees two and five annas to the investor. How much will an
outlay of Rs. 4 and annas nine therein yield ?"
THE FIRST CONVENTIONAL METHOD.
By Means of Aliquot Parts.
Rs. Аз. Ps.
For One Rupee 2—5—0
For 4 Rupees К 9—4—0
Total 10—8—92
for Rs. 4 and
annas 9.
Second Current Method.
(By Simple Proportion)
and Rs. 4—9—0=Rs. 1$
"Ол Re 1, the yield is Rs. $4
7.0 Rs. 18, the yield is Rs. $$ X 1$ —Rs. *$5$
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ay 16
HUE Se
* 7 the Vedic one-line method :
. . Splitting the middle term (or by simple division from
Ч un to left) :
—Rs. 10 and 81$ annas
A few more instances may be taken :—
jeu

(i) By the current ‘Practice’ method
Rs.—as
For Re. 1 4—13
8 аппав==# of Re 1 2— 65
4 annas=i of 8 As. 1— 82
1 a= of 4 annas 0— 414
Total 23— 2.8;
(ii) By the current ‘Proportion’ method.
(ш) By the one-line Vedic Method.
N.B.—Questions relating to paving, carpeting, ornamenting eto.,
etc. (which are-under the current system usually dealt
with by the ‘Practice’ method or by the ‘Proportion’
process) can all be readily answered by the UrdhvaT'ryak method.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

For example, suppose the question is :—
At the rate of 7 annas 9 pies per foot, what will be the
cost for 8 yards 1 foot 3 inches ?
=195 annas 8} pies
. "rH
р с -
ÄT ee
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
нн ——É
ee

CHAPTER ТУ
DIVISION (by the Nikhilam Method).
Having dealt with Multiplication at fairly considerable
length, we now go on to Division; and there we start with
the Nikhilam method (which is a special one).
Suppose we have to divide a number of dividends (of two
digits each) successively by the same Divisor 9 we make a
chart therefor as follows :—
Let us first split each dividend into a left-hand part
| for the Quotient and a right-hand part for the Remainder and |
| divide them by a vertical line. |
In all these particular cases, we observe that the first |
digit of the Dividend becomes the Quotient and the sum of
the two digits becomes the Remainder. This means that we
can mechanically take the first digit down for the Quotientcolumn and that, by adding the quotient to the second digit,
we can get the Remainder.
Next, we take as Dividends, another set of bigger numbers of 3 digits each and make a chart of them as follows :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

PPS ae
In these cases, we note that the Remainder and the sum
of the digits are still the same and that, by taking the first
digit of the Dividend down mechanically and adding it to the
second digit of the dividend, we get the second digit of the
quotient and that by adding it to the third digit of the dividend,
we obtain the remainder.
And then, by extending this procedure to still bigger
numbers (consisting of still more digits), we are able to get
the quotient and remainder correctly. For example,
ya e map 09 "ue
And, thereafter, we take a few more cases as follows :—
XN ЕТЕ 14/10
But in all these cases, we find that the Remainder is the
same as or greater than the Divisor. As this is not permissible,
we re-divide the Remainder by 9, carry the quotient over to
the Quotient column and retain the final Remainder in the
Remainder cloumn, as follows :—
инээ узу .—..
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
“ана, A

We also notice that, when the Remainder is greater than the
Divisor, we can do the consequent final Division by the same
method, as follows :—
We next take up the next lower numbers (8, 7 etc.) as our Divisors
and note the results, as follows :—
Here we observe that, on taking the first digit of the Dividend
down mechanically, we do not get the Remainder by adding
that digit of the quotient to the second digit of the dividend
but have to add to it twice, thrice or 4 times the quotientdigit already taken down. In other words, we have to multiply .
the quotient-digit by 2 in the case of 8, by 3 in the case of 7,
by 4 in the case of 6 and so on. And this again means that
we have to multiply the quotient-digit by the Divisor’s complement from 10.
And this suggests that the Nikhilam rule (about the subtraction of all from 9 and of the last from 10) is at work; and,
to make sure of it, we try with bigger divisions, as follows:
Wil o 27 [m ne. /112
: ыд t
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

от Ino opt) 112 1/12
ee a)
Ши у у
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

In all the above examples, we have deliberately taken ag
Divisiors, numbers containing big digits. The reason therefor
18 as follows :—
(i) It is in such division (by big divisions) that the
student finds his chief difficulty, because he has to
multiply long big numbers by the “trial” digit of
the quotient at every step and subtract that result
from each dividend at each step ; but, in our method
(of the NZkhilam formula), the bigger the digits,
the smaller will be the required complement (from
9 or 10 as the case may be) ; and the multiplicationtask is lightened thereby.
(ii) There is no subtraction to be done at all!
(iii) And, even as regards the multiplication, we have
no multiplication of numbers by numbers as such
but only of a single digit by a single digit, with the
pleasant consequence that, at no stage, is a student
called upon to multiply more than 9 by more than
9. In other words, 9х9--81, is the utmost multiplication he has to perform.
А single sample example will suffice to prove this:
Note :—In this case, the product of 8 and 2 is written down in
its proper place, as 16 (with no “carrying” over to the
left) and so on.
Thus, in our “division” —process (by the Nikhilam
formula), we perform only small single-digit multiplications ;
we do no subtraction and no. division at all; and yet we readily
obtain the required quotient and the required Remainder.
In fact, we have accomplished our division-work in full, without
actually doing any division at ай |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

As for divisors consisting of small digits, another simple
formula will serve our purpose and is to be dealt with in the
next chapter. Just at present (in this chapter), we deal only
with big divisors and explain how simple and easy such, difficult
multiplications can be made (with the aid of the Nikhilam
Sütra).
. And herein, we take up a few more illustrative examples
relating to the cases (already referred to) wherein the Remainder
exceeds the Divisor and explain the process, by which this
difficulty can be easily surmounted (by further application of
the same Nikhilam method) :—
The Remainder here (110) being greater than the Divisor (88)
we,have to divide 110 by 88 and get the quotient and the final
remainder and carry the former over and add it to the quotient
already obtained. Thus, we say :—
80, we add the newly obtained 1 to the previously obtained 1; .
and put down 2 as the quotient and 22 as the Remainder.
This double process can be combined into one as follows :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

A few more illustrations will serve to help the student in
practising this method :—
30009 docs
10003 шыш UE
Thus, even the whole lengthy operation (of division of 11199171
by 99979) involves по division and ño subtraction and consists
of a few multiplications of single digits by single digits and a
little addition (of an equally easy character).
Yes; this is ай good enough so far as it goes; but it
provides only for a particular type (namely, of divisions involving large-digit numbers). Can it help us in other divisions |
(Le. those which involve small-digit divisors) ?
The answer is a candidly emphatic and unequivocal No.
An actual sample specimen will prove this :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Suppose we have to divide 1011 by 23. By the N?khilam
method, the working will be as follows :—
1 gcc 9t 0
SEE oc uar
ISL i 7
aera
Амен у у чау,
"M 2 | 3 (4 times the divisor)
This is manifestly not only too long and cumbrous but much
more во than the current system (which, in this particular
case, 18 indisputably shorter and easier),
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| n. EOD CC рс Or PoE eae Ө ТӨ ТИРИЛЕ moe
In such a case, we can use a multiple of the divisor and
finally multiply again (by the Anuriipya rule). Thus,
But even this is too long and cumbrous ; and this is a suitable
case for the application of the чча (Pardvartya) method.
This we proceed to explain in the next chapter.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
am A ай peu |

CHAPTER V
DIVISION (by the Pardvartya method)
We have thus found that, although admirably suited for
application in the special or particular cases wherein the divisordigits are big ones, yet the Nikhilam method does not help
us in the other cases (namely, those wherein the divisor consists
of small digits). The last example (with 23 as divisor) at the end
of the last chapter has made this perfectly clear. Hence the
need for a formula which will cover the other cases. And this is
found provided for in the Pardvartya Sütra, which is a specialcase formula, which reads “Pardvartya Yojayet” and which
means “Transpose and apply".
The well-known rule relating to transposition enjoins
invariable change of sign with every change of side. Thusbecomes —and conversely ; and X becomes + and conversely. In
the current system, this law is known but only in its application
to the transposition of terms from left to right and conversely
and from numerator to denominator and conversely (in
connection with the solution of equations, the proving of
Identities etc., eto; and also with regard to the Remainder
Theorem, Horner’s process of Synthetic Division etc. etc.)
According to the Vedic system, however, it has a number of
applications, one of which is discussed in the present chapter.
At this point, we may make а reference to the Remainder
Theorem and Horner’s process and then pass on to the other
most interesting applications of the Pardvartya Sūtra.
The Remainder Theorem :
We may begin this part of this exposition with a simple
proof of the Remainder Theorem, as follows:
If Е, Р, © & R be the Dividend, the Divisor, the
Quotient and the Remainder in a case of division and if
the divisor is (x—p), we may put this relationship
down algebraically as follows :—
E=D 0--Б ie. E=Q (x—p)J-R.
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

— ла Ou 2.2 ш OO anc Т үле m mec eae ТИЛ E ee. ДЕА
And if we put x—p, x—p becomes zero; and the
| Identity takes the shape, E—R. In other words, the
| given expression E itself (with p substituted for x)
will be the Remainder.
Thus, the given expression E (ie. the Dividend itself)
(with p substituted for x) automatically becomes the remainder.
And p is automatically available by putting x—p=0 i.e. by
merely reversing the sign of the—p (which is the absolute term
in the binomial divisor) In general terms, this means that,
if с be ax?--bx"-1J-ex?-?--dx?-3 etc. and if D be x—p, the
remainder is ар"--Юр"-1--ерд -2--4р"-3 and so on (ie. E with
p substituted for x). This is the Remainder Theorem.
Horner's process of Synthetic Division carries this still
| further and tells us the quotient too. Itis, however, only a
| very small part of the Pardvartya formula (which goes much
farther and is capable of numerous applications in other
directions also). |
Now, suppose we have to divide |
We put x—2 (the Divsior) down on the left (as usual); just
below it, we put down the—2 with its sign changed; and we
do the multiplication work just exactly as we did in the
previous chapter.
A few more algebraic examples may also be taken :—
| -The quotient is 7x-+-12; and the Remainder is 15.
WEST Ло guns 2 +18 +48
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

At this stage, the student should practise the whole
process as a MENTAL exercise (in respect of binomial divisors
at any rate). For example, with regard to the division of
(12x?—8x—32) by the binomial (x—2), one should be able
to say :—
The procedure is as follows :—
(i) E gives 12 as the first coefficient in the quotient ;
and we put it down;
(ii) multiply 12 by —2, reverse the sign and add to the
next coefficient on the top (numerator). Thus
12 x—2——24, Reversed, it is 24. Add—8 and
obtain 16 as the next coefficient of the Quotient.
(ii) multiply 16 by —2 ; reverse the sign and add to the
next coefficient on top. Thus 16x—2——32;
Reversed, it is 32; add—32 and obtain 0 as the
Remainder.
Similarly, (1) —s .Q=7x+12 ; and R=15
eda and R=653
and R=42
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

This direct and straight application
of the Pardvartya Sütra should be so
well practised as to become very
simple MENTAL arithmetic. And
the student should be able to say
at once :—
хэс Ба асо l л '.©О==х%--х?
and (7)
Extending this process to the case of divisors containing
three terms, we should follow the same method, but should also
take care to reverse the sigas of the coefficient in all the other
terms (except the first) :—
эх 2i Ы R=5x-+-7
0—1 ШЕ Note the zero x? — |
0 +3 and the zero Х |
0 +2 carefully. |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

+3x—l
—3 х°-Е0--х5 —7x?+0+9 Note the
1-2 -+3 - zero x4 and
1 —9 +3 the zero x
0 +0+0 carefully.
Note the zero x? and
zero x carefully.
О е9 the zero
—40 + 04-20 Divisor
-——— carefully
In all the above cases, the first coefficient in the divisor
happened to be 1; and therefore there was no risk of fractional
coefficients coming in. But what about the cases wherein,
the first coefficient not being unity, fractions will have to be
reckoned with 2
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
M p————ÁÉÁÁ—

уо a I S ЕД ЕЕ
The answer is that all the work may be done as before,
with a simple addition to the effect that every coefficient in
the answer must be divided by the first coefficient of the Divisor.
This, however, means a halving of each coefficient (at every
step); and this is not only more cumbrous but also likely to
lead to confusion, reduplication etc.
The better method therefore would be to divide the Divisor
itself at the very outset by its first coefficient, complete the
working and divide it all off again, once for all at the
end. Thus:— 2x—4 —4x'—7x?19x -12 N.B.—Note
x—2 -8 —30 —42 that the R
Q A a always
—2 т} —21/2—54 constant.
Two more illustrative examples may be taken :—
х-21 Аар
ыл
N.B. :—Note that R is constant in every case.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| Arithmetical Applications (Miscellaneous) :
| We shall now take up a number of Arithmetical applications
| and get a clueas to the utility and jurisdiction of the Nikhilam
| formula and why and where we have to apply the Pardvartya
| Sütra.
М (1). Divide 1234 by 112
Ee
$ nai
But this is too cumbrous. The Pardvartya formula will - |
be more suitable. Thus— . |
This is ever so much simpler.
1 (i) 112 1 241 (ii) This too is too long.
888 888 ` Therefore use Pardvartya
4 pc que. E I “0-1:
888 АБЫ eee
e ue E S ll 09 and R=9
o Фан
эж И Ч Ур acte cl prn ce oe
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(СОП)
(3) Divide 1234 by 160
(i) Nikhilam method is manifestly unsuitable. We
should therefore use the Pardvartya formula.
(ii) 160 E a But this is a case where
6+0 —6 0 (Vilokanenaiva) i.e. by
240 simple inspection or observaЕЕЕ tion, we can риб the
answer d :
т. 400 er down
Ee 9
Inall these cases (where the digits in the divisor are
small) the Nkhilam method is generally unsuitable; and the
Pardvartya one is always to be preferred.
Here, as the Remainder portion is a negative quantity, we
should follow the device used in subtractions of larger numbers
from smaller ones (in coinage etc).
Rs. as. ps. £. s d
debo 7 5 3
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

In other words, take 1 over from the quotient column
to the remainder column i.e. take 1123 over to the right side,
subtract 20 therefrom and say, Q—11 and R=1103
(7) Divide 13905 by 113 (similar)
N.B.:—Always remember that just as one Rupee=16 annas,
One Pound=20 shillings and one Dollar—100 cents
and so on, so one taken over from the quotient to the
Remainder—column stands, in concrete value, for the
Divisor.
= 2a sg
EB
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
pe

(11) 1182 11 8 2 9 Alsoby Vilokanam (i.e. mere
Ty 92-382 observation).
(12) 82 1:5-:0253 Also Бу Vilokanam (i.e. by
242 2—2 теге observation)
wees I CUT
181 2 16 2 This is by the Л Шат method
But 18 can be counted as 104-8 or as 20—2. So, put
181 down as 2—2--1. We can thus avoid multiplication by
big digits ie. by more than five.
(ii) 819 CT
(14) Divide 39999 by 9819 or (ii) (by Vinculum and Paravartya)
gpl p M bias
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

1 2 (by simple subtraction of the
ue). 818 : : 40 10 | Divisor as in the case of 16
2 — — апаз, 20 shillings, 100 cents
Па 580 йт]
ENT ne 105
23:57 Blow
Gree 52 T
ОЕЕО воот о) вв 2611
2 1 015 EUIS UTC 41 Б
or (ili) Subtract 828 straight off (in both cases) from 1015.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

-- {| °z§ Qi X MEC cuam pe ааа
Eo ——
jun epe 452 5 8 8
(26) Divide 1356 by 182 Hventhisistoocumbrous. Anurtipya
and Pardvartya willbe more suitable.
40) 0. ратта -
L9 186&5 олу Зои
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(29) Divide 4009 by 882 m
Note :—In both these methods, the working is exactly the
same.
EL S 1H паа.
RUM is = эд.
Te ab 02 тв 8 5
pee pol 328 21--21 CHER
5 1U Кыны 16-4
9 Doug agy
$ Sg o
C ONU NEED)
This work can be curtailed—or at least rendered a bit
easier—by the Anuriipyena Sūtra. We can take 168 (which is
one-fourth of 672) or 84 (which is one-eighth of it) or, better
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ee MI

(ТТ)
| still, 112 (which is one-sixth thereof); and work it out with 25.
| that Divisor and finally divide the quotient proportionately.
| The division (with 112 as Divisor) works out as follows:
212 ЕЕГ,
fees,
лр
It will thus be seen that, in all such cases, a fairly easy
method is for us to take the nearest multiple (or sub-multiple)
to a power of 10 as our temporary divisor, use Ње N?khilam, or
the Pardvartya process and then multiply (or divide) the
Quotient proportionately. A few more examples are given
| below, in illustration hereof :—
(1) Divide 1400 by 199 OR (ii) Since 5X 199=995
| л+о—{ OT? y? 40 MD
I-i-2 дс p gum ТЕБ |
| . СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Arya Samaj Foundation Chennai and eGangotri
Йй БОО ei ib
x2 х2
Te A D 4d.
Note :—The Remainder is constant in all the cases.

CHAPTER VI
ARGUMENTAL DIVISION
(By simple argument per the Ürdhwa Tiryak Sūtra) ч
a third method of division which is one of simple argumentation ·
(based on the ‘Urdhva Tiryak’ Sütra and practically amounts
method (which are of use only in certain special cases) there is |
to a converse thereof).
| In addition to the Nikhilam method and the Pardvartya
The following examples will explain and illustrate it :—
(1) Suppose we have to divide (52--2х-11) by (x--1), we
make a chart, as in the case of an ordinary multipli- х +1
| cation (by the ‘Urdhva Tiryak’ process) and X +1
jot down the dividend and the divisor. Then the rar
argumentation is as follows :— EET
| (i) x? and x being the first terms of the dividend and the
| divisor (or the product and the multiplier respectively),
the first term of the quotient (or the multiplicand)
must be x.
(ii) As for the coefficient of x in the product, it must come
up as thesum of the cross-wise-multiplication-products
of these. We have already got x by the cross-
| multiplication of the x in the upper row and the
| 1 in the lower row; but the coefficient of x in the
| product is 2. The other x must therefore be the
product of the x in the lower row and the absolute
term in the upper row. .'. The latter is 1. And thus {
the Quotient is x4-1.' |
(i) 12x? divided Бу х gives us 12x.
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(ii) The twelve multiplied by —2 gives Q—12x—16
us —24; but the actual coefficient of
x in the product (or tlie dividend) is
—8 .. We must get the remaining 16x by multiplying
the x of the divisor by 16. .. The absolute term
in the Divisor must be 16 .*. Q=12x+16. And
(i) x? divided by x gives us x? x?--7x?--6x-F5
which is therefore the first term x—2
of the quotient. 2. Q=x?+9x+24
(1) x?x —2— —2x?; but we have 7х? in the Dividend.
This means that we have to get 9x? more. This
must result from the multiplication of x by 9x. Hence
the second term of the divisor must be 9x.
(ui) As for the third term, we already have —2х9х=
—18x. But we have 6x in the dividend. We must
therefore get an additional 24x. This can only come
in by the multiplication of x by 24. 2. This is the
third term of the quotient. .. Q—=x?+9x-+24
(iv) Now this last term of the quotient multiplied by
—2 gives us —48. But the absolute term in the
dividend is 5. We have therefore to get an additional
53 from somewhere. But there is no further term left
in the Dividend. This means that the 53 will remain
as the Remainder. .. Q—x?-L-0x--24 ; and R—53
Note:—All| the work explained in detail above can be
easily performed by means of the *Paràvartja
Sutra (as already explained in the *Paràvartya
chapter, in connection with Mental division by
Binomial divisors).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

The procedure is very simple ; and the following examples
will throw further light thereon and give the necessary practice
to the student :—
eU.
x3—x?— Ix 8
Tat E px Qa ie eee сана
ECT . Q=x+2 ; and R=9
xil . Q—4x-F1; and R=0
ae T3 N.B. :—Put zero coefficients for
absent powers.
Lx . Q=x-+3 ; and R—7x4-8
AFI s. Q=x?+2x-+1; and R=0
CREDITI di Q=x +x-+1 5 and R=0
СИРЕ л Qx; and R-ox49
x?—9x—9 aes re :
A 225 2m Зээ T =
Sra . Q=12x?—3x—12 ; and R=0
x?-L9x—8
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
NEM

МУ
т жшше —x?--1; and R=0 r
loeta ВИ ai xt ; andR=0 |
ee =x+5;and R=0 |
SI рах гз —3x212x19 and R=0 |
тла аа ox o and R=0 |
oe —4x?16x-+9; and R=0
UU —Ax?--2x--1; and R=0
ACHSE —x?--2x--3 ; and R=—2x?+18
CE сонин E 100:
and R—32x--301
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ЭГ. ERE арар е с аа
(33) тх Бх І ж |
тх:7-ү2659--5855- SOx! үайх"-үнйх үн зайн цайсан |
(36) (Same dividend as above) |
СС-0. In Public Domain. СигиКи! Kangri Collection, Haridwar

LINKING NOTE
RECAPITULATION & CONCLUSION
OF
(Elementary) DIVISION SECTION
In these three chapters (IV, V and VI) relating to Division,
we have dealt with a large number and variety of instructive
examples and we now feel justified in postulating the following
conclusions :—
(1) The three methods expounded and explained are, no
doubt, free from the big handicap which the current system
labours under, namely, (i) the multiplication, of large numbers
(the Divisors) by “trial digits" of the quotient at every step
(with the chance of the product being found too big for the
Dividend and so on), (ii) the subtraction of large numbers from
large numbers, (ii) the length, cumbrousness, clumsiness etc,
of the whole procedure, (iv) the consequent liability of the
student to get disgusted with and sick of it all, (v) the resultant
greater risk of errors being committed and so on;
(2) And yet, although comparatively superior to the
process now in vogue everywhere, yet, they too suffer, in some
cases, from these disadvantages. At any rate, they do not,
in such cases, conform to the Vedic system's Ideal of “Short and
Sweet" ;
(3) And, besides, all the three of them are suitable only for
some special and particular type (or types) of cases ; and none
of them is suitable for general application to all cases :—
(i) The ‘Nikhila method is generally unsuitable for
Algebraic divisions ; and almost invariably, the ‘Pardvartya’ process suits them better ; А
(п) and, even as regards Arithmetical computations, the
‘Nikhila method is serviceable only when the
Divisor-digits are large numbers (i.e., 6, 7, 8 or 9)
and not at all helpful when the divisor digits are
small ones (i.e. 1, 2, 8, 4 and 5); and it is only the
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

‘Paravartya’ method that can be applied in the
latter kind of cases !
(iii) Even when a convenient multiple (or sub-multiple)
is made use of, even then there is room for a choice
having to be made—by the pupil—as to whether the
‘Nikhila method or the ‘Pardvartya’ one should
be preferred ;
(iv) and there is no exception-less criterion by which
the student can be enabled to make the requisite final
choice between the two alternative methods ;
(v) and, as, for the third method (i.e. by the reversed
‘Ordhva—Tiryak’ Sütra), the Algebraic utility thereof is plain enough ; but it is difficult in respect of
Arithmetical calculations to say when, where and
why it should be resorted to (as against the other
two methods).
All these considerations (arising from our detailedcomparative-study of a large number of examples) add up, in
effect, to the simple conclusion that none of these methods can
be of general utility in all cases, that the selection of the most
suitable method in each particular case may (owing to want of
uniformity) be confusing to the student and that this element
of uncertainty is bound to cause confusion. And the question
therefore naturally—nay, unavoidably arises as to whether
the Vedic Sütras can give us a General Formula applicable
to all cases.
And the answer is:—Yes, most certainly YES! There
is a splendid and beautiful and very easy method which conforms
with the Vedic ideal of ideal simplicity all-round and which
in fact gives us what we have been describing as “Vedic one-linemental answers” |
This astounding method we shall, however, expound in
a later chapter under the caption “Straight-Division”—which
is one of the Crowning Beauties of the Vedic mathematics
Sütras. (Chapter XXVII. q.v.).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER VII
I. FACTORISATION (of Simple Quadratics)
Factorisation comes in naturally at this point, as a form
of what we have called “Reversed multiplication” and as a
particular application of division. There is a lot of strikingly
good material in the Vedic Siitras on this subject too, which is
new to the modern mathematical world but which comes in at
a very early stage in our Vedic Mathematics.
We do not, however, propose to go into a detailed and
exhaustive exposition of the subject but shall content ourselves
with a few simple sample examples which will serve to throw
light thereon and especially on the Siitraic technique by which
a Stitra consisting of only one or two simple words, makes
comprehensive provision for explaining and elucidating a procedure whereby a so-called "difficult" mathematical problem
(which, in the other system puzzles the students’ brains) ceases
to do so any longer, nay, is actually laughed at by them as
being worth rejoicing over and not worrying over!
For instance, let us take the question of factorisation
of a quadratic expression into its component binomial factors.
When the coefficient of x? is 1, it is easy enough, even according
to the current system wherein you are asked to think out and
find two numbers whose algebraic total is the middle coeffcient and whose product is the absolute term. For example,
let the quadratic expression in question be х24-7х4-10, we
mentally do the multiplication of the two factors x12
р (x+5) whose product is х24-7х-1-10 : x+5
and (by a mental process of reverting there eee,
we think of 2 and 5 whose sum is 7 d зол Ee
product is 10: and we thus factorise (x?--7x-++10) into (х--2) and
(x4-5). And the actual working out thereof is as follows :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

The procedure is, no doubt, mathematically correct; but the
process is needlessly long and cumbrous. However, as the
mental process actually employed is as explained above, there
is no great harm done.
In respect, however, of Quadratic expressions whose first |
coefficient is not unity (e.g. 2х2--5х--9), the students do not
follow the mental process in question but helplessly depend on
the 4-step method shown above and work it out as follows:—
As the pupils are never taught to apply the mental process
which can give us this result immediately, it means a real
injury. The Vedic system, however, prevents this kind of harm,
with the aid of two small sub-Sütras which say (i) emper
(Anurüpyena) and (ii) smear (Adyamadyendntyamantyena) and which mean ‘proportionately’ and ‘the first
by the first and the last by the last’.
The former has been explained already (in connection
with the use of multiples and sub-multiples, in multiplication
and division) ; but, alongside of the latter sub-Sütra, it acquires
a new and beautiful double application and significance and
works out as follows :—
(i) Split the middle coefficient into two such parts that
the ratio of the first coefficient to that first part is
the same as the ratio of that second part to the last
coefficient. Thus, in the quadratic 2x?+5x+2, the
middle term (5) is split into two such parts (4 and 1)
that the ratio of the first coefficient, to the first part of
the middle coefficient (16. 2: 4) and the ratio of
the second part to the last coefficient (Le. 1:2)
are the same. Now, this ratio (ie. x+2) is one
factor.
And the second factor is obtained by dividing the first
coefficient of the Quadratic by the first coefficient of the factor
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ee ee SS ee Ч,

already found and the last coefficient of the Quadratic by the last
coefficient of that factor. In other words the second Binomial
factor is obtained thus: = +5 = 2x4+1.
Note :—The middle coefficient (which wè split-up above
into (4+1) may also be split up into (1+-4), that the
ratio in that case 18 (2х--1) and that the other
Binomial factor (according to the above-explained
method) is (x+2). Thus, the change of SEQUENCE
(in the splitting up of the middle term) makes no
difference to the factors themselves !
This sub-Sütra has actually been used already (in the
chapters on division) ; and it will.be coming up again and again,
later on (ie. in Co-ordinate Geometry ete., in connection
with straight lines, Hyperbolas, Conjugate Hyperbolas, Asymptotes etc.)
But, just now, we make use of it in connection with the
factorisation of Quadratics into their Binomial factors. The
following additional examples will be found useful :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

An additional sub-Sütra is of immense ultility in this
context, for the purpose of verifying the correctness of our
answers in multiplications, divisions and factorisations. It
reads ; 799999: яң=ч Ч: and means :—
“The product of the sum of the coefficients in the
factors is equal to the sum of the coefficients in the
product”.
In symbols, we may put this principle down thus :—
S, of the product=Product of the 5, (in the factors).
Similarly, inthe case of Cubies, Bi-quadratics etc., the
same rule holds good. For example:
and we observe that 2х3 х4=14-64-11--6=24.
Thus, if and when some factors are known, this rule
helps us to fill in the gaps.
It wil be found useful in the factorisation of cubics,
biquadratics etc., and will be adverted to (in that context and
in some other such contexts) later on.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
A,
he

CHAPTER VIII
FACTORISATION (of “Harder” Quadratics)
There is a class of Quadratic expressi |
Homogeneous Expressions of the Bu diee M d |
several letters (x, y, z etc.) figure and which are generally fought
shy of by students (and teachers too) as being too “difficult”
but which can be very easily tackled by means of the Adyamadyena Sütra (just explained) and another sub-Siitra whic] |
consists of only one (compound) word, which reads Seat |
and means :—“by (alternate) Elimination and Retention". |
Suppose we have to factorise the Homogeneous quadratic
(2x*+-6y?+32?+ TIxy+llyz+7zx). This is obviously a c
in which the ratios of the coefficients of the various echa
the various letters are difficult to find out ; and the Smee |
of students (and even of teachers) to go into a troubleso : |
thing like this, is quite understandable, Be |
The 'Lopana—Sthüpana! sub-Sütra h
і f » however, removes
ES 03 difficulty and makes the factorisation of a Quadratic |
о 5 8 type ав easy and simple as that of the ordinary quadratic |
(already explained). The procedure is as follows :— |
Suppose we have to factorise the Ї i |
ollowing long Quadratic :
() We first eliminate л (by putting z—0) and retain only
X and y .and factorise the r : ;
: esultin ` ; Р Т
х and у) (with the Adyam Sūtra) = ordinary quadratic (in
(ii) We then Similarly elim;
d > y eliminate y and retain on]
YA юш the simple quadratic (ia x and z); си
gaps x “г еи factors before us, we fill in the
шы, Y our own deliberate elimination of z and y
у. And that gives us the real factors of the given
long ex 1
pression. The proc 3
2 edure А 2
and is ав follows :—- 18 an argumentative one
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
mL tie 2.

If z=0, then E (the given expression) —2x?-L7xy-|-8y?
Similarly, if у=0, then E—2x?--7xy--372— (Х4-32)(2х-41-2) |
| ., Filling in the gaps which we ourselves had created by |
| leaving out z and y, we вау: E—(x-.-2y 4-3) (2х--3у-1-2) '
The following additional examples will be found useful :— |
| H=(x—y) (8x—y) and also (x—z) (8x-+2z)
| By eliminating two letters at а time, we get:
Note :—We could have eliminated x also and retained
only y and z and factorised the resultant simple
quadratic. That would not, however, have given us
any additional material but would have only confir-
| med and verified the answer we had. already
| obtained. Thus, when 3 letters (x, y and z) are there,
only two eliminations will generally suffice. The
following exceptions to this rule should be noted :—
=(x—y) (x+2y) and (x—z) (x+3z)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

But x is to be found in all the terms ; and there is
no means for deciding the proper combinations.
In this.case, therefore, x too may be eliminated ;
and y and z retained. By so doing, we have :—
OR, avoid the x? (which gives the same co-efficient)
and take only y? or z?. And then, the confusion
caused by the oneness of the coefficient (in all the
4 factors) is avoided; and we get,
E=(x—y—z) (x+2y+3z) (as before).
(i) By eliminating z, у and х one after another, |
we have Ё--(х--у--2) (x4-2y 4-Z) |
OR (ii) By y or z both times, we get the same answer. |
Both the methods yield the same result:
‘Here too, we can eliminate two letters at a time |
and thus keep only one letter and the independent
term, each time. |
Note :—This "Lopana—BSthàpana" method (of alternate elimination and retention) will be found highly useful,
later on in H.C.F., in Solid Geometry and in Coordinate Geometry of the straight line, the Hyperbola, the Conjugate Hyperbola, the Asymptotes etc.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER IX
FACTORISATION OF CUBICS ETC.
(By Simple Argumentation e. t. c.)
We have already seen how, when a polynomial is divided
by à Binomial, a Trinomial etc., the remainder can be found
by means of the Remainder Theorem and how both the Quotient
| and the Remainder can be easily found by one or other method
| of division explained already.
From this it follows that, if, in this process, the remainder
| is found to be zero, it means that the given dividend is divisible
| by the given divisor, i.e. the divisor is a factor of the Dividend.
| And this means that, if, by some such method, we are
| able to find out a certain factor of a given expression, the
remaining factor (or the product of all the remaining factors)
| can be obtained by simple division of the expression in question
| by the factor already found out by some method of division.
| (In this context, the student need hardly be reminded that,
in all Algebraic divisions, the *Parávarüja' method is always to
be preferred to the ‘Nikhilam’ method).
Applying this principle to the case of а cubie, we may
say that, if, by the Remainder Theorem or otherwise, we know
one Binomial factor of a cubic, simple division by that factor |
will suffice to enable us to find out the Quadratic (which is the
product of the remaining two binomial factors). And these two
can be obtained by the ‘Adyamadyena’ method of factorisation
| already explained.
| A simpler and easier device for performing this operation
will be to write down the first and the last terms by the “Adyamaдуета? method and the middle term with the aid of the GunitaSamuccaya rule (ie. the principle—already explained with |
regard to the S, of the product being the same as the Product 3
of the 5, of the factors). : E
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

n
Let us take a concrete example and see how this method
can be made use of. Suppose we have to factorise x86x24
llx--6 and that, by some method, we know (x+1) to be a
factor. We first use the Adyamddyena formula and thus
mechanically put down x? and 6 as.the first and the last coefficients in the quotient (i.e. the product of the remaining two
binomial factors). But we know already that the Se of the
given expression is 24 ; and, as the S, of (x—1)=2 we therefore
know that the S, of the quotient must be 12. And as the
first and last digits thereof are already known to be 1 and 6,
their total is 7. And therefore the middle term must
be 12—7=5. So, the quotient is x?--6x 4-6.
This is а very simple and easy but absolutely certain
and effective process.
The student will remember that the ordinary rule for
divisibility of а dividend by a divisor (as has been explained
already in the section dealing with the "Remainder— Theorem")
їз as follows :—
If E=DQ+R, if D=x—p and if x=p, then E—R.
COROLLARIES
(i) So, if, in the dividend, we substitute 1 for x, the
result will be that, as all the powers of 1 are unity itself, the
dividend will now consist of the sum of all the coefficients.
Thus, if D is x—1, R=a+b+c+d-+(where а, b, c, d ete.,
are the successive coefficients); and then, if a--b-Lc etc.,—0,
it will mean that as R=0, E is divisible by D. In other words,
х—1 is a factor.
(ii) If, however, D=x-++1 and if we substitute —1 for x in
E, then, inasmuch as the odd powers of —1 will all be —1 and
the even powers thereof will all be 1, therefore it will follow that,
in this case, R=a—b+e—d ete.
So, if R=0 i.e. ifa—b+c—d etc., —0, i.e, if a—b+c—d etc.,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ie. if the sum of the coefficients of the odd powers of x and
the sum of the coefficients of gue even powers be equal, then
х--1 will be a factor.
` "The following few illustrations will її йө the actual
application of the principle mainly by what may be called
the Argumentation. method, based on the simple multiplicationformula to the effect that—
(х-на) (xb) (х--0)-гх2-4-х2 (a-+b-+c)+x(ab+ac+be)
--abe, as follows :—
(1) Faetorise x?4-6x?--11x-r6.
(i) Here, $,—24;- and t (the last term) is 6 whose
factors are 1, 2, 3 or 1, 1, 6. But their total should be
6 (the coefficient of x?). So we must reject the 1, 1, 6
group and accept the 1, 2, 3 group. And, testing
for the third coefficient, we find ab-J-bc--ca—11
5, (the sum of the coefficients of the odd powers)
=1+11=12; and S, (the sum of the coefficients of
the even powers)=6+6=12. And as 6,-8
*. x+1 is a factor.
'. Dividing E by that factor, we first use the ‘Adyamüdyena! Sütra and put down 1 and 6 as the first
and the last coefficients. .'. The middle coefficient
is 12—(1+6)=5 2. The Q—x?--5x--6 which (by
Adyamddyena) —(x4-2) (x+8).
(2) Factorise х? — 6x?+11x—6
Here 6,-0 .. x—1 isa factor. But as+is an indefinite figure, we cannot use the Gumita-Samuccaya
method here for the middle term but must divide out
(by mental ‘Pardvartya’) and get the quotient as
x?—b5x-F6 which (by the Adyamddya’ rule)
argue about —1, —2 and —3 having —6 as the total
and —6 as the product ; and test out and verify the 11.
And therefore say, E=(x—1) (x—2) (x—3).
М
or (1
от (1
М.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(3) Factorise x3112x2+44x+48.
(i) Here 8,—105 whose factors are 1, 3, 5, 7, 15, 21, 35
and 105. And ty is 48 whose factors are, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6,8
12, 16, 24 and 48. ..x+l and x—1 are out of court.
And the only possible factors are x+2, х-4 and
x-|-6 (verify).
(ii) or, argue that 0-44-6=12 and 2х4Х6--48, and
test for and verify 44 ~. E-(x--2) (x4-4) (х-4-6)
(4) Factorise x3—9x?—93x-1-60
t,—60 (which is 1Х2Х2Х8 x5.)
30 and 60. But the sum of the coefficients in each
factor must be a factor of the total S. (i.e. 105).
Therefore, all the italicized numbers go out, and
so do x—1, x+4, x+6 and x+10.
Now, the only possible numbers here (which when
added, total —2) are —3, —4 and 5. Now, test for
and verify x—3
(ii) or take the possibilities x—10, x—5, x-F5, x—4,
*. x—2 is not a factor.
But if x—3, R=0 .'. x—3 is a factor.
Then, argue as in the first method.
(Б) Factorise x3—9x?—5x--6—Here 8,—0
(i) .". x—1 is a factor ; and the other part (by Division)
is x?—x—6 which =(x+2) (x—3)
(ii) t1=6 (whose factors are 1, 2 and 3). And the only
combination which gives us the total —2, is —1, 2
and —3. Test and verify for —5. And put down the
answer.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(6) Factorise x3--3x?—17x —38.
| Now So=—51 (with factors +1, +3, +17 and +51.
| And —38 has the factors +1, +2, +19 and +38.
. +1, +19 and +38 are not possible.
And only +2 is possible. And if xc —2, R=0
which has no further factors.
| (7) Factorise х3--8х2--19х--12.
| (i) Here б„—=8; and L,—12 .. 1--3--4 are the proper
numbers. Now test for and verify 19.
| ОЁ (ii) * 1--19—8-F12 -. x+1 is a factor. Then the
| quotient is obtainable by the *Adyamüdyena and
‘Samuccaya’ Sütras. And that again can be factorised
| with the aid of the former.
| (8) Factorise x?—7x--6
| (i) >> So=0, .". x—1 is a factor.
-.By ‘Pardvartya method of division (mental),
OR (ii) (by a different kind of application of Adyamádyena
Note:—(1) This method is always applicable when x? is
| absent; and this means that the 3 independent
| terms together total zero.
| (2) Note the note on this and other allied points (in
the section relating to cubic equations) in a later
chapter.
(3) Note that this method of factorisation by Argumentation is equally applicable to Biquadratics also.
(4) The relationship between the Binomial factors
of a polynomial and its differentials (first, second
and so on) is an interesting and intriguing subject
which will be dealt with in a later chapter.
(5) The use of differentials for finding out repeated
factors will also be dealt with later.
х
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER X
HIGHEST COMMON FACTOR
In the current system of mathematics, we have two
methods which are used for finding the H.C.F. of two (or more)
given expressions.
The first is by means of factorisation (which, is not always
easy); and the second is by a process of continuous division
(like the method used in the G.C.M. chapter of Arithmetic).
The latter is a mechanical process and can therefore be applied
in all cases. But it is rather too mechanical and, consequently,
long and cumbrous.
The Vedic method provides a third method which is
applicable to all cases and is, at the same time, free from this
disadvantage.
It is, mainly, an application of the ‘Lopana-Sthapand’
Sūtra, the ‘Sankalana-Vyavakalan’ process and the ‘Adyamddya’
rule. The procedure adopted is one of alternate destruction of
the highest and the lowest powers (by a suitable multiplication
of the coefficients and the addition or subtraction of the multiples). A concrete example will elucidate the process :—
(1) Suppose we have to find the Н.С.Е. of (x2--7x+6) &
(1) The 2nd method (the G.C.M. one) is well-known and
need not be put down here.
(ii) The third process of *Lopana-Sthüpana! (і.е. of
Elimination and Retention, or Alternate destruction
of the highest and the lowest powers) is explained
below :
Let E, and E, be the two expressions.
Then, for destroying the highest power,
we should subtract E, from E, ; and for
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Bar eme
сз i с у - е е йы -
destroying the lowest one, we should add the
two. The chart is as follows:
Е | Subtraction 558—0 | Addition
We then remove the common factor (if any) from each ;
and we find (х--1) staring us in the face.
2.2Х-118 the Н.С.Е.
The Algebraical principle or Proof hereof is as follows :—
Let P and Q be the two expressions; H their Н.С.Е. and
A and B the quotients (after their division by the Н.С.Е.)
“Ë =A; and 2=B ~. Р=НА ond Q—HB
-. P£Q=H (A+B) ; and MP+NQ=H(MA+NB)
*. The Н.С.Е. of P and Q is also the H.C.F. of PQ,
2P+Q, P4+2Q and MP+NQ
All that we have therefore to do is to select our M and
N in such a way that the highest and the lowest powers are
removed and the Н.С.Е. appears and shows itself before us.
A few more illustrative examples may be seen below :—
But the factorisation of the two expressions will
be required.
or (i) The G.C.M. method.
or (її) The *Lopana-Sthàpana! method :—
ны а Шан a EL TU LL a
а AMD IE
2. The H.C.F. is (х2—5х--6)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

^. The H.C.F. is х2--3х--4
But the factorisation of the two cubics will be
cumbrous.
or (i) The G.C.M. method.
or (ii) The Vedic method :—
-. The Н.С.Е. is x?—x—2
But this factorisation of the two biquadraties is
bound to be a (comparatively) laborious process.
(ш) The cumbrous G.C.M. method.
(ш) The Vedic method :—
—(x*—3x3+x? +3x—2) Em ТЕ Шы
—(2x3—2x?—A4x) (N.B.—multiply this by
ITCRUM 2x & take it over
(— x2) to the left for
x?—x—92 subtraction).
— a eee
©. The H.C.F. is х?—х—9
(4) (i) The Vedic method :—
(6x4—10x3 +14x) bly this by
СУЗ злу сс, x & subtract from
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

- • o ЭТ ——— le te Ыы аре
h
(ii) The factorisation of the big Biquadratic will be
“harder”. |
(ii) The G.C.M. method is, in this case, easy. But how
should one know this beforehand and start monkeying
or experimenting with it 2
(5) (i) The Vedic method :—
ur E YO аар ——
^. The Н.С.Е. is 6x?—11x--4
(iii) The cumbersome G.C.M. method.
„. The Н.С.Е. is x?+2x+3
But the factorisation-work (especially of the
former expression) will be a toughish job.
(ii) The G.C.M. method will be cumbrous (as usual).
(iii) The Vedic method—
SAX EE As OU DS
2x--3 Ичро,
| Lue.
N.B.—As this has по x21 2x13
further factors, it
must be in the . The H.C.F.isx?+2x+3
R.H.S. Multiply it
by x and take it
over to the right for
subtraction.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(ii) The G.C.M. method will be cumbrous (as usual).
But the factorisation of the two big biquadratics
into two further factorless quadratics each, will entail
greater waste of time and energy.
So, the position may be analysed thus :—
(i) The G.C.M. method is mechanical and reliable but too
cumbrous ;
(Ш) The Factorisation method is more intellectual but
harder to work out and therefore less dependable ;
(iii) The Vedic method is free from all these defects and
15 not only intellectual but also simple, easy and
reliable. And the beauty of it is that the H.C.F.
places itself before our eyes and seems to s
E tare us in
e face!
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
M7 ec pee АА аЙ ue г. MAS

шүр | }
CHAPTER XI
SIMPLE EQUATIONS (FIRST PRINCIPLES)
As regards the solution of equations of various types,
the Vedic sub-Sütras give us some First Principles which are
theoretically not ünknown to the western world but are not
(in actual practice) utilised as basic and fundamental first
principles of a practically Axiomatic character (in mathematical computations).
In order to solve such equations, the students do not
generally use these basic sub-Sütras as such but (almost invariably) go through the whole tedious work of practically proving
the formula in question instead of taking it for granted and
applying it! Just as if on every occasion when the expression
a8+b3+c3—3abe comes up ; one should not take it for granted ,
that its factors are (a+b-+c) and (a?+b?+c2—ab—be—ca)
but should go through the long process of multiplying these two,
showing the product and then applying it to the case on hand,
similarly for Pythagoras Theorem ete. !
The Vedic method gives us these sub-formulae in a condensed form (like Pardvartya etc.,) and enables us to perform
the necessary operation by mere application thereof. The
underlying principle behind all of them is чая asad
(Pardvartya Yojayet) which means: ‘““Transpose and adjust".
The applications, however, are numerous and splendidly useful. A few examples of this kind are cited hereunder, as
illustrations thereof :—
has to perform hundreds of such transposition-operations in
the course of his work; but he should by practice obtain
such familiarity with and such mastery over it as to assimilate and assume the general formula that if ax+b=cx-+d,
к= h and apply it by mental arithmetic automatically
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

to the particular case actually before him and say :—
2x-J-7—x4-9 ~. Ee т and :
the whole process should be a short and simple mental
process. pe
Second General Type
(2) The above is the commonest kind (of transpositions).
The second common type is one in which each side (the L.H.S.
and’ the R.H.S.) contains two Binomial factors.
In general terms, let (x--a) (x4-b)—(x4-c) (x--d) The
usual method is to work out the two multiplications and do the
transpositions and say :—
2, х2--ах--рх-гай =x*+cx-+dx-+ced
. x(a+-b—c—d) — ed—ab
oc ed—ab
atb—c—d
Tt must be possible for the student, by practice, to
assimilate and assume the whole of this operation and say
А b cd—ab
immediately : са
- As examples, the following may be taken :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

SN
This gives rise to a general corollary to the effect that,
if cd—ab=0 ie. if ed—ab ie. if the product of the absolute
terms be the same on both the sides, the numerator becomes
gero; and .. x=0.
Third General Type
The third type is one which may be put into the general
. axLb p; and, after doing all the cross-multiplication
cx+d qand transposition etc., we get: х..Э4--4р
The student should (by practice) be able to аѕѕіті- адор
late and assume this also and do it all mentally as a single
operation.
form
Note:—The only rule to remember (for facilitating this
process) is that all the terms involving x should be
conserved on to the left side and that all the independent terms should be gathered together on the
right side and that every transposition for this
purpose must invariably produce a change of sign
(i.e. from-+to—and conversely; and from X into
+ and conversely).
Fourth General Type
The fourth type is of the form: E mur m) 0
After all the L.C.M’s, the cross—multiplications and
the transpositions etc., are over, we get _ —mb—naà This
is simple enough and easy enough for m-rn
the student to assimilate; and it should be assimilated and
readily applied mentally to any case before us.
In fact, the application of this process may, in due course,
by means of practice, be extended зо. аз to cover cases involving
a larger number of terms. For instance,
Jm ксп; Bum
UAE TUE TEE 0
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

+, xP(m-I-n-Ep)--x[m(b-I-c) -n(e--)-p(a-3-b)]2-
(mbe-tnca + pab)=0
If m+n+p=0, then
сэн —mbc—nca—pab
But if m+n+p+0, then it will be a Quadratic equation
and will have to be solved as such (as explained in a later chapter).
And this method can be extended to any number of terms
(on the same lines as explained above).
LINKING NOTE
Special Types of Equations
The above types may be described as General types. But
there are, as in the case of multiplications, divisions etc,,
particular types which possess certain specific characteristics
of a SPECIAL character which can be more easily tackled (than
the ordinary ones) with the aid of certain very short SPECIAL
processes (practically what one may describe as mental one-line
methods).
As already explained in a previous context, all that the
student has to do is to look for certain characteristics, spot
them out, identify the particular type and apply the formula
which is applicable thereto.
These SPECIAL types of equations, we now go on to, in
the next few chapters.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
NES CAN | : id " —

CHAPTER XII
SIMPLE EQUATIONS (ру Sütra Sünyam etc.,)
We begin this section with an exposition of several special
types of equations which can be solved practically at sightwith the aid of a beautiful special Sūtra which reads: sri
олны! (‘Sanyam Samyasamuccaye’) and which, in cryptic
language (which renders it applicable to a large number of
different cases) merely says : “when the Samuccaya is the same,
that Samuccaya is zero" i.e. it should be equated to zéro.
‘Samuccaya’ is a technical term which has several meanings (under different contexts); and we shall explain them,
one by one:
First MEANING AND APPLICATION
‘Samuccaya’ first means a term which occurs as a common
factor in all the terms concerned. |
АП these detailed steps are unnecessary ; and, in fact,
no one works it out in this way. The mere fact that x occurs as
| à common factor in all the terms on both sides [or on the
L.H.S. (with zero on the R.H.S.)] is sufficient for the inference
that x is zero ; and no intermediate step is necessary for arriving
at this conclusion. This is practically axiomatic.
And this is applicable not only to x or other such "unknown
quantity" but to every such case. Thus, if 9 (х4-1)-57(х--1),
we need not say: 9(x+1)=7(x+1)
On the contrary, we can straightaway вау: 9(х--1)==7(х--1)
EX x-——I
| SECOND MEANING AND APPLICATION
The word ‘Samuccaya’ has, as its second meaning, the
product of the independent terms. Thus, (х--7)(х--9)=(х--3)
(X+21) .. Here 7x9—3x21. Therefore x=0.
Үү Ч
T
{i СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar `

КОЛЛЕК НЕ ЖЫЕН ы з су с
E
і
This is also practically axiomatic, has been dealt with in a
previous section (of this very subject of equations) and need not
be gone into again.
THIRD MEANING AND APPLICATION
‘Samuccaya’ thirdly means the sum of the Denominators
of two fractions having the same (numerical) numerator. Thus
This is axiomatic too and needs no elaboration.
FourtH MEANING AND APPLICATION
Fourthly, ‘Samuccaya’ means combination (or total).
In this sense, it is used in several different contexts ; and they
are explained below :—
(i) If the sum of the numerators and the sum of the
denominators be the same, then that sum=zero.
Thus :
This is the current method. But the “Sanyam SdmyaSamuccaye” formula tells us that, inasmuch as N,+N,=4x+16
and D,+D, is also 4x+16 2. 4x--16—0 ..x=—4. In fact,
as soon as this characteristic is noted and the type recognised,
the student can at once mentally вау: X——4.
Note:—If in the algebraical total, there be a numerical
factor that should be removed. Thus:
3x-FÁ х-1
Here Ni +N,=4x-+5 запа D4--D, — 8x 4-10. Removing
the numerical factor, we have 4x--5 on both sides here too.
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar :

No laborious cross-multiplications of № by D, and
N, by Di and transpositions etc., are necessary (in the Vedic
method).
At sight, we can at once say 4х--5--0 and be done with it.
Firrn MEANING AND APPLICATION (for Quadratics)
With the same meaning (Le. total) of the word aqaa
‘Samuccaya’, there is a fifth kind of application possible of
this Sutra. And this has to do with Quadratic equations.
None need, however, go into a panic over this. It is as simple
and as easy as the fourth application ; and even little children
can understand and readily apply this Sütra in this context,
as explained below.
In the two instances given above, it will be observed
that the cross-multiplications of the coefficients of x gives us the
same coefficient for x?. In the first case, we had 4x? on both
sides; and in the second example, it was 6x? on both sides.
The two cancelling out, we had simple equations to deal with.
But there are other cases where the coefficients of x? are
not the same on the two sides ; and this means that we have a
quadratic equation before us.
But it does not matter. For, the same Sūtra applies
(although in a different direction) here too and gives us also
the second root of the quadratic equation. The only difference
is that inasmuch as Algebraic ‘Samuccaya’ includes subtraction too, we therefore now take into account, not only
the sum of №, and N, and the sum of D, and D; but also the
differences Taper 3s numerator and the denominator on each
side ; and, if they be equal, we at once equate that difference
to 2
Let us take a concrete example and suppose we have to
(i) We note that N,J-N5—8x--10 and D,+D, is also
8x--10; we therefore use the method described in
the fourth application given above and equate
8x-L10 to zero and say: x=—5/4.
solve the SIUC e
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

_ NES - pee ns
( ilo j)
(ü) But mental cross-multiplication reveals that the
x? coefficients (on the L.H.S. and the Б.Н.5.) are
6 and 30 respectively and not the same. So, we
decide that it is a quadratic equation ; and we observe
that N,~D,=3x+3 and that N,~D, is also 3x+3.
And so, according to the present application of the
same байга, we at once say: 8х--8-40 ..Х----1.
Thus the two roots are—5/4 and —1 ; and we have solved
a quadratic equation at mere sight (without the usual parapherпайа of cross-multiplication, transposition etc.). We shall revert
to this at a later stage (when dealing with quadratic equations
` themselves, as such). |
SIXTH MEANING AND APPLICATION
With the same sense ‘total’ of the word ‘Samuccaya’
but in a different application, we have the same Sütra coming
straight to our rescue, in the solution of what the various
text-books everywhere describe as “Harder Equations", and
deal with in a very late chapter thereof under that caption.
In fact, the label "Harder" has stuck to this type of equations
to such an extent that they devote a separate section thereto
and the Matriculation examiners everywhere would almost
seem to haye made it an invariable rule of practice to include one
question of this type in their examination-papers !
Now, suppose the equation before us is:—
In all the text-books, we are told to transpose two of the
terms (so that each side may have a plus term and a minus term),
take the L.C.M. of the denominators, cross-multiply, equate
the denominators, expand them, transpose and so on and so
forth. And, after 10 or more steps of working, they tell you |
that 8 is the answer.
The Vedic Sūtra, however, tells us that, if (other elements
being equal), the sum-total of the denominators on the L.H.S.
and the total on the R.H.S. be the same, then that total is zero !
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

EE | Á
In this instance, as D,+D, and D,+D, both total 2x—16,
, ох—16=0 .. x=8! And that 18 all there is to it !
A few more instances may be noted :—
(3) pee pet Em is IE OR dis Х--81
x—8 JT x—9 х—5 B ED :
DISGUISED SPECIMENS
The above were plain, simple cases which could be readily
recognised as belonging to the type under consideration. There,
however, are several cases which really belong to this type but
come under various kinds of disguises (thin, thick or ultra-thick)!
But, however thick the disguise may be, there are simple devices.
by which we can penetrate and see through the disguises and
apply the "Sünya Samuccaye’ formula :—
THIN DISGUISES
Here, we should transpose the minuses, so that all the
4 terms are plus ones :—
The transposition-process here is very easy and can
be done mentally (in less than the proverbial trice).
(2) 1 ARAM ЁТ 1 Pee col к x—-—91
Хх41 xt3 x42 xT4
(Bye dls. ele Oe oJ SOx-—8$
(x—b) x—b—d х-с-4 x—¢
x+b x+tb+d х-0-4 x+e
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar e

Note:—If the last two examples (with so many literal
coefficients involved) were to be done according to
the current system, the labour entailed (over the
L.C.M.’s, the multiplications etc.,) would have been
terrific; and the time taken would have been proportionate too! But, by this (Vedic) method, the
equation is solved at sight !
MEDIUM DISGUISES
The above were cases of thin disguises, where mere
transposition was sufficient for enabling us to penetrate them.
We now turn to cases of disguises of medium thickness :—
Бэ үрнэ,
By dividing the Numerators out by the Denominators,
we have:
Cancelling out the two ones from both sides, we have the
Equation before us in its undisguised shape and can at once
Now, this process of division can be mentally performed
very easily, thus :—
ОРЕ p MA
(1) Applying the Pardvartya method (mentally) and
transferring the independent term of the denominator
(with its sign changed) to the Numerator, we get 1 as the
result in each of the 4 cases.
With the help of these two TESTS, we know that “the
other elements are the same"; and, as 0,+р,=р,+р,, w
therefore identify the case before us as DE s
within the jurisdiction of the "Sünygam
coming completely
Samuccaye” formula
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| Secondly, by Paravartya,
| ЕЕ а.
| We transpose the minus terms and find that all the TESTS
have been satisfactorily passed. (АП this argumentation can
| of course, be done mentally).
So, we say: 2X—8—0 ~. x—4
| Here 2--3--1--4: the Numerators all become 1; and
| зета =.
| | Here, 38--2--2--4 ; and the other 2 tests are all
right too. .. x=6
All the TESTS are found satisfactorily passed.
All the TESTS are all right .. 2x—9=0
(0. Farta 22—16 | хт ш ы
Either by simple division or by simple factorisation
(both of them, mental), we note :—
(ii) the numerators are all unity; and
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar *

THICKER DISGUISES
1 2222 Qus Race 0
E оос.
(i) At first sight, this does mof seem to be of the type
which we have been dealing with in this section.
But we note that the coefficient of x in the four denominators is not the same. So, by suitable multiplication of the numerator and the denominator in
each term, we get 6 (the L.C.M. of the four coefficients)
uniformly as the coefficient of x in all of them. Thus,
we have :—
Now, we can readily recognise the type and say :-
But we cannot gamble on the possible chance
of its being of this type and go through all the laborious
work of L.C.M., the necessary multiplications etc.,
(and perhaps find at the end of it all, we have drawn
a blank)! There must therefore be some valid and
convincing test whereby we can satisfy ourselves
beforehand on this point (and, if convinced, then and
then only should we go through all the toil-involved).
And that test is quite simple and easy :—
33 8--4-41--4. But even then, only the possibility or the probability (and not the certainty) of it
follows therefrom.
(ii) A second kind of TEST—with guarantee of certainty—
is available too. And this is by CROSS-multiplication of N, by D, and of N, by Р, on the one hand
and of N; by D, and of №, by Dg on the other. (And
this too can be done mentally).
i Thus, in the case dealt with, we get from each
side—the same 12х--18 as the total .. 12x+13=0
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

C) ш
( ib j
3xp1 6x41. me Sy ЫЙЫ СУ ОГАП
(i) We transpose (mentally) and note:
$4-$— —$--$ бо, we may try the L.C.M. method.
Us 6 T, МАР 90 Es
(ii) Even here, after the preliminary testing of 3+2
being equal to 3+, we may straight away CROSSmultiply and say: .. 12x+5=0 ~. x=—5/12
yee: EE 2.
M Srl йс ee
-. By either of the two methods, we get 12x—1—0
*„ Хиэш--
EE. 8 5 са
" By either method, 6x--8—0 ~. x=—,
By simple division, we put this into proper shape,
as follows :—
1 Sil ТАЛ 3
x+5 US SEES “гах 4
" By either method, 6x--5=0 ~. са:
205 (17 xp d anf
~. By either method, 6x+8=0 -. X=— 9
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar »
Eog uito as 010217007 NNNM

FumrHER APPLICATIONS OF THE FORMUŁA |
(1) Im the case of a special type of seeming “cubics”? :—
There is a certain type of equations which look like cubic
equations but, which (after wasting a huge lot of our time and
energy) turn out to be simple equations of the first degree and
which come within the range of the “Sūnyam Samuccaye"
formula. Thus, for instance—
р
The current system works this out at enormous length
(by expanding all the three cubes, multiplying, transposing
etc. and finally gives us the answer Х--6
The Vedic Sütra now under discussion 18, however, applicable to this kind of case too and says :—
(x—3)--(x—9)—2x—12. Taking away the numerical
factor, we have x—6. And x—6 is the factor under the cube
The Algebraical proof of it is as follows :—
—2(x^—3x^a—3x*b + 3xa?+3xb?-+ 6xab—a3—3a2h—3ab2—b3) is
Cancelling out the common terms from both sides, we have :
12xa*+ 12xb?—8a3—8h3—6xa2+ 6xb2+12xab—2a3—Ga2b
ee 6xa*+- 6xb?—12xab == 6a3—6a2h—Gab?-+6h?
Obviously
this particular combination was not thought
of and worked out by the mathematicians working under the
current system. At any rate, it is not found listed in their
books (under any known formula or as a “conditional identity"
and so on) The Vedic mathematicians, however, seem to have
worked it all out and given us the benefit thereof (by the application of this formula to examples of this type). rs
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| We need hardly point out that the expansions, multir lications additions, transpositions, .factorisations in each
| particular case of this type must necessarily involve the exenditure of tremendous time and energy, while the Vedic
АН gives us the answer at sight!
Three more illustrations may be taken :—
The very prospect of the squaring, cubing etc., of these
numbers must appal the student. But, by the present Sütra,
р
we can at once вау: 9x—200=0 .. x=100
This is still more terrific. But, with the aid of this Sūtra,
we can at once say: х=1; and
The literal coefficients make this still worse. But the
Vedic one-line mental answer is: x=—b.
(2) In the case of a special type of seeming “Biquadratics” :
There is also similarly, a special type of seemingly “BiquaP. dratio" equations which are really of the first degree and which
| the same Siitra solves for us, at sight. Thus, for example :
According: to the current method, we cross-multiply and
Expanding the two sides (with the aid of the usual formula
+-x?(ab--ac+-ad-+-be-+-bd-+ed)+x
х (abe-+-abd-+-acd-+-bed)-+-abed)] (twice over),
we will next say :— '
Cancelling out the common terms and transposing, We then вау:
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
puue” Q2 ; с ды ee

According to the Vedic formula, howevr, we do not crossmultiply the binomial factors and so on but simply observe
that N,+D,* and N.+D, are both 2x+8 and ..2х--8--0
The Algebraic proof hereof is as follows :—
(x+a+d)ì x-+a
(x-ra--2d) x+a+3d TOS
г. By the usual process of cross-multiplications,
.. (By expansion of both sides)
г. (Cancelling common terms out), we have :—
^. (Cutting d? out), we have 2x+2a+3d—0 .-. x—-—1(2a--3d)
At this point, the student will note that №, J-D, (under the cubes)
and N,+D, are both (2x--2a--3d). And this gives us the
required clue to the particular characteristic which characterises
this type of equations. i. e. that N,+D, (under the cube)
and N,+D, must be the same; and, obviously, therefore, the
"Sünyam Samuccaye’ Sütra applies to this type. And, while
the current system has evidently not tried, experienced and
listed it, the Vedic seers had doubtless experimented on,
observed and listed this particular combination also and listed
it under the present Sütra.
Note :—(1) The condition noted above (about the 4 Binomials)
is interesting. "The sum of the first + the second
must be the same ав the sum of the 3rd and 4th.
(2) The most obvious and readily understandable
condition fulfilling this requirement is that the
absolute terms in Np, Ny, D, and D, Binomials
should be in Arithmetical Progression.
*(within the cubes)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(3) This may also be postulated in this way, i.e. that
the difference between the two Binomials on the
R.H.S. must be equal to thrice: the difference
between those on the L.H.S. This, however, is
only a corollary—result arising from the A.P.
relationship amidst the four Binomials (namely,
that if №,, N,, D, and D, are in A.P. it is obvious
that D,—N,=3(D,—N,).
(4) In any case, the formula (in this special type) may
be enunciated—in general terms—thus :—if N+-D
[ on both sides be the same, N-+-D should be equated
to zero:
Two more examples of this type may be taken :—
| Working all this out (which all the literal coefficients and
| with cross-multiplicatons, expansions, cancellations, transpositions etc., galore) would be a horrid task (for even the most
laborious labourer) The Vedic formula, however, tells us
b that (x—a)--(x—b) and (x—2a—b)+(x+a+2b) both total
up to 2x—a-Fb .. x=}(a—b)
Note :—In all the above examples, it will be observed that the
4 binomials are not merely in Arithmetical Progression
but are also so related that their cross totals are also
the same.
Thus, in the first example worked out above, by Crossmultiplication, we have (х--7)(х--3)3=(х--1)(х--5)8 ; and
the Cross-ADDITION of these factors gives us 4х--16 as
the total on both sides; and this tallies with the value x=—4
(obtained above).
In the second example :—
And here too, Cross-ADDITION gives us 4х-1-48-1-64 as the total
on both sides, And this too gives us the same answer as before,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar `

In the third example, we have :—
And here too the Cross-ADDITION Process gives us 4x—24 as
the total on both sides. And we get the same answer as before.
In the fourth case, we have :—
And cross-ADDITION again gives us the total 4x—2a+2b on
both sides and, therefore, the same value of x as before.
The student should not, however, fall into the error of
imagining that this is an additional TEST (or sufficient condition)
for the application of the formula. This really comes in as a
corollary-consequence of the А.Р. relationship between the
Binomial factors. But it is not a sufficient condition (by itself)
for the applicability of the present formula. The Rule about
N,+D, and N,+D, being the same, is the only condition
sufficient for this purpose.
An instance in point is given below :—
(H3? xa
Here, Cross-ADDITION gives 4х--17 as the total on both
sides, and the condition D4—N,—3(D,—N,) is also satisfied
(as 6=2 х3). But 3+5+2-+8; and, as this essential condition
is lacking, this particular equation does not come within the
purview of this Sütra.
On actual cross-multiplication and expansion etc., we
find :— ;
.. 6x?--32x-L-34—0, which is a Quadratic equation (with the
two Irrational Roots ! and nota simple equation at
all, of the type we are here dealing with.
And this is in confiormity with the lack of the basic
condition in question i,e. that N,+D, and N,+D, should be
the same, t зге
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Sa eee
—— etn a наа pa ca

PAA METTE e EI I E Rem
(3) In the case of another special type of seeming “Biquadratics”
There is also another special type of seeming “Biquadratios" which are really simple equations of the first degree,
which the “Sinyam Samuccaye” Sütra is applicable to and
which we now go on to. (This section may, however, be held
over for a later reading).
We first note that cross-ADDITION gives us the same
total (4х--22) on both sides. This gives us the assurance
that, on cross-multiplication, expansion etc., the x! and the х8
coefficients will cancel out. But what about the х? coefficients 2
For them too to vanish, it is necessary that the sum of
the products of the independent terms.taken two at a time
should be the same on both the sides. And this is the case when
if (х-на) (x4-b) (x-+c) (x-+d)=(x+e) (x--f) (x--g) (x+h), we
have not merely a+b+c+td=e+f+g-+h but also two other
conditions fulfilled :—
(i) that the sum of any 2 binomials on the one side is
equal to the sum of some two binomials on the other ;
and (ii) ab+cd on the left—ef--gh on the right.
In the example actually now before us, we find all these
conditions fulfilled :— |
(84-60) are both equal to 68.
So, by this test, at sight, we know the equation comes
Under the range of this Sūtra 2. 4х--22-20 2. x=—5$
Similar is the case with regard to the equation :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

(i) By cross-addition, the total on both sides is 4x410
(ii) The sum of each pair of Binomials on the one side is
equal to the sum of some pair thereof on the other ;
and
The Sūtra applies; and 4x+10=0 x=—2}
Such however is not the case with the equation :—
Here, we observe :— :
(i) The total on both sides is 4x-+4;
but (ii) the totals of pairs of Binomials (on the two sides)
do not tally ;
and (11) ab-+cdef+gh
This equation is therefore a quadratic (and not within
the scope of the present Sūtra).
: The Algebraical Explanation (for this type of equations)
is :—
The data are :— 5 |
(i) a--b--c--d—e-L-f--g--h ;
(1) The sum of any pair of binomials on the one side
must be the same as the sum of some pair of binomials
on the other. Suppose that atb=e+f; and c4-d:
—g--h ; and
(ш) ab--cd—ef--gh
+x(abe+-abd+acd+bed)-+-abed B
—X'-Ex* (e--f--g--h)--x? (efte
g--eh--fg-I-fh-Fgh
“ех(е 4-6 --egh --fgh)-I-efgh 2202
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
—— ne
a элсэн л лсэн

equat
^, The x4 and x?cancel out; and, owing to the data in
the case, the x? coefficients are the same on both sides; and
therefore they too cancel out. Апа there is no quadratic
ion (left for us to solve herein)
Proof: The x? coefficients are :—
L.H.S. ab--ac--ad 4-be-4- bd J-ed
R .H.S8. ef-+-eg+eh+fg+fh+gh
i.e. (ab4-ed) J-a(c-Fd) b(c-+-d)=ab-++cd+(a+b)(c+d)
and (ef+gh)+e(g-+h)+f(g-++h)=ef-+gh-+-(e+f)(g+h)
But (ab-+cd)=(ef+gh) ; and a+b=e+f; and с--4
the L.H.S.—the R.H.S.; and x? vanishes !
FURTHER EXTENSION OF THE SUTRA
In the beginning of this very chapter, it was noted that
if a function (containing the unknown x, y etc.,) occurs as a
common factor in all the terms on both sides (or on the L.H.S.
(with zero on the Б.Н.5.) that function can be removed therefrom
and equated to Zero. We now proceed to deal with certain
types of cases which do not seem to be of this kind but are
really so. All that we have to do is to re-arrange the terms in
such a manner as to unmask the masked terms, soto say and make
the position transparently clear on the surface. For example—
(1) xa , xb , x+c
: Dueb i 128 c
Taking —3 over from the R.H.S. to the L.H.S. distributing
it amongst the 3 terms there, we have:
Х-На x--b x-+e
DEN: rl +++ шаар m
Le. xtatb+e | x-Fb-Fc-ra | x Fera rb Sag
b+c c+a a+b
` By virtue of the Samuccaya rule,
This whole working can be done, at sight i.e. mentally.
(2) xa xb, x+c_ x+2a 2 xj2b aft х-р20)
b-Fe еа a+b Б-с-а с-48-5 a+b—c
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

Add unity fo.each of the 6 terms ; and observe :— .
. X-Fa--b--e | xt+a+b+e xtatb+c.
о m oh
_xtatb+e ү xtatbte , x Fab ro
ED, D, De
(3) x—a ,x—b,x—c | х+а хур, хе
b+c cta a+b 2a+b+c 2b+c+a 2c+a+b
Subtract unity from each of the 6 terms ; and we have :
(4) x--a? T x-J-b 3 x-J-c
(a+b) (a+c) (b-Fe)(b-Fa) (c+a) (c+b)
x—bc ^ x—ca , x—ab
(b+c) b(c+a) c(a+b)
Subtracting 1 from each of the 6 terms, we have:
x—ab—ac—be=0 .. x= (ab+bc+ca)
каро 3-8
boe ca a+b
— Ep Za^—bo Eb oa үгх2-1203--81
Subtracting a from the first terms, b from the second
terms and с from the third terms (on both sides), we have:
x—ab—be—ca=0 .", x=ab+be+ca
b-rc cra ЫШ БО,
Ав (b—c)+(c—a)+(a—b)=0, we add b—c, c—a and
m to the first, second and third terms respctively ; and we
ave:
Ав a(b—c)4-b(c—a)--e(a—b) — 0
Же add a(b—c) to the first term, b(c—a) to th
VEL I d
and c(a—b) to the last; and we have: Le A
t == alat о) EE,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
TO S eee

ax--a(a?+2bc)-+-a(b—c)?
b—c
ах-Еа(а°-ЕЪ°-Ео?) | a 2142
аг EC {x-+(a?+b?+c?)}
Similarly, tz = 0. (x-H(a?--b*- o?)
b—c is c—a ДР a—b
Splitting the R.H.S. into (b?-F-bo-Fc?)-F(c?--ca T-a?) -- (8? -]-ab
| +b?), transposing the three parts to the left and combining
the first with the first, the second with the second and the third
with the third (by way of application of the ‘Adymddyend’
formula), we have :
| ty = Eta eho? boot)
| O x--a*-J-2b*—b*-Fo? хаз роз
| b—c b—c
| the same N
| c—a
| . the same N
| and t= a e ЛЕ
Similarly, t =
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

ĈHAPTER XIII
` MERGER TYPE
of
EASY SIMPLE EQUATIONS (by the Pardvartya’ method)
Having dealt with various sub-divisions under a few
special types of simple equations which the Sünyam Sämyasamuccaye formula helps us to solve easily, we now go on |
to and take up another special type of simple equations which
the Pardvartya Sūtra (dealt with already in connection with
Division etc) can tackle for us.
This is of what may be described as the MERGER Туре;
and this too includes several sub-headings under that heading.
The first type:
The first variety is one in which a number of terms on
the left hand side is equated to a single term on the right hand |
side, in such manner that N,+N,-+N, etc., (the sum of the |
numerators on the left) and (the single numerator on the right) |
are the same. For instance, { |
E rx rH Неге N,--N, ie. (3-4) —N(i.e. т) |
So the Sūtra applies.
The procedure is one of merging ‘of the R.H.S. fraction
into the left, so that only two terms remain. The process is
as follows :
As we mean to merge the R.H.S. into the L.H.S., we
subtract the independent term of the to-be-merged binomial |
from the absolute terms in the binomials on the left and multi- |
ply those remainders by the numerators of the terms on the
left. And the process is complete.
(i) We first put down the two to-be-retained denominators down thus :—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |
а С COO ETA

ee ——
(ii) Then, as 3(from the R.H.S) is to be merged, we
subtract that 3 from the 1 in the first term, obtain
4-9 as the remainder, multiply it by the numerator
(ie. 3), get —6 as the product and put that down
as the new numerator for our first term.
(ii) And we do the same thing with the second term,
obtain —4 as the product and set it down as our
Numerator for the 2nd term of the new (Le. the
derived) equation.
(iv) As the work of merging has been completed, we put
zero on the right hand side. So the resultant new
equation (after the merger) now reads:
mE o
xl x42
Then, by simple cross-multiplication, we say
or, by the general formula (—mb-—na)/(m-Fn) explained
alreadv (in the chapter on simple equations and first principles),
we say at once:
The Algebraical Proof hereof is :—
ELI apa x18 x43 x13
3 8. c doped
“п хш ш
„ә, oo "Sd =
The General Algebraical Proof hereof is:
DE UE
х+а x+b x+c
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar х

eru ы туре. Че.
т) Xu Deko
PERUMG EN Lae
. р(х-+о—х—а)_ q(x+b—x—c)
` (x+a) (х-Ес) (х-Ео) (x4-b)
2. X{p(c—a)-+-q(c—b)} = bp(a—c) +-aq(b—c)
bp(a—6)-Faq(b—c)
Well; the Algebraical explanation, may look frightfully long.
But the application of the ‘Pardvartya’ Sūtra (as just hereinabove explained and illustrated) is simple enough and easy
enough and should be welcomed by the student with delight.
a х=
A few more examples of this sort may be noted :
Неге 8--5--8 .. The байга applies.
Te? = ае aa 5
(2) 2 BR жб
Here 2+3=5 .. The formula applies.
Note :—At this stage, when both the numerators are found to be
—6 and can therefore be removed, the formula “Stinyam
Samuccaye” may be readily applied ; and we may say:
But, if MONI £39 =
oy шо ш 218—6
the merger Sütra applies; but after the merger, the
numerators are different (i.e. —10 and —12) and there-
'fore the 'Sünyam? Sütra will not apply.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
c civ d Ы 1087
MM MM ÀÀ— HH —

DISGUISES
Here too, we have often to deal with disguises, by seeing
through and penetrating them, in the same way as in the
previous chapter (with regard to the ‘Stinyam Samuccaye’
formula).
А few illustrations will make this clear:
5 EAT
Here, mere transposition will do the trick. Thus:
2 dig Now, 24-8--5 2. The Sūtra applies.
= 0 Set
4+9415 .. Doubt arises; but the coefficients of x being
different in the three denominators, we try the L.C.M. method
and get:
And here, on noting №, (12)--Х, (18) =, (30), we вау:
"YES; the Sütra applies” and proceed to apply it:
But how should we know before-hand that the Sūtra does
apply? The TEST is very simple and merely consists in the .
division of each numerator by the x—coefficient in the denominator (as in the ‘Stinyam’ case). Thus $4-8 —2--3—5; and 15:
18 also 5.
Say, “YES” and go ahead, with the merging.
Here ($+ 8) and 25 are the same (ie. 5) ^ YES.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ~

Proceed therefore and say:
TED ERE 6x 4-5
Here 1--8--1--14-523: and + is also 232, YES
Do the merging therefore and say:
c 9 3 mA b , YES
ио to) ко `5 =—о563
Be lox oxi
Бы i oe: 1017.
Е оро oti (гэп; 2239
EAR он 2
Неге 74-8 = 24; and 2,5 ів аво 91 .. YES
84х-Е1® р Вїх-Е14 pra
ae. 3 Б
...г.сллсл c. 23 Ч
84х-Г18 Six pai 84x14 pu
emu d 21
арі 9x2 `9
СС-0. In Public Domain. СигиКи! Kangri Collection, Haridwar
tree Se e ES [y eee ere S

EXTENSION OF MERGER METHOD
(Multiple Merger)
We now take up and deal with equations wherein N,+N.+
of the L.H.S.)=N of the R.H.S. and wherein the same
formula can be applied in exactly the
мо the 1
:Ратӣтатіуа (Merger)
game way 88 before. Thus:
| 2 38 Ss ages
| та кр C x5 ё
"x42 EUST
—mb—na
-. (i) By the Basic Formula ( xe)
a ор emn 2
or (i) Ву 'Sünyam Samuccaye’ formula :
—— en
Note :—These two steps (of successive merging) can be combined
into one by multiplying N, first by (2—4) and then
by (2—5) ie. by 6 and similarly N, “first by (3—4)
| and then by (3—5) i.e. by 2 and proceeding as before
| оа эй лыг)
| „. By either method (Basic ог Sümyam), х= —25
| The Algebraic Proof hereof is this: |
| шоу n , p ®ш |
| x+a рат xtd |
| ~ xpa + x+b T хс
a х-Га x+b
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
p CER ОИ а ee T Р

which is the exact shape of the formula required for the singleStep merger. (vide supra).
Similarly, the merger-formula can be extended to any
number of terms as follows:
р q
Eu ut. a IE poss
SUED CETT
x+w
x+a
x-+-b
(which is the general formula for the purpose). Thus, in the
above example—
A few more illustrations of this type are given below:
АТВ анов
8 6 айс ойс л. YES
а атт 2 6
(2) 2 IBS eo) "Bg
ES х Sep 60x18 `` P
“йк erm tae 60х15
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

22212 Do Hoc 5 су
їв 10
Note :—Any change of SEQUENCE (of the terms on the L.H.S.)
will cause no change in the working or the result.
DUM Bre. dab. ИЕ
and 144 is also 36 ~. YES
2222. ү 9 eee - YES
.(By merger) 30 gox—20 60x—12
| 2. (By Basic rule or by cross-multiplication or by (‘Sainyam
OR (by Multiple simultaneous merger) 3
m
| Note :—Again any change of SEQUENCE (of the terms on the
| 1..Н.8.) will cause no change in the working or the result.
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

CHAPTER XIV
COMPLEX MERGERS
There is still another type—a special and complex type
of equations which are usually dubbed ‘harder’ but which can
be readily tackled with the aid of the Pardvartya Sūtra. For
instance :
Note the TESTS: (1) 19—$—48--4 ; and
Transposing, 10 15. 2 3
and taking the L.C.M.
6х8 бхра бх—9 бх-4
Simple CROSS-MULTIPLICATION leads us to the main
TEST : |
Неге сошез the third TEST i.e. that the numerator (of the
final derived equation) is the same on both sides—
A C Seo. 94.8
ао В. ВЕНИ
CLUE—This gives us the necessary clue, namely, that, after
putting up the L.C.M. coefficient for x in all the
denominators, (Di) (0,)--(0,) (D,). As the transposition, the L.C.M. etc., can be done mentally, this
clue amounts to a solution of the equation at sight.
In these examples, we should transpose the 4 fractions
m such a manner that, after the cross-multiplication etc., are
over, all the four denominators (of the
final derived equation)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
К

ММГ- тг 1
the same on the L.H.S. and the R.H.S. (of the same equation).
A few more illustrations will be found helpful:
IU WIS Е е
(i) Transposing etc., we have :
Here the N on both sides (of the final derived equation) is 18
“, The Sūtra applies.
90—18 79 АСКЕТ
ре а Н ee эхэн эн
| Note :—In some cases (details of which we need not now enter
| into but which will be dealt with later), the original
| fractions themselves (after the transposition) fulfil the
conditions of the Test. In such cases, we need not
bother about the L.C.M. etc., but may straightaway
transpose the terms and apply the ‘Pardvartya’ formula.
| In fact, the case just now dealt with is of this type,
| as will be evident from the following :
EE oo 3:0 oo X
Неге 2—1; $—2; and the numerator (on both sides of the
final derived equation) is 1.
| "The Sūtra applies and can be applied immediately
| (without bothering about the L.C.M. etc.).
have the same (L.C.M.) coefficient for x and the numerator is
так 3x2 х1 ^ 0x17
АСА РИА ИЕ
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar E

um aite. 1 2 ETT
(ii) In this case, there is another peculiarity ie. that
the transposition may be done in the other way too and yet
the conditions are satisfied. So, we have:
AD .. ата 0)
(iti) And even, by CROSS-multiplication at the very
outset, we get 12х--18--0 (by Samya Samuccaye). .. X=-}3
In such cases, SEQUENCE (in transposition) does not matter !
(This will be explained later).
CN M uh. wm" 99
TESTS: 52 and $$ are both 17; and 52 and 2? are both 13.
_ This equation can be solved in several ways (all of them
very simple and easy):
(i) By the L.C.M. process:
2. In the derived equation (in its final form),
.. The Sūtra applies.
MI ee. XK
(ii) or, removing the common factor (12) :
.. In the (final) derived Equation,
N,=17X13; and N,—13X17 .. The Sūtra appliesЮТА, Dox DD, ane 12x = 900 2 Bene
(ili) or, at the very outset (ie. without L.C.M. etc.) :
51 бё ЕБИ 39
DOLOS, N=561—340=221; and
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
M ÀÀMM— MM

The Sūtra applies straightaway.
| Note :—In the second method, note that |
| N,=N,=D,—D, and N,=N,=D,—D, TESTS . |
The General Formula applicable in such cases ів:
m—n 1р9: теор
х+р x+n x--q x+m
| шш) (s zu pim (ств “ны
(хр) (к-а) (z+m) (ха)
As the numerators are the same,
~. The Sūtra applies
uo xu ИШ рдун
prq—m—n `
| ах] ea a б]
.'. In the final derived equation,
L.H.S. N=24; and R.H.S. N is also 24
^. The Sūtra applies.
| (ii) ‘Vilokana’ (i.e. mere observation) too will suffice in this
case. г —
(1) Here the resultant N is the same (1) (on both sides)
с. YES
(ü) or, by cross-multiplication at the very outset and
Stinyam Samuccaye, 12k—1=0 - х= т
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ^

тан чаи
ОЕ а зол Аав си
| BTE xl 5x+3 15х42
7. The resultant Numerator on both sides is 45
г. The Sūtra applies.
(ii) Or, by cross-multiplication at the very outset and
Sinyam etc., formula, we get 80х--11 and 150х--55 on the
L.H.S. and the R.H.S. respectively ; and the numerical factor
(B) being removed, both give us 30х-Е11==0 /. X—^7d
(i) ; (By Parüvartya division) ;
1 Be enue 2 1
Eo 1 о 2
2,418 the N on both sides (of the derived equation)
.. The Sūtra applies.
EIS e d
(ii) or by cross-multiplication at the very outset and
Sünyam Sütra, we have:
AMET TOUT 3
DUI ва то 3х4! Зх
In the resultant equation,
22-18 is the numerator on both sides
1. The Sūtra applies,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

a у ы БУЕ
(ii) от
Sünyam formula,
by cross-multiplication at the very outset and
. By (Pardvartya) devision twice over.
ааа РО Xil
“Ву пуат? Sūtra, we immediately obtain:
Note :—The Cross-multiplication and ‘Sünyam method 18 so
simple, easy and straight before us here that there
is no need to try any other process at all The student
may, however, for the sake of practice try the other
methods also and get further verification therefrom
for
the correctness of the answer just hereinabove
arrived at.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar >
0 LE ииий ттт
a
Re he betas ene ge
то шы

HAPTER XV
SIMULTANEOUS SIMPLE EQUATIONS
Here too, we have the GENERAL FORMULA applicable
to all cases (under the ‘Pardvartya’ Sūtra) and also the special
Sütras applicable only to special types of cases.
THE GENERAL FORMULA
The current system may congratulate and felicitate itself
on having a fairly satisfactory method—known as the Crossmultiplication method—for the solving of simultaneous simple
equations, which is somewhat akin to the Vedic “Pardvartya’ |
method and comes very near thereto. |
But even here, the unfortunate drawback still remains |
that, in spite of all the arrow-directions etc., intended to
facilitate its use, the students (and sometimes even the teachers)
of Mathematics often get confused as regards the plus and the |
ы minus signs (+ and.—) and how exactly they should be used ; |
and, consequently, we find most of them preferring—in actual
daily practice—the substitution method or the elimination |
method (by which they frame new equations involving only |
х ог only у). And this, of course, does not permit a one-line
mental-method answer ; and it entails the expenditure of more
time and more toil.
The Vedic method (by the Pardvartya Rule) enables us
to give the answer immediately (by mere mental Arithmetic).
The rule followed is the "Cyclic" one: |
(i) For the value of x, we start with the y-coefficients
and the independent terms and cross-multiply forward (i.e.
rightward) (ie. we start from the upper row and multiply
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| across by the lower one ; and conversely ; ; and the connecting
| link between the two cross- prodcts is always a minus). And
this gives us our Numerator ;
(ii) For finding the Denominator, we go from the upper
row across to the lower one (i.e. the x coefficient) but backward
(i.e. leftward). Thus,
ox+3y= 8 | 2. for the value of x, the numerator is 3x14—
4х4-5у =14 5x8—2; and. the Denominator is 3x4—
In other words х=2 —1.
And, as for the value of y, we follow the cyclic system (i.e.
start with the independent term on the upper row towards the
x coefficient on the lower row). So, our Numerator is:
| And NOTE that the Denominator is invariably the SAME as
"m before (for x) and thus we avoid the confusion caused in the
current system by another set of multiplications, a change of .
| sign etc. In other words, у=@=2
Ls pe lt
and y — Tel
эла у ae
(4) 5x—3y—11 гоо Таний
| апа у ие 2 =
and y = ag ДО
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar В
К Ev

A SPECIAL ТҮРЕ |
There is a special type of simultaneous simple equations
which may involve big numbers and may therefore seem “hard”
but which, owing to a certain ratio between the coefficients,
can be readily ie. mentally solved with the aid of the Sütra |
аттесї qui wem (Sünyam Anyat) (which cryptically says: If one.
is in ratio, the other one is Zero).
An example will make the meaning and the application
clear : |
Here we note that the y-coefficients are in the same
ratio to each other as the independent terms are to each other.
And the Sütra says that, in such a case, the other one, namely,
x=0. This gives us two simple equations in y, which give us
the same value $ for y. Thus х=0; y—$
N.B.:—Look for the ratio of the coefficients of one of the unknown quantities being the same as that of the independent terms (on the R.H.S.); and if the four are in |
proportion, put the other unknown quantity down as
Zero ; and equate the first unknown quantity to the
absolute term on the right.
The Algebraical Proof is this :
ax--by bm |
ex-+-dy =dm |
2, adx+bdy=bdm |
bex+bdy =bdm
and y=m
A few more illustrations may be taken:
and у=
© СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(из)
and y=0
Here 172 — 4 x43 and 387 =9 x43 | .. The ratio is the
and y —£$
Note :—The big coefficients (of х= 01) need not frighten us!)
N.B. ;—This rule is also capable of infinite extension and
may be extended to any number of unknown
quantities,
Thus ;
(1) ax+by-+cz=a AE eec
ыча} у= о}
cx-+ay+by=c and z=0
axtay+fz—fm y=0
mx-+py+qz=qm/ and z=m
49x(a —d)3--cy --(m—n)8z— cm 7 and z—0
N.B. :—The coefficients have been deliberately made big
and complex but need not frighten us.
A Second Special Type
There is another special type of simultaneous linear
equations where the x-coefficients and the y-coefficients
are found interchanged. No elaborate ‘multiplications etc.,
are needed here. The (axiomatic) Upasiitra #+®ч-эячФөчтї
(‘Sattkalana-Vyavakalandbhyam’) (which means “By addition
and by subtraction) gives us immediately two equations giving
the values of (х-ру) and (x—y). And a repetition of the same
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar =
А m

process gives us the values of x and у! Апа the whole work |
сап be done mentally. Thus: |
And by subtraction, 22х--22у =22(x+y)=22 .. x+y=1
and у= —1 |
Note :—However big and complex the coefficients may be,
there is no multiplication involved but only simple
addition and simple subtraction. |
The other special types of simultaneously linear equations will be discussed at a later stage.
= СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XVI
MISCELLANEOUS (SIMPLE) EQUATIONS.
There are other types of miscellaneous linear equations
which can be treated by the Vedic Sütras. A few of them are
shown below.
FIRST TYPE
Fractions of a particular cyclical kind are involved here.
And, by the Paravartya Sütra, we write down the Numerator
of the sum-total of all the fractions i in question and equate it
to zero. Thus:
D. cna ees ee
Here, each numerator is to be multiplied by the factor
absent from its denominator. This is usually and actually
done everywhere but not as a rule of mental practice. This,
however, should be regularly practised; and the resultant
numerator equated to zero.
In the present instancé,
The Algebraical proof is well-known and is as follows:
Еа р г\л q
(x4-a) ЕБ) 1555 Gerais
(х-Еа)(х-ЕБ)(х-Ес)
х —(pe+ga-+rb)
P+q+r
In other words,
Each N с by the Sissi number reversed
As this is simple and easy to remember and to apply,
the work can be done mentally. And we can say, х=
Т
EF) (х-Еа)
х=
СС-0. In Public Domain. СигиКи! Kangri Collection, Haridwar
E mU ЭР”

A few more examples are noted :
1 ну бамо
F о.
ee GES SED
NES A
таат
ш СЕВЕ 5 5 9
A few disguised samples may also be taken :
i зв
'. (mentally)
meom || 3 si
E аја ен I4
Seal ae гни Итти тни 5d
2. (mentally)
GELS), GFHE (x+5)(x+1) х
.. (mentally)
ee
EFE Gcr epar
'. (mentally) 2
Aal E а
ҮЛЭГ ир ВЭ!
Gets) (х+З)(х-Е5)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
"RES VICOS c Сл Tort gr Mu Sameer
GFF) _

| л, (mentally) c— rs) (х-єЗў{х-Е5) GESYGC EI) d
|, (5) nsu. Aw uas C Lie F -3
| MEME cee m ie ie
| .'. (mentally) Е) Gee Ba лесу с) =%
о за таа
[po x—4 | x9 e E
| . (mentally) eiea (кз 64у =0
es SSS ey
г. (mentally) 02 2220 ша 0
| SECOND ТҮРЕ
| A second type of such special simple equations is one where
wehave 11-11 | 1
| АВ ГАС ADT Bo and the factors (A, B, C and D) of
| the denominators are in Arithmetical Progression. The Sütra
| СС-0. In Public Domain. СигиКи! Kangri Collection, Haridwar
БВ Cn AN. EE

aurea (Sopüntyadvayamantyam) which means “the ulti- |
mate and twice the penultimate” gives us the answer immedi- |
ately, for instance : |
| ac БИШ sel y 1 |
Here, according to the Sūtra, L+2p (the last-+twice the |
The proof of this is as follows:
GCESJG-ES) GAETA (к-Е®)(х-Е5) (548514) |
Removing the factors (x-|-2) and (х--3) |
nee ре, 9Р--0
шээг гү pb
The General Algebraical Proof is as follows:
DEC S БР 2
i АБТАО АБ BG (where A,B, О and D are in А.Р.)
Let d be the common difference.
Ара) дата А(А-1-34)
di 2d ker —d
Х| араараа) | =з | хал) |
Cancelling the factors A(A+d) of the denominators and d
of the Numerators :
Dee =O
A+3d A-+2d
In other words 2 —1 , 2» |
Lo L+2P=—0
- СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 1

НЕСЕ н
Another Algebraical proof. :
But '.'
1 ЦЭЭЛ ae
АБТАС АР ВО
p=
A.
few more samples may be tried :
*, (mentally)
СЕБЕ RESETS) OPIS) | PATS)
THIRD TYPE
A third type of equations are those. where Numerator
and Denominator on the L.H.S. (barring the independent
terms) stand in the same ratio to each other as the entire Numerator and the entire Denominator of the R.H.S. stand to each
other and these can be readily solved with the aid of the Upasütra
(subformula or corollary) явлаа (Antyayoreva) which means,
“only the last terms” і.е. the absolute terms. Thus:
Here, (x?--x) —x (х--1) and (x?+3x)=x(x+3)
-. The Rule applies; and we say:
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar х

eo
The Algebraical proof 18 as follows : |
AC+D_A_AC_D (by Dividend)
BO+E B BC E
Another Algebraic Proof is this:
AC+D_A . ABC-LAE—ABC--BD
Ер ^ ABC+AR 48
w
A D
шор О. ===
ВЕ
А few more examples may be taken :
Mu uero. 10 x23 |
(6) 1-рх 2-рах-р ах? 2
s врх = |
l—qx 2-+pqx—pq?x? 2 ae
з 6 ZT єз. , |
eat гү ШШ шнын
Note :—By cross-multiplication,
Here, the total of the Binomials is 3x-|-15 on each side.
But the Sünyam Samuccaye Sütra does not apply
beacuse the number of factors (in the original shape)
is 2 on the L.H.S. and only one on the R.H.S. * Атйуауоreva is the Sūtra to be applied.
RS T nm
- СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

The total (on each side) is the same (i.e. 8x-+12). But
the ‘Sinyam Samuccaye’ Sütra does not apply. The
‘Antyayoreva’ formula is the one to be applied.
(x+1)(x+2) шаг 2 (2Х-т cu
E" ms MY like the one above.
FOURTH TYPE
Another type of special Fraction-Additions (in connection
with Simple equations) is often met with, wherein the factors
of the Denominators are in Arithmetical Progression or related
to one another in a special manner as in SUMMATION OF
SERIES. These we can readily solve with the aid of the
same “Antyayoreva’”’ байга, (but in a different context, and in a
different sense). We therefore deal with this special type here.
(1) The first sub-section of this type is one in which the
factors are in АР. Thus:
The Sütra tells us that the sum of this series is a fraction
whose numerator is the sum of the numerators in the series and
whose denominator is the product of the two ends i.e. the first
and the last Binomials !
бо, in this case, qose cun and so on.
The Algebraical proof of this is as follows :
jou. Ha ==
рос) 8) PNP)
wherein the Numerator is the sum of the original Numerators
and the Denominator is the product of the first and the last
Binomial factors.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar 5
Е. ИИ ро асаа BEIM ____

JEEP | |
=(Е)х+З)(х-Е4) («х-Е(х+Е3)(х+4) FDR TS
Adding t, to the above, we have 2 1 |
Б. NE Eat |
Continuing this process to any number of terms, we
find the Numerator continuously increases by one and the
Denominator invariably drops the middle binomial and retains
only the first and the last, thus proving the correctness of the
Rule in question.
= Se
and so on to any number of terms
Note :—The second term of each step on the R.H.S. and
the first term on the next step (of the L.H.S) cancel
each other and that, consequently, whatever may be
the number of terms which we take, all the terms
(on the R.H.S.) except the very first and the last
cancel out and the Numerator (being the difference
between the first and the last binomial ie. the only
binomials surviving) is the sum of the original Numerators (on the L.H.S.). And this proves the proposition
in question.
E ES M e Е
À few more illustrations are taken:
Eero FIEF
Si
xi-3xi2 xi—5xl6
Se Bi VO VIE |
” СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

9) арза ра ирик"
“йж GREG 7
-6,- Зуун
4 ПОКРЕНЕ а eee
draw Кес
s С ЕЕ) “вх үү аха) GPA 777
Неге, there is a slight difference in the structure of the
Denominator i.e. that the A.P.is not in respect of the independent term in the binomials (as in the previous examples) but in
the x-coefficient itself. But this makes no difference as regards
the applicability of the Sūtra.
sS,
The First Algebraical Proof of this is pu as before :
titt = рве): а апа во оп
The addition of each new term шр establishes
the proposition.
The second Algebraical proof is slightly different р
follows the same lines and leads to the same result:
ус eae =2(Ay 1
= 1 IIl а те ап
ta © (8x+1)(5x+1) = zn) and so. on
Note :—The cancellations take place exactly as s before, with
the consequence Ane the sum-total of the fractions=
2x D, xD, = 53d (Where 1 stands for à)
(which pue the pr
бсо ae
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

( ind )
Here, the progression is with regard to both the items in
the binomials (i.e. the x-coefficients and the absolute terms).
But this too makes no difference to the applicability of the
formula under discussion. |
"Bo x-ray xa)
7) Шог ы кыл...
| Сарај ра) F
УИС
4, Э8”-(вх-БаДӨХ-Га)
хүйг
Seemingly,- there is a still greater difference in the structure of
the Denominators. But even this makes no difference to the
applieability of the aphorism. So we say:
P G-E- py 5x 5)
Both the Algebraical explanations apply to this case
also. And we may extend the rule indefinitely to as many
terms and to as many varieties as we may find necessary.
We may conclude this sub-section with a few examples
_ of its 2 to Arithmetical numbers :
! na ЕУ атоо
In.a sum like this, the finding of the L.C.M. and the multiplications, divisions, additions, cancellations etc., will be tiresome and disgusting. But our recognition of this. series as
coming under its right particular classification enables us to
Bay а once: g` 4
„= ==— and во on.
HOS TT TT
Note ‘The principle explained above is in constant requisition in connection with the “Summation of Series”
in Higher Algebra etc., and therefore of the utmost
importance to the mathematician and the statistician,
in general.’
eB СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

FIFTH TYPE
There is also a fifth type of fraction-additions (dealing
| with simple equations) which we often. come across, which are
| connected with the “Summation of Series” (as in the previous
type) and ‘which we may readily tackle with the aid of the same
(Antyayoreva) formula. '
The characteristic peculiarity here is aia each numerator
is the difference between the two Binomial factors of its Denominator. Thus,
(1 a—b b—c di c—d
Both the Algebraical explanations hereof are exactly as
before (and need not be repeated here).
(2) x—y J-A e WS
(a+x)(a+y) “НетуДа-га) (Ez)
E S 23 KW.
(09^ (acxy(ad-w)
Se 17
So GT E24)
Poe А
| авва 0-4
| (харв) бес pe Foy(px +d)
a—d
~ (px-FaYpx-r-d)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Note :— (i) If, instead of d, there be a in the last term (in this
case), the Numerator in the answer becomes zero ;
and consequently the L.H.S. (ie. the sum of the
various fractions) is zero.
(ii) The difference between the Binomial factors of
the Denominator in the L.H.S. is the Numerator
of each fraction; and this characteristic will be
found to characterise the R.H.S. also.
(ii) The note at the end of the previous sub-section
(те: the summation of series) holds good here too.
2 СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XVII
QUADRATIC EQUATIONS
In the Vedic mathematics Sutras, CALCULUS comes
in at a very early stage. As it so happens that DIFFERENTIAL
calculus is made use of in the Vedic Sütras for breaking a quadratic equation down at sight into two simple equations of
the first degree and as we now goon to our study of the Vedic
Sütras bearing on Quadratic equations, we shall begin this
chapter with a breif exposition of the calculus.
Being based on basic and fundamental first principles
(relating to limiting values), they justifiably come into the
picture at a very early stage. But these have been expounded
and explained with enormous wealth of details covering not
merely the Sütras themselves but also the sub-sütras, axioms,
corollaries, implications etc. We do not propose to go into
the arguments by which the calculus has been established
but shall content ourselves with an exposition of the rules
enjoined therein and the actual Modus Operandi. The principal
rules are briefly given below:
(i) In every quadratic expression (put in its standard form
i.e. with 1 as the coefficient of x2), the sum of its two Binomial
factors is its first differential.
Thus, as regards the quadratic expression x2—5x-+6,
we know its binomial factors are (x—2) and (x—3). And therefore, we can at once say that (2x—5) (which is the sum of these
two factors) is its D, (16. first DIFFERENTIAL).
(ii) This first differential (of each term) can also be
obtained by multiplying its sat (Dhwaja) ad (Ghata) (i.e. the
power by the эг (Алка і.е. its coefficient) and reducing it by
one.
Thus, as regards x?—5x--6
x? gives 2x; —5x gives—5; and 6 gives zero.
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar "s

(iii) Defining the DISCRIMINANT as the square of the |
coefficient of the middle term minus the product of double the r
first coefficient and double the independent term, the text then
lays down the very important proposition that the first differentia]
is equal to the square root of the discriminant.
In the above case x?—5x+6=0
Thus the given quadratic equation is broken down at
sight into the above two simple equations ie. 2x—5 —1 and
The current modern method (dealing with its standard
quadratic equation ax?--bx-Fe— 0) tells us that:
—b+./b?—4ac Thisisno doubt all right, so far as it goes ;
xd 2a ' but itis still a very crude and clumsy way |
of stating that the first differential is the square root of the |
discriminant. |
Another Indian method (of medieval times well-known |
as Shree Shreedharacharya's method) is a bit better than the
current modern Methods; but that too comes nowhere near
the Vedic method which gives us (1) the relationship of the
differential with the original quadratic (as the sum of its factors)
and (2) its relationship with the discriminant as its square root !
and thirdly, breaks the original quadratic equation-at sightinto two simple equations which immediately give us the two
values of x!
A few more illustrations are shown hereunder:
(9) ах24-рх--с-40 ~, 2ax-I-b = адас
- СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

This portion of the Vedic Sütras deals also with the Binomial - theorem, factorisations, factorials, repeated factors,
continued fractions, Differentiations, Integrations, Successive
Differentiations, Integrations by means of continued fractions
etc. But just now we are concerned only with the just hereinabove explained use of the differential calculus in the solution
of quadratic equations (in general) because of the relationship
D,=+ v the discriminant. The other applications just
„referred to will be dealt with at later stages in the student's
progress.
II This calculus-method is perfectly GENERAL i.e. it
applies to all cases of quadratic equations. There are, however,
certain special types of quadratic equations which can be still
more easily and still more rapidly solved with the help of the
special Sütras applicable to them. Some of these formulas
are old friends but in a new garb and a new set-up, a new context
and soon. Апа they are so efficient in the facilitating of mathematics work and in reducing the burden of the toil therein.
We therefore go on to some of the most important amongst
these special types.
FIRST SPECIAL TYPE
(Reciprocals)
This deals with Reciprocals. The equations have, under
the current system, to be worked upon laboriously, before they
can be solved. For example: |
(1) Хор
According to the current system, we say :
хана ыг
or (ii) a ша = 4о0г 1/4
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
í
z J eS е ИЙ E Е

CONT CRINE
But, according to the Vilokanam sub-Sütra of Vedic
mathematics, we observe that the L.H.S. is the sum of two
Reciprocals, split the 11 of the R.H.S. into 4+% and at once
вау:
х41-44 s.x-—4 ог 1/4. It is a matter of simple
observation and no more.
pt
Here the R.H.S. does not readily seem to be of the same
sort as the previous examples. But a little observation will
suffice to show that 52 can be split up into 348
х=й х= ог
гини ши 10—116 Mog ?
iex LGD “44:26 А or -5ал 5 CONES t us оа Я 12
(10) ZINE Soe Le .2х+-11_з+, mob
DX OD xD 84 7 x3 Dx-lj--*t--- 12
Неге the connecting symbol is a minus. Accordingly, we
- СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| N.B. :—Note the minus. (of the second root) very carefully.
For, the value x= will give us not 5 but -$ on the
R.H.S. and will therefore be wrong! |
c x
(13) xX x Cp geo ¢ -=$ от—{
(14) х+{7_х19__за әт «тк o отп
10 gee o x+9
Note ;—In the above examples, the L.H.S. was of the form
a,b. and, consequently, we had to split the R.H.S. |
ba’ into the same form Ё m)
ра
abo
In other words, the Denominator on the R.H.S. had to be
factorised into two factors, the sum of whose squares (or their
difference, as the case may be) is the Numerator.
As this factorisation and the addition or subtraction of the
^ squares will not always be easy and readily possible, we shall,
| at a later stage, expound certain rules which will facilitate this
work of expressing a given number as the sum of two squares
or as the difference .of two squares.
SECOND SPECIAL TYPE.
(Under the Süngyam Samuccaye Formula.)
We now take up a second special type of quadratic equations which a very old friend (the Sanyam Samuccaye Sutra)
can help us to solve, at sight (a sort of problem which the
mathematicians all regard as “Hard”) !
We may first remind the student of that portion of an
earlier chapter wherein, referrimg to various applications of
the Samuccaye Sütra, we dealt with the easy method by which
the oneness of the sum of the numerator on the one hand and the
And this, when simplified, =
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
AEG ; pu

‚ырынан << аи к р зу
denominator on the other gave us one root and the oneness of
the difference between the Numerator and the Denominator
(on both sides) gave us another root, of the same Quadratic
equation. We need not repeat all of it but only refer back to
that portion of this volume and remind the student of the
kind of illustrative examples with which we illustrated our
ee САИН
theme :
брт 2х-3
bosd TE 6x—16=0; or 5x=0
THIRD SPECIAL TYPE
There is a third special type of Quadratic Equations which
is also generally considered “very hard" but whereof one root is
readily yielded by the same ancient friend (the “Sdmya Samuccaye" Sütra and the other is given by another friend-not so
ancient, however but still quite an old friend i.e. the "Sünyam
Алуа? Sütra which was used for a special type of simultaneous
equations.
Let us take а concrete instance of this type. Suppose
we have to solve the equation :
е ү чю. Ec
x--2 х--3 eme]
The nature of the characteristics of this special type
will be recognisable with the help of the usual old test and an
additional new test.
The TESTS are: i-ci—1-L1; and 24$—£-1
: In all such cases, "Sünyam Anyat” formula declares
hat one root is zero ; and the “Stinyam Samuccaye’” Sütra says ;
= СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar ii

ШИ гу 1 — 2
БСК
tthe Algebraical Proof hereof is as follows!
E (by simple division) Е апа во оп.
ЕЕЕ раа араа. SPUR
So, fı za =] { x x 201
„. (Removing 1—1 and 1—1 from both sides) x, (the
common factor of all term)—0 ;
EN ES А
x2 x-3 х-4 xl
„. (Ву the Samuccaye formula) 2х--8--0,
and on its removal,
Note:—In all these cases, Vilokanam (i.e. mere observation)
gives us both the roots.
A few more illustrations of this special type are given:
DE. bol 2 5
затв axi 6xll
1 2x and so on,
ie eT
B pu 12x :
MOX ax Ok 6x
moe)
or (by cross-multiplication) 12х--5 or (36x-4-15) —0
3) a b a—c b+c
E n rus
с.х=0 or—}(a+b)
(4 a—b га р-с _ afb _ bte
Х-Ба--5 х4-5-0 x-+a+b x—b—e
(5) atb , bte _ 2b , ate
— ae ey
гук--0 or —Ha+2b-+e)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

FOURTH SPECIAL TYPE
And again, there is still another special type of Quadratics
which are “harder” but which our old friends "Sünyam Алуа?
and *Parüvartya" (Merger) can help us to solve easily.
Note:—Apropos of the subject-matter of the immediately
preceding sub-section (the 3rd special type), let
us now consider the equation 2 , 3 _ „Вя
This may look, at the outset, х2 x+3 х5
a like, but really is not, a quadratic equation of the type
dealt with in the immediately previous sub-section
(under Sainyam Anyat and Siinyam Sámya Samuccaye)
but only a simple MERGER (because, not only is the
number of terms on the R.H.S. one short of the number
required but also 2--$z5£ It is really а case under
Sünyam Anyat and Pardvartya (merger).
Here, the TEST is the usual one for the merger process
ie. МХ,--Х, (on the L.H.8.)=N, (on the R.H.S.) Thus:
.. (By merger method) —6 ^ —6 О O26 0
pe EST.
A few true illustrations are given below:
л. (By Division) „_ 2511 3x Б бх
..X—0. (This can be verified by mere observation)
or 2 pn o8 n (by merger, x——21
This resulb can be readily put down, by putting up
each mumerator over the absolute term of the Denominator
as the Numerator of each term of the resultant equation and
retaining the Denominator as before. [Or by taking the Square
Root of Each Numerator] (in the present case).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Thus $—2; $—3; and 25--5. And these will be our
new Numerators. Thus, we have the newly derived Equation :
(By merger) х= —
DNUS ә de
EpL. x39. xpo
Here ' 2+3=25 - YES
The derived equation is:
Eur dua.
(which is the same as in all the three preceding cases).
Note :—In the last two cases, the first term alone is different
and yet, since the quotients 4 and 2 are the same,
therefore it makes no difference to the result; and
we get the same two roots in all the three cases!
Каз аа
Here "e $-Fí—$ 22 YES 0
N. B. Note that 2x6 , 3x4
and that these are the new Numerators (for the derived
Equation)
(ВУ Оу 55707 iL M4 . a
or 1 EX I 1 2 2, YES
"(By merger) 15 5 lc
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar E

Ургац” ут 00
N.B. :—The remaining examples in this chapter may be held. |
over (if deemed advisable) for a later reading. |
EEUU ыр 20
xta x+tb x-+c
Here *- pup. 20 ..YBS ..x-—0
a b
с
Е +. YES
xta xtb x+¢
.(By merger) a—c 2-0 250) |
xta x4b S
y — be--ca—2ab
7 а-ЕЬ—2с
xtatb х--0--0 x-+a+ce
"V ta = NAD Sr. х=
Here 55815536 ОГО pae |
a—b 1 b—c _ a—c - YES |
гар ХӨ 60:10 |
-. (By Merger) (a—b)(b—c) , (b~c)(b—a) _ 9 and so on. |
ax--d bx-Fd сха
Here (by division), we have: d-+-ax) 1 (1
P
ax
—ах
ES
iu CON MM
ax--d = bx+d сх-4
. abe abc даро
| ШЫ авах Бас aborlabd шоо
Ep
D D, D;
х, bed —abd , acd —abd 257 |
abex--bed 'abex-Faed _ 3 |
3. bd(c—a) ^ ad(b—c)
ре(ах--4) ac(bx-rd)
- СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

a
a
''ax+d bx+d
. ad+bd—2cd
* = a64-bc—2ab
ax+ d bx+ d cx+d
24 за вао m
Here ETE 0..YES ..x-—0
Or (by division)
abex-+bed abex--aed abcx-+-abd
“(Ву merger), bed—abd , aed—abd. 9
D, р,
“Бд(ах--4) ac(bx-Fd)
oe ad+bd—2cd
"= ac--be-—2ab
OR (by mere division Pardvartya) at the very first step.
d да _ 3d
“"axtd'bx+td cx+d
(which is the same as No. 6 supra)
ad+be—2cd
ac-+-be—2ab
CONCLUDING LINKING NOTE
(On Quadratic Equations)
In addition to the above, there are several other special
types of Quadratic Equations, for which the Vedic Sūtras have
made adequate provision and also suggested several beautifully
interesting devices and so forth. But these we shall go into
and ‘deal with, at a later stage.
Just at present, we address ourselves to our next appropriate subject for this introductory and illustrative Volume
namely, the solution of cubic and Biquadratic Equations etc.
ОШО x=
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
n — Зр у EX -

CHAPTER XVIII
CUBIC EQUATIONS
We solve cubie equations in various Ways:
(i) with the aid of the Parávartya байга, the LopanaSthapana Sütra, the qxmgqoreit formula (Pürana- Apiirndbhaydm) |
which means *by the completion or non-completion" of the |
square, the cube, the fourth power etc.) ;
(1) by the method of Argumentation and Factorisation
(as explained in a previous chapter).
The Pürama Method
The Pürama method is well-known to the current system.
In fact, the usually-in-vogue general formula ^ p. 4/b?—4ac |
for the standard quadratic (ax?+-bx-++-c=0) E oa |
has been worked out by this very method. Thus, |
ax*+bx+c=0
^(Dividing by а), a bx, c_
en x24 5x. cmd !
а a
(completing the square on the L.H.S.)
г x2p bx, b* e b? b?—4ac
Ё b]? b?—4ac
2a 2a
This method of *
= completing the square” is thus quite wellown to the present-day mathematicians, in connection with the
solving of Quadratic Equations. But this is only a fragmentary
and fractional application of the General Formula which (in
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar H

ў ЕУРО иг"
conjunction with the Paràvartya, the Lopana-Sthapana etc.,
gūtras) 18 equally applicable to cubic, biquadratic and other
higher-degree equations as well.
Completing the Cubic
With regard to cubic equations, we combine the Pardvartya
Sūtra (as explained in the ‘Division by Paravartya’ chapter) and
the Parana sub-formula. Thus,
г. (Substituting the value of x?—6x? from above herein),
Let x—2—y (and .. let x —y-F2)
N.B. :—It need hardly be pointed out that, by argumentation
(re: the coefficients of x?, x? etc.,) we can arrive at the
same answer (as explained in a previous chapter dealing
with factorisation by Argumentation) and that this
holds good in all the cases dealt with in the present
chapter.
~ y?—y (where y stands for x+2)
WO у—0 ог E xc 2 =з ог l
N.B. :—The object is to bring (x-+2) on the R.H.S. and thus
help to formulate an equation in Y, obtain the three
roots and then, by substitution of the value of x (in
terms of y), obtain the three values of x.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

7 у?=у(2у4-1)—2 CUSTO m M e.
Note :—Expressions of the form x3—7x-L6 can be split into
x5—]1—'"x--7 etc., and readily factorised. This is always
applicable to all such cases (where x? is absent) and
should be fully utilised. :
The Pürama method explained in this chapter for the
solution of cubic equations will be found of great help
in factorisation ;and vice-versa.
"Harder" cubic equations will be taken up later.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
eS eee eee

| CHAPTER XIX
BIQUADRATIC EQUATIONS
The procedures (Purana etc. ,) expounded in the previous
chapter for the solution of cubic equations can be equally well
applied in the case of Biquadraties etc., too. Thus,
А S. x=] or —3 or 1 or —5
- x=4 or 5 or 2 or 1
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
HORN

(її?)
Note :—The student need hardly be reminded that all these
examples (which have all been solved by the Parana
method hereinabove) can also be solved by the Argumentation-cum-factorisation method.
A SPECIAL TYPE
There are several special types of Biquadratic equations
dealt with in the Vedic Stitras. But we shall here deal with only
one such special type and hold the others over to a later stage.
This type is one wherein the L.H.S. consists of the sum
of the fourth powers of two Binomials (and the R.H.S. gives us
the equivalent thereof in the shape of an arithmetical number.)
The formula applicable to such cases is the amfte-anfte (уаз
Samasti) Sütra (or the Гората Sthàpana one) which teaches us
how to use the average or the exact middle binomial for breaking the Biquadratic down into a simple quadratic (by the
easy device of mutual cancellation of the old powers i.e. the
x? and the x).
A single concrete illustration will suffice for explaining
this process :
Let x--6 (the average of the two Binomials) =a
х СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ee

: owing to the cancellation of the odd powers х? and x,
| ‚В. ita simple examples like this, the integral roots are
small ones and can be spotted out by mere inspection
| and the splitting up of 706 into 625 and 81 and for this
| purpose, the Vilokanam method will suffice. But,
| in cases involving more complex numbers, fractions,
| surds, imaginary quantities etc., and literal coefficients
and so on: Vilokanam will not completely solve the
Equation. But here too, the Vyasti-Samasti formula
will quite serve the purpose. Thus,
N
The General Formula will be as follows:
Given (x--m-+n)4+(x-++m—n)*=p
«сад 2 4. үгэ
| Жа a Uae m e
ч
| Eu вану is 4n4+2p
| ИС cm 7 =
| 2х лафа МЕ;
Applying this to Ње above example, we have:
Б. ЕБИ ee 6-38
ЯН тэл МИЧИН:
(which tallies with the aobve)
N.B. :—" Harder" Biqudratics, Penties etc., will be taken up
later.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XX
MULTIPLE SIMULTANEOUS EQUATIONS.
We now go on to the solution of Simultaneous Equations
involving three (or more) unknowns. The Lopana-Sthapana
Sūtra, the Anuriipya Sūtra and the Pardvartya Sūtra are the
ones that we make use of for this purpose.
FIRST TYPE
In the first type thereof, we have a significant figure on
the R.H.S. in only one equation (and zeroes in the other two)
From the homogeneous zero equations, we derive new equations
defining two of the unknowns in terms of the third ; we then
substitute these values in the third equation; and thus we
obtain the values of all the three unknowns.
A second method is the judicious addition and subtraction of proportionate multiples for bringing about the elimination of one unknown and the retention of the other two.
In both these methods, we can make our own choice of
the unknown to be eliminated, the multiples to be taken ete.,
Thus :
& 2А--В gives us: шш | Au esci
УЕ 3
and z= 8
(1) from A, we have x+y=z
and from B, we have 4x —by = —2z |
^. By Pardvartya, x —4 7! and Y= 2
^. (by substitution in b. д=14 z+z=10 .. i
and y=2
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
i SS du эр лл mr ee TRIN TTE LE
P

| —]1l1z—2x-0 cee A
эх-Е4у-Е5®=35
> Adding B and 20, wehave 16y+3z=70
n Subtracting B from 3A, 13y—26z=0
г. (Substituting these values in О) 2.Х--3
1 ay ex | a ЕРА
zc
and
| (1) A-+C gives us: 6x-+ 5z=37
| 2A--3B gives us: 25x—10z= 04
From (А) and (B) we have
У. X yu v= SOE ane 25x
SECOND TYPE
This is one wherein the R.H.S. contains significant figures
" all the three equations. This can be solved by Pardvartya
( ROSS-multiplication) so as to produce two derived equations
ү Б. Н. 5. consists of zero only, or by the first or the second
4 of the methods utilised in the previous sub-section. Thus,
Ву Бх a Du ie oe
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Dy SOUS Ма: 7-5 |
Having thus derived two equations of this kind (ie. of
the first special type), we can now follow the first method under
that type ; and, after a lot of big multiplications, subtractions,
additions and divisions, we can obtain the answer : x —2, y —3
and z—4
(ii) or, (adopting the first method adopted in the last sub-
| section), we have:
S. Зу- 5z—3—'Ix |
and 10y—11z—4—9x
By CROSS-multiplication,
zi 17
. ze up 45
Dax soy amd zd.
and z =
This method too involves a lot of clumsy labour.
(iit) or, (adopting the Lopana-Sthipana method), we say :
C—A—B gives us 11y—15z— —27
and 9B—T7C gives us —43y 4-32z— — 1 |
uX-ycz-2 :
andz—x .. x=y=z=2. |
3 СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Sree ee ЭХ Te T LN

(ii) 2А—В gives us: y+2z= | x 21
and x=2
2B—C gives us: 3y+3z=12
or (iv) by mere observation.
| 3 x+2y+3z=14 Nera
3x-4- y+6z= 23 SERD
and so on as before.
(ii) 2A—B gives us: y--2z— Ч v =
8x-+ 2y— que
and 3A—C gives us; 5y+3z=19 z—3
A and во on,
(1) .', 2y-F3z—11— x and во on, as before.
| : xs all these processes, there is an element, more or less,
7 clumsiness and cumbrousness which renders them unfit
| О come under and fit satisfactorily into the Vedic category.
Methods expounded in the Vedic. Sütras and free from the said
draw-back and also с
à apable of universal application will be
explained at а later `s d Ч,
tage.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXI
SIMULTANEOUS QUADRATIC EQUATIONS
The Sütras needed for the solution of simultaneous
Quadratic equations have practically all been explained already.
Only the actual applicational procedure, devices and modusoperandi thereof have to be explained. Thus:
Dc b oveThis is readily obtainable by Vilokanam (mere observation)
T. = because ee values can always be reversed,
x—y=1 х c2 | Note the minus
М.В. :—1, When the value of x or y has been found, xy at
once gives us the value of the other, Thus, if,
here, x—4, y=8, no other substitution etc., is
necessary.
2. One set of values can һе found out by Vilokanam
alone. |
3. The internal relationship between the two sets of
Values will Р explained later.
(4) oe 7 . x=4 and y=8 by (mere Vilokanaman xy=12 observation)
cipe — 5i
X —y — 1 AE оем Par 1 | $ 2
SG Xm | —@
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Se T ETC ie TIRE 5:

(6) A E 1 х?-Е2ху-Еу*= qv х=5 ү, Ча
N.B. :—There is plus sign all through. Therefore it can all be
simply reversed (i.e. one by Vilokanam and the other by
(туу
апа METH 24
Secondly, х(х--у)--4х--8х--24 ..x—3 |
| site 9x--4y —10
| But x+2y= 5
`. (By Parávartya or by Sünyam Anyat) x=0 & у=
лон =» 10 жо Г
Каз суз
and x—1 or 14
(11) ОО Ue XU Ce ce = —0 .x=— 1
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

=3) «.1gx+2hy—iy = hae y
or (ii) ERU а
ни 3 and y=1
" 2_` Aa ot
And (by OROSS—multiplication)
COPI cedes ву.
Substituting in х2--у? 26, we have
yao
эда. х= Зу о +} or £6 or #1.
N.B. :—Test for the correct sign (plus or minus).
*. (By substitution), NN
у=+5 | SEVO
(17) Bu LT ir (By subtraction), 4x?—4xy 4-2y?—16
Тр e ly
х2-нху-р y?—18 | .. y=+1 EVE
and x=+3 UERiS
(19) A bee пху.
and x=+/1/3
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

цэ
s. Ву substitution, 11у*—68 or 10y?—68
and азр Ув or +3 / 34/5
Ч e ce. y+3 |
(i) By Sünyam Anyat -. y=0
Now, substitute and solve.
or (ii) By subtraction, 3xy+y°=y
Substitute and solve
| S. х=4у or —3y
N.B. :—The Sünyam Anyat method is the best.
г. Substitute and solve
or (ii) By transposition,
This means that the two equations are not independent ;
and therefore, any value may be given to y and a corresponding
set of values will emerge for x!
(*Harder" simultaneous Quadratics will be taken up ata
later stage).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXII
FACTORISATION AND DIFFERENTIAL CALCULUS
In this Chapter the relevant Sütras (Gunaka-Samuccaya
etc.,) dealing with successive differentiations, covering Leibnity’s
theorem, Maclaurin’s theorem, Taylor’s theorem etc., and
given a lot of other material which is yet to be studied and
decided on by the great mathématicians of the present-day
western world, is also given.
Without going into the more abstruse details connected
herewith, we shall, for the time-being, content ourselves with
a very brief sketch of the general and basic principles involved
and a few pertinent sample-specimens by way of illustration.
The basic principle is, of course, elucidated by the very
nomenclature (ie. the Gunaka-Samuccaya) which postulates
that, if and when a quadratic expression is the product of the
Binomials (х--а) and (x--b), its first differential is the sum of
the said two factors and so on (as already explained in the
chapter on quadratic equations).
It need hardly be pointed out that the well-known rule of
differentiation of a product (i.e. that if y=uv, when u and v be
the function of x, Ду v du, u dv) and the Gunaka-Samuccaya
dx dx dx
Stitras denote, connote and imply the same mathematical truth.
Let us start Hid very simple instances :
b
Ec U ene
^. D, (the first B ceo +(x+1)=Za
(EH) 5 ES)
+(x?-++4x+3)=ab+be+ac— Zab,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Ds —4x3+30x2+70x+50= Zabe
These examples will suffice to show the internal relationship
subsisting between the factors of a Polynomial and the successive differentials of that Polynomial; and to show how easily,
on knowing the former, we can derive the latter and vice versa.
There is another relationship too in another direction
wherein factorisation and differentiation are closely connected
E with each other and wherein this relationship is of immense
practical help to us in our mathematical work. And this is with
regard to the usa of successive differentials for the detection
of repeated factors.
The procedure hereof is so simple that it needs no elaborate exposition at all. The following examples will serve to
show the modus operandi in question :
(1) Factorise x8—4x?+5x—2
ee 2
Judging from the first and the last coefficients of E(the given
expression), we can rule out (3x—5) and keep our eyes on (x—1).
` (According to the Adyam Adyena Sūtra) E=(x—1)? (x—2)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

o ОГТ a 2
" Dy =24x—24—24(x—1) г. As before, we have, (2x--1)?
(3) Factorise x*—6x3-.-13x?—24x J-36
(2) Factorise 4х3--12х2-415х-4. |
LS.) СЭР”,
—— mem
^ 0=12х2—36х--26 (which has no rational factors)
(4) Factorise: 2x1—293x9-L84x?— 80x —64
(5) Resolve X1—5x3—9x3--81x —108 into factors. |
х Dy (x9) (ас)
(6) Resolve 16х%—24х%-.16х—3 into factors.
(7) Resolve x°—5x4410x3
—10x?--5x 1 into factors.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(8) Factorise x>—15x3+ 10x?+60x—72
Many other such applications are obtainable from the
Vedic Sütras relating to ewe (Calana-Kalana—Differential
Calculus). "They are, however, to be dealt with, later on.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CuHapteR XXIII Р
PARTIAL FRACTIONS
Another subject of very great importance in various mathematical operations in general and in Integral Calculus in
particular is “Partial Fractions” for which the current systems
have a very cumbrous procedure but which the ‘Pardvartya’
Sütra tackles very quickly with its well-known MENTAL ONELINE answer process.
u
We shall first explain the current method ; and, along-side
of it, we shall demonstrate the “Pardvartya” Sūtra application
thereto. Suppose we have to express 3x?+12x-+11
EMEN. e L. i te т, кн
in the shape of Partial Fractions. (x4-1) (x4-2) (х4-3)
The eurrent method is as follows :
Let— 3xtEI2x-Hll _ А В A C
E [ED GEPS) TELS] A(x?--5x 4-6) J- B(x?-I-4x 4- 3)
~. Equating the coefficients of like powers on both sides,
АВ C= 3
Solving these three simultaneous equations involving
three unknowns, we have, A=1; B=1; and C=1
SE- E piles bo
In the Vedic system, however, for
(1) we equate its denominator to
^ Pardvartya value of A(i.e. —1) ;
(1) and we MENTALLY substitute this value
Е, (but without the factor which is A’
on the R.HS.) &
getting the value of A,
zero and thus get the
г
—] in the
S denominator
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ЧИ”
| (iii) we put this result down as the value of A. Similarly
r for B and С.
ts (x--2) (РЗ) ЛОО п
= (x4-3) (х-Е1) (у CEDERE
Note :—All this work can be done mentally; and all the
laborious work of deriving and solving three simultaneous equations is totally avoided by this method.
| and (12-25 COE ee eel
ae E EU 1 і
A few more illustrations are shown below:
(1) 2х--3 o Aisa le (also available by mere
(x+1) (x+2) x41 х-2 Vilokanam)
(2) 7 А КОДО
п Зер -5ү 7
x?—bx--6 х9 Буш
[eror ox таат
х?—9х—15_ xls х—Б
з СҮН уе
(к*—1) GET) fp (х—1)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

RUE rd а
Therefore, the GENERAL FORMULA is :
6x?2+-mx-tn
If and when, however, we find one or more factors of the
Denominator in repetition (1.6. a square, a cube etc,,) a slight
variation of procedure is obviously indicated. For example,
let E Бе 3x+5
According to the current System, we вау;
Us 1—2x-—p (so that х= Р)
E=? Py
This is no doubt a straig
even this is rather cumbrous,
not mental arithmetic ! And,
numbers (as will be the
_still worse |
ht and simple procedure. But
certainly not easy and certainly
with bigger numbers and higher 5
саве in the next example), it will be
Бы. x
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

— tt
The Vedic system, however, gives us two very easy
i Pardvartya methods whereby the whole work can be done
mentally, easily and speedily. They are as follows:
| (1) Sep лд M
s. —9Bx—3 ; and A+B=5
s. B=—14 and А=6$
гс. By Pardvartya (making 1—2x=0, 16. х=),
we have A=63; and (as this is an absolute identity)
(i.e. true for all values of x), let us put x—0
Two more examples are taken by way of Illustration :
amx)
According to the current system, we say :
let 1—х=р (so that x=1—p)
a тш
A Eo ES]
Шор рор
But according to the Vedic procedure, we вау:
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

танаа п с тшшш
Or; secondly, (by Parávartya),
Pub х=1 doc c5
Put x22 .. A—B+C--D=15 Ec
(all of which can be done by mental Arithmetic).
or, secondly (by Pardvartya),
ВЕУ. dob ao C= IT
ЕЕЕ АЕТ: A= 1
: . N.B.:—1. Tt need be hardly pointed out that the current
| method will involve an unquestionably cumbrous
and clumsy process of working, with all the attendant waste of time, energy etc.
2. Other details of applications of Pardvartya and
other Sütras to partial fractions, will be dealt
with later. ^
3. Just now we take up an important part of Integral
Caleulus wherein, with the help of partial fractions,
we can easily perform difficult integrational work.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

р>
CHAPTER XXIV
INTEGRATION
By
| PARTIAL FRACTIONS
In this chapter we shall deal, briefly, with the question
of INTEGRATION by means of Partial Fractions. But, before
we take it up, it will not be out of place for us to give a skeletonsort of summary of the first principles and process of integration
(as dealt with by the Балба. Sutra).
The original process of differentiation is, as is wellknown,
a process in which we say:
Let у=<х%. Then О, (ie: dy) _ 3x2 ;
dx
По 6х mdi DS
Now, in the converse process, we have :
dy зу? с. dy=83x?dx
dx 2
Integrating, .. fdy=J3x*dx ..у=х®
Thus, in order to find the integral of a power of x, we
add unity to the qd (Pūrva i.e. the original index) and divide
the coefficient by the new index (ie. the original one plus
unity).
A few specimen examples may be taken:
(1) Integrate 28x3. j28x3dx —22x1—7x*
—ix5--ix1--9x3-L31x?—9x--K(where K is an independent term)
3f(x*-I-x^71--xa-? eto.)
(3) _ xati xe xi
xx Ка Caste Etc.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(4) (axm*!-4-bxm--cx"-!)dx
ад ptt ок” о,
"m42 mtl m
This is simple 2 so far as it goes. But what about
complex expressions involving numerators and denominators 2
The following sample specimens will make the Весе ае (бу
means of Partial Fractions) clear:
(1) Integrate 7х—1
> (By Pardvartya), Тх-1 |. (7х-1
ES Dos.
(x—l)x үү dx үр dx
(2) Integrate o0 x*—Tx+1
"(By Pardvartya), х2-7х--10000 х2-17х-1
coL eee
BIG а P ae — тодров д8)“
zu Guy
xe S—XR XT]
Let 1 А B C
xi—x?—x 1 х-1 Cp 1)? HEY wee
(COCHE MER Aes NERA N
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

1 Differentiating (N),
0-22Ах--В--20х--20 Viet iN ede RE B
Now put x=1 ` оА=—} . A=—}
Differentiating (P),2A+20=0 .. 20—4 „. C=}
T MR 1
> ) Би заа 573 ay (x—1): wf er (х--1)
=—} log (х—1)=$ log (x— n +4 log "o
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

j CHAPTER XXV
А/ТНЕ VEDIC NUMERICAL CODE |
It is a matter of historical interest to note that, in their |
mathematical writings, the ancient Sanskrit writers do not |
use figures (when big numbers are concerned) in their numerical: |
notations but prefer to use the letters of the Sanskrit (Deva- |
nagari) alphabet to represent the various numbers! And this |
they. do, not in order to conceal, knowledge but in order to
facilitate the recording of their arguments, and the derivation
conclusions etc. The more so, because, in order, to help
the pupil to memorise the material studied and assimilated
they made it a general rule of practice to write even the most
technical and abstruse text-books in Sütras or in Verse (which
is so much easier—even for the children—to memorise) than
in prose (which is so much harder to get by heart and remember).
And this is why we find not only theological, philosophical,
medical, astronomical and other such treatises but even huge
big dictionaries in Sanskrit Verse! So, from this stand-point,
they used verse, Sütras and codes for lightening the burden and
facilitating the work (by versifying scientific and even mathematical material in a readily assimilable form)!
i The very fact that the alphabetical code (as used by them E
; for this purpose) is in the natural order and can be immediately
interpreted, is clear proof that the code language was resorted
not for concealment but for greater ease in verification etc.,
' and the key has also been given in its simplest form :
| “mR яа, Erf яа, ЧЧ Чэчж, ате and a: рач” which
| means :
(1) ka and the following eight letters ; |
(2) ta and the following eight letters ; |
(3) pa and the following four letters ; |
{4) ya and the following seven letters; and |
(5) ksa (or Ksudra) for Zero.
| Elaborated, this means :
(1) ka, ta, pa and ya all denote 1;
(2) kha, tha, pha and ra all represent 2;
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

N
(3) ga, da, ba and la all stand for 3;
(4) gha, dha, bha and va all denote 4;
(b) gna, та, та and sa all represent 5;
(6) ca, ta, and $a all stand for 6;
(7) cha, tha, and sa all denote 7;
(8) ja, da and ha all represent 8;
(9) jha and dha stand for 9; and
(10) Ksa (or Ksudra) means Zero !
The vowels (not being included in the list) make no difference; and in conjunct consonants, the last consonant is alone
to be counted.
Thus pa pa is 11, ma mais 55, ta ta is 11, ma ry is 52 and so
on !
And it was left to the author to select the particular
consonant or vowel which he would prefer at each step. And,
generally, the poet availed himself of this latitude to so frame
his selections as to bring about another additional meaning
(or meanings) of his own choice. Thus, for instance, kapa,
tapa, papa and уара all mean 11; and the writer can (by a
proper selection of consonants and vowels) import another
meaning also into the same verse. Thus “I want mama and
papa" wil mean “Т want 55 and 11"!
Concrete, interesting and edifying illustrations. will be
given later on (especially in connection with recurring decimals,
Trigonometry etc. wherein, over and above the mathematical
matter on hand, we find historical allusions, political reflections,
devotional hymns in praise of the Lord Shri Krishna, the Lord
Shri Shankara and so on!)*
This device is thus not merely a potent aid to versification
(for facilitating memorisation) but has also a humorous side to
16 (which adds to the fun of it) !
"The hymn (in praise of the Lord) gives us the value
of $$ to 32 decimal places (in тошу;
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| d EI
Cuaprer XXVI
RECURRING DECIMALS
Tt has become a sort of fashionable sign of cultural advancement, not to say up-to-datism, for people now-a-days to
talk not only grandly but also grandiosely and grandiloquently
about Decimal coinage, Decimal weights, Decimal measurements v
etc.; but there can be no denying or disguising of the
fact that the western world as such—not excluding its mathematicians, physicists and other expert scientists-seems to have
a tendency to theorise on the one hand on the superiority of
the decimal notation and to fight shy, on the other, in actual
practice—of decimals and positively prefer the “vulgar fractions”
to Шеш!
In fact, this deplorable state of affairs has reached such
à pass that the mathematics syllabus—curricula in the schools,
colleges and universities have been persistently “progressing”
and "advancing" in this wrong direction to the extent of
declaring that Recurring decimals are not integral parts of the
matriculation course in mathematics and actually instructing the
pupils to convert all recurring decimals AT SIGHT into their
equivalent vulgar fraction shape, complete the whole work
with them and finally re-convert the fraction result back
into its decimal shape!
| Having invented the zero mark and the decimal notation
| and given them to the world (as described already from the
| pages of Prof. Halstead and other Historians of Mathematics),
the Indian Vedic system has, however, been advocating the
decimal system, not on any apriori grounds or because of
partiality but solely on its intrinsic merits. Its unique achieve- Y
ments in this direction have been of a most thrillingly wonderful
i character ; and we have already—at the very commencement of
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

this illustrative volume—given a few startling sample-specins thereof. The student will doubtless remember that, at
me d of that chapter, we promised to go into fuller details of
ARUM at a later stage. In fulfilment of that promise, we
now pass on to a further exposition of the marvels of Vedic
mathematics in this direction.
Preliminary Note
We may begin this part of this work with a brief reference
to the well-known distinction between non-recurring decimals,
recurring ones and partly-recurring ones.
(1) A denominator containing only 2 or 5 as factors
gives us an ordinary (ie. non-recurring or non-circulating)
decimal fraction (each 2, 5 or 10 contributing оле significant
digit to the decimal). For instance,
^ hu n Цан Ys 021
d= 5 0125 иба ‘01 ; and во on.
(ii) Denominators containing only 3, 7, 11 or higher prime
numbers as factors (and not even a single 2 or 5) give us recurring
(or circulating) decimals which we shall deal with in detail in
this chapter and in some other later chapters too.
(iii) A denominator with factors partly of the former type
(i.e. 2 and 5) and partly of the latter type (ie. 3, 7, 9 eto.)
gives us a mixed (i.e. partly recurring and partly non-recurring)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(qnem EE SERE
decimal, (each 2, б or 10 contributing one non-recurring digit
to the decimal).
2-1 =0416; апа во оп
74 $Q8xg n
N.B. :—(i) Each 3 or 9 contributes only one recurring digit ; 11
gives 2 of them ; 7 gives 6 ; and other numbers make
their own individual contribution (details of which
will be explained later).
(ü) In every non-recurring decimal with the standard
numerator (ie. 1), it will be observed that the last
digit of the denominator and the last digit of the
equivalent decimal, multiplied together, will always
yield a product ending in zero; and
(ii) In every recurring decimal x with the standard
numerator (i.e. 1), it will be similarly observed that
9 will invariably be the last digit of the product of
the last digit of the denominator and the last digit
of its Recurring Decimal Equivalent (nay, the
product is actually a continuous series of NINES) !
E oe us to determine beforehand, the last digit of
Thus 3, in d ES Nico of à given vulgar fraction.
zy in 9; e xh FA E necessarily end in a rg in 12
this rule in the conversi 3 e Immense practical utility of
shape ha AU EE vulgar fractions into their decimal
pe has already been indicated in the first chapter and will
be expatiated on, furth :
› er ahead in thi : 2
quent chapters, his chapter and in subse
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

the case of 1 and its conversion 7)1 .0(.149857
ТА the vulgar fraction to the decimal shape. oe
| We note here : |
(i) that the successive remainders: are
3, 2, 6, 4, 5 and 1 and that, inasmuch as 1 is the 20
| original figure with which we started, the same 14
| remainders are bound to repeat themselves in 5
| the same. sequence (endlessly). And this is 56
| where we stop the division-process and put the 20
usual recurring marks (the dots on the first 35
and the last digits) in order to show that the
decimal has begun its characteristic (recurring) 49
character. 1
At this point, we may note that inasmuch as the first -
dividend 10 (when divided by 7) gives us the first remainder 3,
and, with a zero affixed to it, this 3 will (as 80) become our
second dividend and inasmuch as this process will be continuing
indefinitely (until.a remainder repeats itself and warns us that
the recurring decimal's recurring character has begun to manifest
itself, it stands to reason that there should be a uniform ratio
in actual action. In other words, because the first Dividend
| 10 gives us the first remainder 3 and the second dividend 30,
| therefore (Aanuriipyena i.e. according to the ratio in question
| or by simple rule of three), this second dividend 3 should
give us the second remainder 9! In fact, it is a “Geometrical
Progression” that we are dealing with !
And when we begin testing the successive remainders from
this standpoint, we note that the said inference (about the
Geometrical Progression with the common ratio 1 : 3) is correct
For, although, when we look for 3 х 3=9 as the second remainder,
we actually find 2 there instead, yet as 9 18 greater than 7 (the
divisor), it is but proper that, by further division of 9 by 7,
we. get 2 as the remainder. And then we observe that this
Second remainder (2) yields us the third remainder 6, and
thereby keeps up the Geometrical Progression (with the same
i СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Ee eee
ratio 1 : 3). In the same way, this 6 gives us 18 which (being
greater than the divisor and being divided by it) gives us 4 ag
the fourth remainder. And 4 gives us 12 which (after division
by 7) gives us 5 as the fifth remainder! And, by the same
ratio, this 5 gives us 15 which (when divided by 7) gives us 1
as the sixth Remainder. And as this was the dividend which
we began with, we stop the division-process. here !
The fun of the Geometrical Progression is no doubt
there ; but it is not for the mere fun 7)1 .0(G.P. 1, 3, 2, 6, 4, 5
of it, but also for the practical utility 7
of it, that we have called the TS
student’s attention to it. For, in the
actual result, it means that, once we know the ratio between
the first dividend and the first remainder (1 : 3 in the present
case), we can—without actual further division—automatically
put down all the remainders (by maintaining the 1 : 3 Geometrical Progression). For example, in the present case,
since the ratio is uniformly 1 : 3, therefore the second remainder
is 9 (which after deducting the divisor), we set down as 2;
and so on (until we reach 1). Thus our chart reads as follows :
Yes; but what do we gain by knowing the remainders
beforehand (without actual division)? The answer is that,
as soon as we get the first remainder, our whole work is practically over. For, since each remainder (with a zero affixed)
automatically becomes the next dividend, we can mentally do
this affixing at sight, mentally work out the division at each
step and put down the quotient automatically (without worrying
about the remainder)! For, the remainder is already there in
front of us!
Thus the remainders 1, 3, 2, 6, 4 and 5 give us (Dividend digits)
the successive dividends 10, 80, 20, 60, 40 and 1, 3, 2, 6, 4, 5
50 ; and, dividing these mentally, by 7, wecan 1 4 2 8 5 7
go forward or backward and obtain all the (Quotient-digits)
quotient-digits 1, 4, 2, 8, 5, and 7. And, as it
is a pure circulating decimal, our answer is 142857!
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

€ can
There is, however, & still more wonderful Vedic method by
which, without doing even this little division-work, we can put
down the quotient—digits automatically (forward or backward,
from any point whatsoever)! . The relevant Sütra hereon
gays: AMARA TAT (Sesdnyankena Сататета and means: The
Remainders by the last digit) :
As explained in another context (in the very first chapter
of this volume), the word by indicates that the operation is not
one of addition or of subtraction but of division and of
multiplication !
The division—process (whereby we affix a zero to 1, 3, 2 etc.,
divide the product by 7 and set down the quotient) has been
shown just above. We now show the reverse process of multiplication, which is easier still.
In so doing, we put down not the dividend—nucleus
digits but the remainders themselves in order : 8, 2, 6, 4, b, 1.
And, as we know from a previous paragraph that 7 is the
last digit, we multiply the above-given remainders by 7 and put
the last (i.e. the right-hand-most digit) down under each of the
remainders (totally ignoring the other digit or digits, if any,
of the product)! And lo! the answer is there in front of us
again, (really looking more like magic than like mathematics) !
Thus, (Remainders)
3 multiplied by 7 gives us 21 ;
and we put down only 1 ;
2 X 7 gives us 14 ; and we put down only 4 ;
6 X 7 gives us 42 ; and we put down only 2;
4X7 gives us 28 ; and we put down only 8;
5 X 7 gives us 35: and we put down only 5 ; and
lX"7givesus 7: and we put down 7.
Rud the answer is - 142857
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
(Quotient-digits)
ET

At this point, we may remind the student of a Very
important point which we have already ex- 7)1:0 (-142
plained in chapter I (regarding the conversion S 857
of Ту, Jy and 4 to their recurring decimal 30
shape). This is in connection with the facts 28
| that the two halves of these decimals together “өд
| total a series of NINES ; that, once half the 14
| ànswer is known, the other half can be had —
| by putting down the complements (from 56
| nine) of the digits already obtained: and — |
| i that, as the ending of the first half of the result Эн |
| synchronises with our’ reaching of the ` 25, |
| difference between the numerator and the 50 |
denominator as the remainder, we know when 49 |
exactly we should stop the division (or multi- . vy |
| plication, as the case may be) and begin the
| mechanical subtraction from 9 of the digits already found!
The student can easily realise how, inasmuch аз this
tule is applicable to every case (wherein DaN comes
up as a Remainder), it therefore means an automatic red
of even the little labour involved, by exactly one-half |
Going back to the original topic (те:
vulgar fractions into their equivalent decimal shape and how
the Geometrical Progressional ratio can give us beforehand—
without actual division—all the remainders that will come up
ш actual division), we now take Up yg as another illustrative
example and observe how the process works out therein:
(1) (i) 35 Here the successive Dividends— 18)1:00 (:076
uction
the conversion of
hucleus— digits are 1, 10, 9, 12, 3 and . 91 ( 923
„ 4. Affixing a zero to each of them · 90 999 |
and dividing the dividends by 13, 48: |
we get 0, 7, 6, 9, 2 and 3 ав the first Ч
digits of the quotient in the answer. 20
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
o н еее

чар
= SSS
(i) Or, secondly, re-arranging 13)1:00(6.Р. 1,10,9,12,9,4the remainders so as to 976 923
start from the first actual remainder, we have :
10, 9, 12, 3, 4 and 1. And multiplying these Бу
a(the last digit of the уау ло 9, 12, 3, 4, 1
answer in the present case), ^07 6923
we put down merely the
right—hand—most digit of each product; and these
are the successive quotient—digits! Here too, as
usual, we go forward or backward (or in any sequence
which we may choose) And the answer is :076923
(ii) And here too we observe, in operation, the rule about
complements from NINE! And it commences 076
from the point at which we obtain 12 (the differ- 928
ence between the Numerator and the deno- 999
minator) as the Remainder. E
(iv) In the above charts, we may avoid big numbers by
using a minus where a big number is threatened. Thus,
instead of taking 3 (as in the G.P. 1
case of 7), we may take —3 as
the common geometrical ratio and will find the
Geometrical Progression intact; and naturally the
remainder-digit Бу Ше ту 308 ED CD NES
last digit remains in- : :
tact too and gives us the same answer: ':076923!
We pass now on to still another and easier method which
comes under the Hkddhika Sutra which we have expounded
and explained at sufficient length already (in the first chapter)
and which therefore we need only summarise and supplement
here but need not elaborate again. :
' The Ekàdhika Sütra (which means Фу the preceding one
шоо Бу one’) has already been shown at work in а number `
Ways and in a number of directions and on a number of
00 х LI LJ . . Ыы Li
ын and will similarly come into operation still further,
таа н
By More ways and in many more contexts.
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

TT |
Numbers ending in Nine |
(i) If and when the last digit of the denominator is 9, we
know beforehand that the equivalent recurring decimal ends in 1.
(ii) In the case of ту, the last but one digit is 1; we increase
it by 1 and make it 2. In 4&4 we work with 2--1—3. In ṣẹ and
in 22;, we operate with 4 and 5 respectively and so on.
(ii) In the multiplication-process (by Ekādhika Pürva),
in all these cases, we put 1 down as the last digit (i.e. in the
right-hand-most place); and we go on multiplying that last
digit (1) from the right towards the left by 2, 3, 4 and 5 respectively ; and when there is more than one digit in that product, |
we set the last of those digits down there and carry the rest of it |
over to the next immediately preceding digit towards the left. |
(iv) When we get DuN аз the product, we know we have |
done half the work ; we stop the multiplication there ; and we |
mechanically. put down the remaining half of the answer (by |
merely taking down the complements from NINE). |
(v) The division-process (by Ekadhika Sütra) follows the |
same rules (vide Supra).
(1) We may first consider the fraction 2; as our first illustration of the method described : |
(i) Putting 1 as the last digit and continually multiplying i
by 2 towards the left, we get the last four digits (towards the
left) without the least difficulty.
(Ш) 8X2—16. Therefore put 6 down immediately to the
left of 8 (with 1 to carry over). 6X2+the 1 carried over—13.
Put the 3 to the left of the 6 (with 1 to carry over). 3x 2--1—7
Set it down before the 3 (with nothing to carry over) 7X2=
14. Therefore put the 4 before the 7 (with 1 to carry over)
4X2-+the 1 carried оуег--д, |
(Ш) We have thus got 9 digits by continual multiplication |
from the right towards the left, And now 9X2=18 (which is
D“ N). This means that half the work is over and that the
earlier 9 digits are obtainable by putting down the complements
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

NEC D
(from NINE) of the digits already determined. So, we have |
9) Let us now examine the case of iy:
Begin with 1 (as usual) at the extreme right end and go
on multiplying by 3 each time, "carrying over" the surplus
digit or digits (if any) to the left (i.e. to be added to the next
product to-be determined. Thus, when we have obtained 14
digits i.e.
Эн, find that we have reached 28 ; we know we have done half
the work; and we get the first 14 digits by simply subtracting
each of the above digits from NINE.
(3) Next let us take gg
Take 1 again at the extreme right end and continually
multiply by 4 from the right to the left. Thus, we have:
Note in this case that *.* 39 is a multiple of 3 and 13 and
not a prime number (like 19 and 29) and *. 3 and 13 give only
1 and 6 recurring decimals, there is a difference in its behaviour
— A e
ee
1.6. that the two halves are not complementary with regard to |
9 but only in relation to 6! In fact, D « N (i.e. 38) does not come 1
up at all as an interim product (as 18 and 28 did). And so, |
the question of complements from 9 does not arise at all; and
the decimal equivalent has only 6 figures (and not 38)!
only 6 recurring decimals in its decimal equivalent and because,
for reasons to be explained a little later, this decimal equivalent
of y is exactly divisible by 9, much more therefore is it divisible
by 3. And, consequently, when we divide it by 3 and exhaust -
| the six digits, we find that there is no remainder left. In other
Words, 5 has only 6 digits in its recurring decimal shape.
| These have been obtained by the self-same Ekadhika pro-
| 9655 88 served our purpose in the case of Ду and wy
The reason for this is very simple. As 3,— +3, as 4g has |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

57 We next take up and examine the case. of 3, which, besides
following the rules hereinabove explained, has the additional |
merit of giving us the clue to a still easier process for the conversion of vulgar fractions into their recurring decimal shape :
Алы T |
(i) If 2. we go on dividing 1 by 49 or 142857 by 7
(until the decimal begins to recur), we shall doubtless |
get our answer. But this will mean 42 steps of laborious working and is therefore undesirable. |
(ii) We therefore adopt either of the Ekddhika methods |
and go on multiplying from right to left by 5 or |
dividing from left to right by 5. |
(Ш) On completing 21 digits, we find 48 (i.e. D a N) coming
up and standing up before us; and we mechanically
put down the other 21 digits as usual (by the subtraction, from 9, of the digits already obtained). And
the answer is: САЯ
(iv) And this gives us the clue just above referred to about
a still easier method (than even the Ekádhika ones) for the conversion of vulgar fractions into recurring decimals, And it is
as follows :
By actual division (of 1 by 49), we 49)1:00( :20408
observe that the successive remainders 98
arein Geometrical Progression (with the | 200 |
common ratio 1 : 2) that the dividends are 196 |
similarly related and that each set of two |
digits in the quotient is also so related to , |
its predecessor. In other words, this connotes and implies that, 3
after putting down 02, we can automatically put down 04,
08, 16 and 32 and so on..
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

But when we reach. 64; we find that 2 х 64—128 i.e. has
3 digits. All that we have to do then. is to add the 1 of the
128 over to the 64 already there, turn it into 65 and then put
down not 28 but the remaining part of double the corrected
figure 65 (i.e. 30) and carry the process carefully on to the very
end (i.e. until the decimal starts to recur). We therefore have :
ан arisa cta а
This new method does not apply to all cases but only to
some special cases where the Denominator of the given. vulgar
fraction (or an integral multiple thereof) is very near a power
of ten and thus lends itself to this kind of treatment. In such
cases, however, it is the best procedure of all.
Note :—The rule of complements (from 9) is actually at work
in this case too; but, inasmuch as (for reasons to be
explained hereafter), the actual total number of digits
is 42, the first half of it ends with the 21st digit and as
we have been taking up a group of two digits at each
step, we naturally by-pass the 2186 digit (which is
concealed, so to speak, in the middle of the 11th
group). But, even then, the double-digit process is
so very simple that continuation thereof can present
no difficulty.
Other Endings
So far, we have considered only vulgar fractions whose
denominators end in 9. Let us now go on to and study the
cases of +, Js, 37, as and other such fractions (whose denominators end not in 9 but in 1, 3 or 7).
(i) Here too, we first make up our minds, at sight, as
regards the last digit of the decimal equivalent.
Thus, Denominators ending in 7, 3 and 1 must necessarily yield decimals ending in 7, 3 and 9 (so that the
product of the last digit of the denominator and the
last digit of the decimal equivalent may end in 9.)
Let us start with the case of x.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
r4

(ii) Put down 3 in the shape у t=
(iii) Take 5 (one more than 4) as the Hkddhika Pūrva
for the required multiplication or division (as the
case may be).
ace — aia Án
(iv) Thus start with 7 at the right end 857
(v) Multiply it by 5 and set down 35 as shown in the
marginal chart.
(vi) Multiply 5 by 5, add the 3 to the product and
set 28 down in the same way.
Now, 5X8+2=42. ButthatisDuN 142 | 857
Therefore put 142 down as the first 25
half (according to the complements
Or =v
The Ekádhika being 5, divide 7by5 142/857
and continue the division as usual 21 4 /
(with the same rule of procedure).
After getting the three quotient-digits 1, 4 and 2
you find 42 as the remainder before you. So tackle
the last 3 digits (according to the complements rule)
and вау:
(2) Let us now take the case of їз =$:
(i) The last digit is 3..the last digit 4076 /928 |
(in the answer) will be 3. 076/923 |
(li) The Ekadhika (multiplier or divisor) ів „4.
(iii) ан After 3 digits (whether Бу multipliction or
by division), 36 (Du N) comes up. So, the other
half is mechanically set down, And we say:
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

3) Next, let us take Ti г;
(i) The last digit is 1. The last digit JT.
(of the answer) will be 9.
(ii) The Ekadhika (in both ways) is 10.
(11) Immediately after the very first digit, we get 90
(which is 90% 9) before us. So, the complementsrule operates.
(iv) And, in either case, we get 2=:0/9
(4) 2555 (giving 7 as Ekddhika) and 3 as the last digit of the
answer. |
2. (By both methods, Multiplication and Division).
(5) тт=тї» (giving 12 as Ekadhika and 7 as the last digit)
2. By both the methods (multiplication and division).
we have:
The Code Language at Work.
Not only do the Vedic Sütras tell us how to do all this
by easy and rapid processes of mental arithmetic; but they
have also tabulated the results in the shape of special sub-Sütras
(containing merely illustrative specimens with a master-key
for “unlocking other portals" too). The abstruser details
(and the master-key) are not given here ; but a few sample-specimens are given of the way in which the code and the Ekanytina Sütra (explained in Chapter 2) can be utilised’ for the
Purpose of postulating mental one-line answers to the questions
m question. The three samples read as follows:
(1) 899: чт quam (Kevalaih Saptakam бил) ;
(2) +1 aaf: (Kalau Ksudrasasaih) : and
(3) si amagadi: (Kamse Ksamadaha-khalairmalath)
In the first; of these, Saptaka means ‘seven’ ; and Kevalath
Tepresents 143 ; and we are told that, in the case of seven, our
multiplicand should be 143!
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
t
peut

In the second, Kalau means 13 and Ksudrasasaih represents 077; and we are told that the multiplicand should be
In the third, Kamse means 17; and Ksama-daha-khalairmalaih means 05882353 ; and we are told that the multiplicand
should be this number of 8 digits!
Now, if we advert to the 'Ekanyüna" corollary of the |
Nikhilam chapter (on multiplication), we shall be able to
remind oursleves of the operation in question and the result
to be achieved thereby. Let us do the multiplications accordingly (as directed) and see what happens.
(1) In the case of 7 (as denominator), 143 x 999=142/857 ;
and lo! these are the six recurring decimal digits in the answer !
(2) In the case of 13, 077 x999—076/923 ; and these are the
six digits in the recurring decimal equivalent of ру! and
94117647 ; and these are the 16 recurring digits in the recurring decimal equivalent of 4!
In all the 3 cases we observe the Rule of Complements |
(from 9) at work. And the sub-Sütra merely gives us the |
necessary clue to the first half of the decimal and also a simple |
device (Ekamyünena) for arriving at the whole answer! And
all this is achieved with the help of the easy alphabet-code !
These results may therefore be formulated as follows:
And, Ьу CROSS-multiplication, we get from the above,
the following results :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
MS

(os)
And, just in passing, we may note that this is the reason
: Fike case of all these vulgar fractions, the last digit of
way;
ominator (9, 3, 7 or 1, as the case may be) gives, 1,3,7
ШО ын as the last digit of the equivalent recurring
or
decimal fraction !
The Remainder-Quotient Complements-Cycles.
We have already - again and again - noted the fact that,
in the various typical cases observed and analysed by us, the
two halves of the quotients (added together) give us a serles
of NINES. We shall now proceed a little bit further and try to
see if there be any such (or similar) rule governing the remainders,
For the purpose of the necessary experimentation and investigation, let us take up a more detailed consideration of the
remainders obtained in each case by successive divisions of
the numerator by the denominator; and let us start with 7.
We know the successive Remainders are 3, 2, 6, 4, 5 and
1. We know already that, on reaching 6 (Le. D ^N) as the
remainder, half the work has been completed and that the
complementary half is about to begin. Putting the d
above 6 figures, therefore, into two rows of three „
figures each, we have :
and we observe that each vertical column (of one digit тов Es
upper row and of one from the lower one) gives A Bol
us the same total (i.e. 7) ! SH CA
N.B. :—As our divisor is 7, it is but natural that no remainder
higher than 6 is permissible i.e. that the only possible
remainders are 1, 2, 3, 4; 5 and 6. (And these are the
ones we actually find).
Let us now take up the case of у; and note what happens.
The successive remainders are 10, 9, 12, 3, 4 and 1 (the highest
of which is 12). And when they are placed 10 9 12/3 4 1
in two rows, we find here too, that the last
ee remainders are complements—from 3-4 b
13—of the first three remainders. 13 13 13
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

EN Но.
In the case of р; the successive remainders are:
Ero КҮЗ ЛӘ Lh. 8. 12 1
The last 8 remainders are thus complements—from 17—of |
the first eight ones ! |
In the case of 19, the Remainders are: |
ШОШО Gees TI 15 17 18 |
ШАКИ ө АӨ 89 4-2 1
Here again the first nine remainders, when added
successively to the next nine, give 19 each time.
Thus, it is clear that, whereas the quotient-halves are
uniformly complements from nine, the remainder-halves are
complements from the individual divisor in each case. And
this further reduces our labour in making out a list of the Remainders.
Multiples of the Basic Fractions.
Thus far, we have dealt with vulgar fractions whose
numeratoris unity. But what about fractions which have some
other Numerator? Апа the answer is : “There are several `
simple and easy methods by which, with a tabulated list before
us of the results obtained by one or more of the processes above
expounded, or even independently, we can readily put down
the Recurring Decimal equivalents of the vulgar fractions of the
type just under discussion.
Let us, as usual, start with 2 and frame a chart as follows :
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

In this chart, we observe that, in all the “proper” fractions
having 7 as their Denominator, |
(i) The same six digits are found as in the case of 7;
(ii) they come up in the same sequence and in the same
direction as in the case of 1;
(iii) they, however, start from a different starting-point
but travel in “Cyclic” order (in what is well-known
as the ‘“‘Clock-wise” order).
(iv) and with the aid of these rules, one can very easily
obtain the recurring decimal equivalent of a vulgar
fraction whose numerator is higher than 1.
In fact, a person who is actually looking at a statement
(on a board, a piece of paper, a slate etc.,) to the effect that
1.149857, has several easy alternative processes to choose
from, for determining the decimal equivalents of all the other
five possible fractions having the same denominator (i.e. 7).
They are as follows:
The First Method.
1. The verious digits can. be numbered and marked
in ascending order of magnitude, thus:
(i) Unity being the least of (1) (3) (2) (6) (4) (5)
them, the cycle for} starts 1 4 2 8 5 7.
with one as its starting
point, travels in clock-wise cyclic order and reads :
(ii) 2 being the second, 2 starts with 2 апа gives us the
answer -285714 ;
(iii) There being no 3 at all, the third digit in ascending
order 18 4. ‚бо $ begins from 4 and reads: ©
(iv) The next digit (ie. the 4th) in ascending order
actually being 5, 4/7 begins with 5 and gives:
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Тэгтэл ee ell
і
й
(у) The fifth digit actually being 7, 5/7 commences with 7
and reads :
(vi) The 6th and last digit being 8, the sixth and last
fraction (ie. $) starts with 8 and says:
This is the first method.
Yes, but what about those cases in which the number of
decimal places is more than 10 and thus, in the tabulated answer
before us, some digits are found more than once?
Yes, it is perfectly true that, just as some digits are found
absent [as in the case of 7 (just seen)], there are other cases
where the same digits are found more than once. In fact, in
every case wherein the number of decimal places is more than
10, this is bound to happen ; and provision too there must be
against it. In fact, the remedy is very simple i.e. that, even
where digits occur more than once, there still are gradations ;
and, if these are taken into account, the cyclic order and the
ascending order of magnitude will still operate and serve their
purpose.
For example, in the case of 3, we have .05889...... at the
very Commencement ; and there are two eights before us. Yes,
but 88 is greater than 82; and therefore we should take 82 first
эш 88 afterwards and do our numbering accordingly :
ae Тт Starts with zero; y with 11; rr; with 17; үү with 23;
шоо od ; fr With 3; yẹ with 41; 17 With 47; үтү with 52; 19
= р ЙУ нү ; l 7 2
; and тт with 9. The arranging in ascending order of magnitude has, of course, to be done carefully and correctly. But it
must be admitted that, although the procedure of counting and
numbering is quite reasonable and scientifically correct, yet
10 18 rather cumbrous, clumsy and tiring. Hence the need for
other methods.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Yes; but what again about the cases wherein the number
f digits i the decimal equivalent is much less than the denoо
е vulgar fraction in question and has thus по
inator of th |
on p meeting all the possible demands ?
Yes, ру is such а case. The number of possible multiples
is 12; and the number of digits in the decimal equivalent is
only 6. (for 25=:076/923). What is the remedy ?
The remedial provision is that a multiple or two will do the
trick quite satisfactorily and neatly.
2, (By simple multiplication by 2),
And now, there are twelve digits in all; and these can
meet the needs of all the possible multiples.
The procedure is there and is quite correct. But, after all,
one must confess that, even with this device, this counting
and numbering procedure is still a cumbrous, clumsy and
tiring process. Hence, let us repeat, the need for other methods.
The Second Method
The second method is one wherein we avoid even this numbering and marking etc., and (in accordance with the Adyam
Adyena tule), multiply the opening digit or digits of the basic
decimal fraction (+ 142857 ) and determine, therefrom the starting
point for the multiple in question. Thus, :149857
КСЕ; starts with :14...... 2, 2 should start with :28 etc., and
(in clockwise cyclic order) give -285714;
7 Ought to start with ‘42 etc., and give 428571 :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

4 must start with '56; but there is no 56 but only -57
before us; and so (making allowance for a possible nay, the
actual—carrying over of a surplus digit from the right leftward),
we start with 57 and say: %='571428 ;
Similarly 5 should start with +70 ; but (for the same reason
as in the immediately preceding case), it actually starts with
"71 and gives us: -714285 ; and -§ should start with * 84,
actually starts with :85 and yields the answer: 857142!
This is the Second method.
The Third Method
The third process is very similar; but it bases itself not
on Adyam Adyena but on Antyam Antyena. In other words,
it deals not with the opening digit but with the closing one.
Thus,
7. 2 must end with 4 .. It is *285714
2. $ should end with 1 2, It is “498571
^ $ ought to end with 8 .. It is :571428
7. $ should end with 5 2, It is -714285
and .. $ must end with 2 .. It is :857142
This is the third method and the easiest and therefore
the best of the lot.
Independent method
The above described methods are all for the utilisation
of our knowledge of the decimal shape of a fraction whose numerator is unity, for deriving the corresponding decimal form
of any multiple of that fraction. This is all right, so far as
it goes. But what about a person who has not got such a readyto-hand table to refer to ? In such a case, should one newly
prepare the basic chart and then manipulate it—cyclically—
(in one of the ways just explained), for getting the required
result ?
That would, of course, be absurd. For use by such
persons, we have too, a totally independent method, by which,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

- mmm
without resorting to any such previously prepared (or newly
prepared) table, one can readily deal with the particular fraction
on hand! And the whole modus operandi is exactly the same
as has been already explained in respect of the basic fraction
and without the slightest difference or deviation in any particular
whatsoever therefrom.
For example, suppose you have to decimalise $. Your last
digit will be 1. and as $—21, your Ekddhika Pūrva will be
5. Now, go on dividing by 5, in the usual manner; and you get
the chart, as explained in the margin: $—21—- 4 2 8/571
After you get the first three digits 4, 2 and 8, you find that
your dividend is 28; but this is D aN (i.e. 49—21). So you
may stop here and put the last three quotient-digits down as
5, 7 and 1 (the complements, from nine, of the digits already
found). |
Or you may continue the division till you get 21 as the
dividend ; and as this was your starting-point, you may put
the 6 digits down as а ''Recurring" decimal.
Try this with үз, 12, ту and so on, with any number of
cases. And you will always find the same thing happening right
through all of them. Thus, for those who do not have a tabulated schedule before them, this absolutely independent method
is also there: and you can make full use of it.
Note :—1, In this independent method, it should also be noted
that if we have to decimalise 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc., we
have merely to divide 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 etc., by 7
and put down that remainder as the first remainder
in each particular case and that the work can be
done automatically thereafter.
2. or, we may pre-decide the last digit in each case by
taking the last digits of 7, (1) 4, (2) 1, (2) 8, 3(5),
(4) 2 as the last digits of the decimal equivalent of
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Recapitulation (and Supplementation)
Over and above the ones expounded and explained hereinabove, there are several other very instructive and interesting
principles, features and characteristics characterising this
question of the conversion of vulgar fractions into decimal
ones (in respect of the remainders, the quotients etc.). For
the benefit of the students, we propose now to recapitulate,
summarise, supplement and conclude this portion of the subject :
(1) As regards the remainders, we have noted that, as
| soon as Dv N comes up before us ав a remainder, the remaining
remainders are all complements—from the divisor (ie. the
denominator)—of the remainders already obtained ;
(2) This automatically means that the quotient—digits
already obtained and the quotient—digits still to be found,
are complements from Nine!
(3) If we take any remainder and multiply it by the
Caramünka (the last digit), the last digit of the product is
actually the quotient at that step. (The formula here is siwrfer
Ят mA (Sesani Arkena Caramena) which is therefore of
the utmost significance and practical utility in mathematical
computations. For instance,
(1) 7 The remainders are 3, 2, 6, 4, 5 and 1. Multiplied by |
7 (the Сатататћка) these remainders give successively |
т “эортэттртэээн
21, 14, 42, 28, 35 and 7. Ignoring the left-hand side
digits, we simply put down the last dight (Charamanka)
of each product; and lo! We get 1--:149857!
(2) 4 The remainders are 10, 9, 12, 3, 4 and 1. Multiplied
successively by 3 (the last digit), these remainders
give 30, 27, 36, 9, 12 and 3. Ignoring the previous
digits, we write down merely the Caramankas the
last digit) of each product; and lo! 435—-:079623 !
3, 13, 11, 8, 12 and 1. Multiplied by 7, they give us
successively :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
КЕЗЕНИНЕ: а И MERE bed NR LM s

66, 84 алд 7. Dropping the surplus (i.e. left-side)
digits and putting down only the Carmdnkas
(the right-hand most digits), we have
In fact, the position is so simple and clear that we need
not multiply the whole digit, write down the product and then
drop the surplus digit (or digits). We need only put down the
Charamanka (the right-hand-most digit) at the very outset
(as each step) and be done with it!
(4) The Geometrical-Progression = character of the
Remainders gives us a clue to the internal relationship between
each remainder (and its successor) (or its predecessor)! Thus,
as we know one remainder, we practically know all the rest of
them Thus,
In the case of +: As we know the first remainder is 3,
we can multiply any remainder by 3, cast out the sevens (if any)
and immediately spot out and announce the next Remainder.
3x3—9; 9—7—2; .. 2 is the second remainder
2x3=6. This is the third rdmainder.
As 6 is Do N, we may stop here and (by the rule of complements from the denominator), we may put down 4, 5 and 1 as
the remaining three remainders.
Or, if we overlook the D ^ N rule or prefer to go on with our
multiplication by 3 (the Geometrical ratio), we get:
6X3=18 ; 18—14—4.; and this is the 4th remainder.
4X3—12; 12—7=5; and this is the 5th remainder.
5X3=15; 15—14—1; and this is the 6th (and last)
Remainder.
We have thus obtained from the first remainder, all the
remainders :
And from these, by multiplication by the Caramdnka (7),
We get all the 6 quotient-digits (as explained above) :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

This is not all Instead of using the first remainder
(3) as our Geometrical Ratio, we may take the second one (9),
multiply each preceding group of 2 remainders by 2 and get
32, 64 and 51 (for, by casting out the sevens, 6X2—7=5 ; and
4X2—7—1). And multiplying these 6 digits by 7, we again get
the Caramünkas 1 4 2 8 5 7 (as before).
Or we may take help from the third remainder (i.e. 6),
multiply the preceding group of 3 remainders and get 3 2 6, 4 5 1
(for, by casting out the sevens, 3X 6—14—4 ; 2x6—7=5 ; and
6x6—35—1. And, multiplying these (same) 6 digits by 7,
we again obtain the Caramankas 142857 as before.
This procedure is, of course, equally applicable to the
fourth and fifth remainders (i.e. 4 and 5) and can get us the
same result as before. This is doubtless purely academical and
of no practical utility. But we are discussing a principle, nay
a universally operating mathematical law and must therefore:
demonstrate its actual universality of application.
So, if we take the 4th remainder (1.6. 4) and multiply the
preceding group of four remainders by 4, we again get 3264/51
and the only difference is that the first two digits are found to
have already started repeating themselves |
If we now take the 5th remainder (i.e. 5) and multiply the
preceding group of 5 remainders by 5, we again get 32645/1...
And, if we follow the same procedure with the 6th
remainder (i.e. 1) and multiply the group of preceding remainders
by 1, we will, of course, get the same preceding remainders over
again !
(5) In the case of 17, the first four remainders are:
10, 15, 14 and 4. Ав 418 a manageable multiplier, we may make
use of it as a convenient and suitable remainder for this purpose.
Let us therefore multiply the group of four Remainders (already
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
| AAA oo ШИЛ ӘР» ESS. E ла гэл Sue See

— ооо
found) by 4 and cast out the seventeens (wherever necessary),
And then we find :
4x4-16. But as Гр « №16, we can stop here and set
down all the other remainders by subtracting each of the above
digits from 17: 7, 2, 3, 13/11, 8, 12 and 1. And, multiplying
each of these 16 remainders (or rather their Caramdnkas i.e.
units digits) by 7, we get :
Still another method
Besides (1) the corollary-Sütra (2) each remainder x the
last digit method, (3) the Ekadhika process from right to left
and (4) the Ekadhika method from left to right, there is still
another method whereby we can utilise the Geometrical-Progression relationship and deduce the same result by a simple and
easy process. And it is this, namely, that as soon as we come
across а clear ratio between one remainder (or dividend) and
another, we can take that ratio for granted (as being of universal
application) and work it out all through. For example,
In the case of 19, we have 10 and 5 as the first two
remainders and we note that 5 is just one-half of ten. Keeping
this ratio in view, we can deduce that the next remainder should
be one-half of 5. But, as 5 is not exactly divisible by 2, we add
19 to it, make it 24 and put down its half (i.e. 12) as the next
by cw Aere and put down the remaining half of the remainders
p а from 19. Having thus got the remainders, we
s ply the Caramanikas by 1 (the last digit of the answer)
We get the quotient-digits automatically.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

dsl» uA ee dida aad a7 a oS Aat
N.B. :—The ratio in question may be noticed at any stage of the
work and made use of at any point thereof.
. In the case of jy, we have the remainders 10 and 15 at
the very start. We can make use of this ratio immediately
and throughout, with the proviso that, if and when a fractional
product is threatened, we can take the denominator (or as many
multiples thereof as may be necessary) for making the digit on
hand exactly divisible by the divisor on hand.
Thus, in the case of ту, we have the remainders 10 and
15 to start with (the ratio being 1 to 13). So, whenever one odd
number crops up, its successor will be fractional. And we
get over this difficulty in the way just explained.
And when we get a remainder which is numerically greater
than the divisor, we cast off the divisor and put down the remainder. Thus, ;
4 gives us 6; 6 gives us 9;
9(--17) gives us 39 i.e. 5; (5--17) gives us 33 ie. 16. And
there we can stop.
Number of Decimal Places
Students generally feel puzzled and non-plussed as to
how to know beforehand the number of decimal places which, on
division, the decimal equivalent of a given vulgar fraction
will actually consist of. In answer hereto, we must point out
that, having—in the immediately preceding sub-section on this
subject—made a detailed, analytical study of the successive
remainders, we have, in every case before us, practically a
tabulated statement from which (without actual division to the
very end) we can postulate beforehand all the forthcoming
remainders. And the tabulated statement has the further
merit that it can be prepared, at any time, at a moment’s
notice |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ВИТА j 5
урн ан UE г ——— — ыш

All this means, in effect, that,
(i) As soon as 1 (or other starting point) is reached (in
our mental analysis), we will have completed the whole
work of decimalisation and therefore know the actual
number of decimal places coming ahead. The cases
I ar te eU. have all proved this.
(ii) As soon as we reach the difference between the
numerator and denominator, we know we have done
half the work and that the other half is yet to come.
The cases of } etc. (which we have dealt with in
extenso) have proved this too.
(iii) As soon as we reach a fairly small and manageable
remainder (in our mental calculation), we know how
many more steps we should expect.
Let us again take the case of 1 by way of illustration.
The first remainder is 3; and used as a successive multiplier
(with the provision for the casting out of the sevens), that
first remainder—multiplier brings us on to 1.
When we have done two steps and got 1 and 4 as the
first two quotient-digits, we find 2 is the remainder. Multiplying the first group of two digits (14) by 2, we get 28 as the
second-group (with the remainder also doubled i.e. 2x92—4).
Multiplying 28 by 2, we get 28x 2—50 as the third group
and 4Х2--8 as the remainder. And then, by casting out
the sevens, we obtain 57 as the quotient-group and 1 as the
remainder! And as this was our starting-point, we stop further
computations and decide that 3, when decimalised, has 6
decimal places in the answer.
Going back to the case of pr, the student will remember
that, after 4 steps, we got.0588 ав the quotient-digits and 4 as
the remainder. Multiplying the former by the latter, we
obtained 2352 as the second quotient-group and 4х4=16;
as the remainder; and there we stopped, (because we had. the
first 8 digits on hand and knew the other 8 digits) Thus $y
Save us 16 digits.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(As a Geometrical series is of the standard form 1, r, г? and
so on, we are able to utilise 2 and 2? (in the case of 3), 4 and 42
(in the case of ду) and so on for helping us to pre-determine the
number of decimal places in the answer. This is the Algebraical
principle utilised herein.
Note :—1.
We need hardly point out that the Ekadhika method
has the supreme and superlative merit of lightening
our division (and multiplication) work. For instance, in the case of #5, gy etc., we have to do our
division-work, at stage after stage, by successive
division, nob by 19 or 29 etc., (the original denominator)-but by 2 or 3 etc. (the Ekadhika-pürva).
And this is the case with regard to every case i.e.
that we perform all our operations —in this system —
with much smaller divisors, multipliers etc., and
this rule is invariable. What a tremendous saving
in effort, labour, time and cost!
We have purposely treated this subject at great
length and in elaborate detail, because it is very
essential that the whole matter should be clearly
understood, thoroughly assimilated and closely
followed so that, even without the help of a teacher,
the student may be enabled to work out these
methods independently in other similar cases and
to know— with absolute certainty that ANY and
EVERY vulgar fraction can be readily tackled
and converted into the corresponding recurring
decimal (whatever may be the complexity thereof
and the number of decimal places therein) In
fact, in as much as these simple and easy processes
are available—and suitable—for ALL possible
denominators and for all possible numerators,
the decimal (and especially the recurring decimal)
should no longer be a bugbear to the student.
On the contrary, they should be the most welcome
of all weleome friends!
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Some Characteristic features (General and Special)
(1) In the cases of fractions with prime numbers (like 19,
99, 59 etc.,) as denominators, the maximum number of decimal
шүүлт 18 one less than the denominator! ‘This is self-evident
and requires по elaboration.
(2) Usually, it, or a sub-multiple thereof, is the actual
number.
(3) Generally, the rule of complements (from nine) is found
in operation amongst them.
(4) For fractions like d 25, oy etc., (where the denominator
are products of prime numbers), the number of digits depends
on the various respective factors in each case (as will be presently
elucidated).
(5) If and when the decimal-fraction obtained from one of
the factors of the denominator is exactly divisible by the other
factor (or factors), the division by the second factor leaves no
remainder. And therefore the number of decimals obtained
by the first factor is not added to! Thus,
Dans e
Here, the numerator on the R. H. S. being exactly
divisible by 3, it divides out and leaves no remainder. Therefore, the number of digits continues the same.
This means that, in every case wherein the complementary
halves (from nine) are found, the numerator on the В. Н. 8.
must necessarily be divisible by 3, 9 etc. And by multiplying
the denominator in such a case by such factors, we cause no
difference to the number of decimal places in the answer. And
consequently, we have :
de, 15878 ; and so on.
‚ Going back to the Ekanyūna Sitra (as explained in connection with the Sanskrit Alphabetical code), we know that
Boxen X13x33x37. This means that since
x 5 1 and 999, the multiplication of the Denominator (7)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

by anyone of these factors will make no difference to the
number of decimal places in the answer.
(ш) Ей [айз 3
Here too, all the above considerations apply. And, since
76923=77 х 999—332 X7 X11 X37, therefore these factors (and
combinations of factors) will, by multiplying the denominator,
make no difference to the number of decimal places. (Note.
and comes under the same category (with
22 digits in the answer (just like зу).
(7) dg is a special case and stands by itself. Naturally it
should have been expected to provide for 48 places. But,
as a matter of fact, it gives only 42; and for a perfectly valid
and cogent reason ie. that, out of the 48 possible multiples,
six (ie. 2, 14, 21, 28, 85 and 42) go into a different family, as
it were and take shape as +, 2, 2, 7, 5 and $; have their places
there as ‘142857, ‘285714 and so forth and need no place in the
dy etc., group! And thus, since 6 go out of the 48, the remaining
42 account for the 42 places actually found in the decimal
equivalent of 2.1 This is not a poet’s mere poetic phantasy but
a veritable mathematical verity !
(8) 45 is, in a way, an exception, as it contains only 13
digits. And, as this is an odd number, the question of the two
complementary halves does not arise! 13, however, is a submultiple of 78; and there is no deviation from the normal in
this respect. An at-sight-one-line mental method will soon be
given for 44 (in this very chapter).
(9) Similarly 4 has 44 digits and thus conforms to the submultiple rule. And this implies that, like jg, it will need another
complete turn of the wheel (in one of its multiples) in order to
meet the needs of all the multiples! (An incredibly easy method
will be shown in this very chapter for reeling off the answer m
this case).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ше
(10) gg has only two recurring places (01) ; but the whole
gamut can be and has been provided for, therewith.
(11) In the case of basic fractions ending in 3, the denominator is first multiplied by 3 and gives us the Ekddhika, and the
last digit in the answer is also 3.
(12) gy (like gy) has only two decimal places (-03).
(13) dg has only 21 digits. 21 is а sub-multiple of 42 but is
odd and gives no scope for the complementary halves.
(14) dg has only 13 digits (a sub-multiple but odd)
(15) dg has only 41 digits (similarly).
(16) 4g is special. Since 73X137=10001 and since
—'0136/9863 (by Ekanyüma Sütra)
(18) 25 will be discussed a little ldter.
(19) In the case of fractions whose denominators end in
(17) And, conversely,
‚ 7, the last digit is also 7 ; and the Hkadhika is obtained from the
denominator multiplied by 7.
(20) + and 4& have been dealt with in detail already.
(21) 5, and уу are special (because 27X37=999). And
their decimal forms are. `037 and 1097.
(22) ay has 46 digits.
(23) = 1 and has only 18 digits.
(24) y has 33 digits (odd)
(25) 3, has been discussed already (number i)
(26) 3,— 1 and has 28 digits.
(27) J has its full quota of 96 digits.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(28) In the case of fractions with denominators ending in
1, the Ekadhika comes from the denominator multiplied by 9:
and the last digit is 9. ©
(30) = pus and has been discussed under 7.
(31) 4, will come up a little later.
ОООО 7.7.
(34) gu and has 16 digits.
(35) gy has 60 digits.
(36) Z4 has 35 digits (odd)
097 : . (a very interesting
(87) сэн гэгчийг
number).
(88) = 1 and has already been discussed under 7 and
ЁОЛ Х7 under 13. And besides,
But
But here a big BUT butts in and exclaims: “Yes; all
this is all right in its own way and so far as it goes. But, as
our denominators go on increasing, we note that, although the
last digit of the decimal fraction is 1,3,7 or at the most 9 and
no more, yet, the Eküdhika Pūrva goes on increasing steadily
all the time and we have to multiply or divide successively by
bigger and bigger Eküdhikas, until, at last, with only two-digit
denominators like 61, 71 and 81 and so on, we have now to deal
with 55, 64, 73 etc., as our multipliers and divisors, and
surely this is not such an easy process.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar `

The objection is unobjectionable; nay, it is perfectly
But we meet it with quite a variety of sound and
correct. 2
which will be found very cogent and reasonable.
valid answers
They are as follows :
(i) Even the biggest of our Ekädhikas are nowhere —in respect of bigness—near the original divisor. In every case,
they are smaller. But this is only a theoretical and dialectical
answer from the comparative standpoint and does not really
meet the intrinsic objection (about the Vedic methods being not
‘only relatively better but also being free from all such flaws
altogether) ! We therefore go on and give a satisfactory
answer from the positive and constructive stand-point.
(ii) Even though the Ekadhika is found to be increasingly
unmanageably big, yet the remainders give us a simple and
easy device for getting over this difficulty. This we shall
demonstrate presently. :
(iii) The Ekdadhika (so far explained and applied) is not
the whole armoury. There are other Auxiliaries too, wherein
no such difficulty can crop up. These we shall expound and
explain in a subsequent, but sufficiently near chapter of this
very volume; and they will be found capable of solving the
problem in toto; and
(iv) Above all, there is the CROWNING СЕМ of all
coming up in a near chapter and unfolding before our eyes a
formula whereby, however big the denominator may be, we
can—by mere mental one-line Vedic arithmetic—read off
the quotient and the remainder, digit by digit! This process
of “Straight Division”, we have already referred to and shall
explain and demonstrate, in a later chapter, under this very
caption “Straight (or Instantaneous) Division".
i In the meantime, just now, we take up and explain the way
ш Which the remainders come to our rescue and solve this
Particular problem for us.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar —

Let us take first, the cae of jg. We know immediately
that the last digit of the decimal is 3 and that the Елада
is 7. And then we work as follows:
(i) Multiplying digit after digit (as usual) by 7, we have :
or (ii) dividing digit by digit (as usual) by 7, we have:
These are the usual Hkddhika Pūrva methods. But
(11) we observe in the first chart, after two digits (1 & 3
have been obtained), the next leftward group (39)
is exactly three times (the extreme-right-end one)
and we can immediately profit by it. Thus 39 gives
us 117, out of which we put down 17 and keep 1 to
carry over;' l7 gives us 51+1==52. 52 gives us 156,
out of which we set down 56 and keep 1 to carry over.
56 gives us 168+1=169. of these, we put 69 down
and keep 1 to be carried over; and so on. In fact,
the whole procedure is exactly like the one which
we followed from left to right in respect of 4,
or(iv) if we wish to start from the left end, go on to the
right, that too is easy enough.
We note that, the first digits being completed, we get
8 as the Remainder. We can immediately work out this
process by multiplying each two-digit group by 8 (as we did in
the case of ду by 2) and frame the following chart:
EDU: EROS
These multiplications by 3 to the left and by 8 to the right
are easy enough. Aren't they ?
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Let us now take up and try +y (as promised at an earlier
stage). Obviously, the last digit is 7 and the Ekadhika is 33.
This is rather unwieldy as a multiplier or as divisor. We should
therefore try and see what we can get from the Remainders.
We find them to be 10, 6 eto. ` We can immediately pounce up
on this 6 for our purpose and work in this way:
-02 being the first two digits of the quotient and 6 being
our ratio, the next two digits are obviously 12. These X 6 should
give us 72 ; but as 4 will be coming over from the right, we add
the 4 and put down 76. This should give us 456, of which the
first digit has already been taken over to the left. So 56 remains.
But this will be increased by 3 (coming from the right) and will
become 59—This gives us 57, 44 and 68 for the next three 2digit groups and 08 for the one thereafter. The 08 group of
two digits gives us 48 which, with the carried digit becomes 51.
This gives us 06 and 36 (which becomes 38). And then we have
28 (turning into 29, then 74 which becomes 78) and so forth.
Here we notice that, exactly after 23 digits, the complements (from nine) have begun. So, we can complete the second
ET We have thus avoided the complicated divisions by the
orginal divisor 47 and also the divisions and multiplications
by the unmanageable Hhadhika 33 ; and, with the easy remainder
6 as our multiplier, we have been able to obtain all the 46 digits
of the answer !
This merely shows that these are not cut-and-dried
mechanical processes but only rules capable of being applied
to the special kind of cases which they are particularly designed
to meet and fit into.
And, as for a cut-and-dried formula capable of universal
application, that too is forthcoming (as already indicated) and
Will be dealt with, Very soon. CON
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Let us now take up ү which, a little earlier, we promised
` to deal with soon afterwards. In this case, the last digit is 9:
and the Eküdhika is 28 (which is nearly as big as the original
denominator itself)! “We should therefore sift the remainders
and find a suitable auxiliary therefrom.
In this.case, we find 7 is the first significant remainder.
So, leaving the Ekadhika process out of account for the moment,
we may use the Geometrical Progression principle and achieve
our purpose thereby (as we did-with 6-in the case of #7). But let
us proceed further and see whether a still more easily manageable
remainder is available further up.
Well; we observe:
= ' 032258 (with remainder 2). The actual remainders
This suits us most admirably, and we proceed further
with the help of 2. Thus:
But this means that, after only 15 digits (an odd number),
the decimal has already begun to recur! So, we simply say :
What a simple and easy device!
Let us now take up Фу. Тһе last digit is 7; but the
Ekadhika will be 68! So, we seek help from the Remainders.
They are: 10, 3 etc., and the quotient-digits are ‘0103...
So, multiplying each quotient-group (of 2 digits each)
by 3 (as we did, by 2, in the case of #5), we get:
83 etc. etc!
Let us take one more example (i.e. 54.7) and conclude. The
last digit is 7; but the Lkadhika wil be 698! It will surely
not be an enviable task for even the most practised and experienced statistician to multiply or divide, at each step, by
such a big figure! We therefore again seek help from the
remainders and the Geometrical Progression Rule.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

> OM!
The Quotient-digits are '001 etc., and the successive
remainders are 10, 100, 3 etc. ! This means that we should
multiply each group of three quotient-digits by 3 and get our
answer (to any number of decimal-places). We thus have:
Jud А : : : : ED
732 etc. etc.
The Converse operation.
Having dealt, in extenso, with the conversion of vulgar
fractions into their equivalent recurring decimals, we now
take up the CONVERSE process i.e. the conversion of decimals
into the equivalent vulgar fractions. We do not, however,
propose to go into such a detailed and exhaustive analytical
study thereof (as we have done in the other case) but only to
point out and explain ome particular principle, which will be
found very useful in this particular operation and in many
subsequent ones.
The principle is based on the simple proposition that
infivitum. It therefore follows that all recurring decimals whose
digits are all nines are ipso facto equal to unity ; and if a given
decimal can be multiplied by a multiplier in such а manner as
to produce a product consisting of only mines as its digits, the
operation desired becomes automatically complete.
For instance, let us first start with the now familiar decimal *076923. In order to get 9 asthe 076923
last digit, we should multiply this by 3. 2:
Setting this product down (230769), 230769
we find that, in order to get 9 as the 01769293
penultimate digit, we should add 3 to
the 6 already there. And, im, order
to get that 3, we should multiply the given multiplicand by 1.
On doing this, we find that the totals (of the two rows) are all
nines!" So we stop there and argue that, because the given
decimal x13—999999 (ie. 1), therefore the fraction should
be wy. In fact, it is like saying 18х-41 .. X— 4s
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ТЭД

(2) Secondly, let us take the case of -037 and see how this
works. Here as the last digit is 7, 50, in order to get 9 ag
the last digit of the product, we should multiply -087
it by 7. And, putting 259 down, we should add 4 27
to obtain 9 as the penultimate digit. And, in order оро
to get that 4 there, we should multiply the multi- 074
plicand by 2. And, on doing во, we find that the na es
product is -999 (=1). Therefore, the fraction 999-1
(3) When we try the case of 142857 ; we find that multiplication by 7 gives us the ше product. 999999 (—1) ; and
therefore we say 149857—
(4) 047619. We first ee byl 1, seel 047619
in the penultimate place, have to add 8 thereto, _ 21
multiply by 2 (for getting that 8) and thus fnd 947619
3 18 1 à SUUM ARR ue
that the required answer 18 ут :099999—1
(5) Similarly, we may take up various other decimals
(including the long big ones like the equivalents of Jy, 35, a's,
ds, itt vr vo ws, d; te, and invariably we find our
purpose achieved.
(6) But, what about decimals ending in even numbers or
5% Well; no integral multiplier can possibly get us 9 as the last
digit in the product. And what we do in such a case is to divide
off by the powers of 2 and 5 involved and use this new method
with the final quotient thus obtained. Thus, if we have to
deal with 285714 we divide it off by 2, get “142857 -2)-285714
as the quotient and find that multiplication thereof 142857
by 7 gives us the product :999999—1. And therefore we вау:
(7) Let us now try the interesting .919345679
decimal. 012345679. On applying this new 81
method, we find that multiplication by 81 (012345679
gives us 1 as the product .. х= gy 28:9/7:884:8:2--
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

o
MB 1. The student should also make use of the Ekanyüna
formula. This is readily applicable in every case
of “Complementary halves" (including 7, үз, үт, ту
etc.
| imi ) ‚115999, = 32 Cand KOKON
Nau f
| 2. Similarly, with regard to other factors too, it goes
| without saying that the removal, in general, of
common factors (from the decimal and the denominator) facilitates and expedites the work.
3. The subsequent chapters on “AUXILIARY FRACTIONS” and “DIVISIBILITY” etc., will expound
| and explain certain very simple and easy processes
| by which this work (of arithmetical factorisation)
can be rendered splendidly simple and easy ; and
4. Above all, the forthcoming “Straight Division”
method will not merely render the whole thing simple
| and easy but also turn it into a pleasure and a
delight (even to the children).
Some Salient Points and Additional Traits.
| Thus, the Ekddhika process (forwards and backwards)
| and the Geometrical Progression relationship between the
remainders have given us the following three main principles :
(i) The quotient-complements (from 9); -
(ii) The remainder-complements (from the Denominator) ;
| & (iii) The multiplication of the Caramánka (last digit) of
| the remainders by the Caramdnka (the last digit) of
| the decimal, for obtaining each digit of the quotient.
| Now. apropos of and in connection with this fact,
the following few important and additional traits
| should also be observed and will be found interesting
and helpful :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(1) In the case of ṣẹ, the remainders are (1), 10, 5, 12, в,
(i) Each remainder by itself, if even; and with the
addition of the denominator, if odd, is double the next
remainder. This follows from the Ekddhika being 2.
(1) Each quotient-digit is the last digit of its corresponding remainder. This is because l is the last
digit of the decimal.
(2) In the case ofgs, the remainders are: (1) 10, 13, 14,
(i) The quotient-digits are the last digits thereof (for
the same reason as above)
(ii) Hach remainder (by itself or in conjunction with the
denominator or double of it) —thrice its successor ; and
(ui Each remainder plus its successor’s successor—the
next remainder thereafter. Thus 10+14=24; 13+
~ N.B. Note the casting off of the denominator all through.
(3) In the case of 4, the quotient-digits ате:
1. (Note the Ratio 9: 1.)
The remarkaole thing here is that the numerator--the |
first remainder—the second remainder and that all through, |
the sum of any two consecutive remainders is the next remainder |
so on to the very end. : Г
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

к
The general form herefor is a, d, a+d, a+2d, 2a+3d,
| 3a+5d, 5а--84 etc. The student who knows this secret relation-
| (between each remainder and its successor) can reel the
hi b
A. f the answer off, at sight, by simple addition !
44 digits О
(4) In the case of 44, the remainders ате:
The general form herefor is a, d,a-+2d, 2а--54 etc. Knowledge of this relationship will be of splendid practical utility in
this case. (Note the Ratio 8: 1.)
(5) In the case of gg the remainders ате:
The general form herefor is obviously a, d, a--3d, 3a--10 d,
10a-+33d etc.
(6) In the case of 59, the remainders ате:
\ Here Ње general form is a, d, a+4d, 4a--17d etc.
Inductive conclusion
Having thus examined the cases of 5, py, gy and уу, we
| note the following :
| (i) In every case, we start with 1 (the basic numerator)
| as а sort of pre-natal remainder (which is perfectly
| justified because we are dealing with a recurring
| decimal) ; and we call it a;
| (ii) In every case, the first actual remainder is 10; and
we call it d; |
| (ili) And then the successive remainders are a, d, a+d,
| 8--24, a+3d, a+4d respectively (wherein the co-
| efficient of xis obviously the deficit of the penultimate
digit from 9! ; |
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Thus for jy, we have a+1d;
for фу, we have a+2d ;
for gg, we have a+3d ;
for ұу, we have a+4d; and so on.
(iv) And this relationship is maintained systematically
all through. In other words, each remainder--the
next one or double that or thrice that etc.—the further
subsequent remainder. Arguing thus, let us try yẹ
As 3 is 6 less than 9, .. the general form should
3, 30 (i.e. 4) and 27 (16. 1). And we find this to be
actually correct.
(v) And, in case the penultimate digit is more than 9,
we should react by subtracting d (and not add to it)
at the rate of 1 for each surplus. Thus, our chart will
now read-a, d, a—d, d- (a—d) i.e. 2d—a, and so on.
For instance, for +4, the remainders will be (1) 10,
(vi) And, over and above all these details which are
different for different numbers (as explained above),
there is one multiplier (namely 10) which is applicable
to all cases! And thus, whatever fraction we may
be dealing with, 2, 4, 5, 8 or any remainder whatsoever can be sately put in into the next place with
a zero added! The student will observe that, in
all the examples dealt with hereinabove (not only
in this particular subsection), every such remainder
of two digits (ending in zero) has been invariably
preceded by the same number (without the zero)!
With the help of this rule applicable in all cases and the
special rules (about d, 2d, 3d, 4d etc.,) enjoined for the different
individual cases, the student should easily now be in а position
to make a list of the successive remainders in each case and
therefrom, by Caramünka multiplication, put down the successive quotient-digits without further special labour!
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
к, лу т ЫН we ENERO ea I

| These and many more interesting features there are in
| the Vedic decimal system, which can turn mathematics for the
| children, from its present excruciatingly painful character to
| the exhilaratingly pleasant and even funny and delightful
character it really bears !
We have, however, already gone into very great details ;
and this chapter has already become very long. We therefore
conclude this chapter here and hold the other things over for
a later stage in the student’s progress.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER ХХУП
STRAIGHT DIVISION
We now go on, at last, to the long-promised Vedic process
of STRAIGHT (AT-SIGHT) DIVISION which is a simple and
easy application of the URDH VA-TIRYAK Sitra which is
| capable of immediate application to all cases and which we have
repeatedly been describing as the “CROWNING GEM of ай”
for the very simple reason that over and above the universality
of its application, it is the most supreme and superlative manifestation of the Vedic ideal of the at-sight mental-one-line
method of mathematical computation.
Connecting Link
In order to obtain a correct idea of the background, let |
us go back, very briefly, for a very short while, to the methods
which we employed in the earlier chapters on division ; and Jet
us start with the case of 25°82.
According to the first method According to the second |
(under the Nikhilam etc., Sūtra) ^ method (by Pardvartya for- !
our chart will read ав follows : mula), we say:
:and R —0 aum oles 29- 949": |
.. We have felt, and still feel, that even these comparatively |
Short, intellectual and interesting methods are cumbrous and
clumsy (from the Idealistic Vedic standpoint). And hence the
clamant need for a method which is free from all such flaws and
? СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |
СНР DERIT |

T
which fulfils the highest Idealistic ideal of the Vedic Sütras.
y And that is as follows : 8:88 92822
Out of the divisor 73, we put down И: За 2
only the first digit (i.e. 7) in the Divisor- = БОЗОЙ (рс
column and put the other digit (i.e. 3) “оп
top of the flag” (by the Dhvajanka Sütra), as shown in the
chart alongside. |
The entire division is to be by 7; and the procedure is
as explained below :
As one digit has been put on top, we allot one place (at
the right end of the dividend) to the remainder portion of the
answer and mark it off from the digits by а vertical line.
(i) We divide 38 by 7 and get 5, as the quotient and 3 as
the remainder. We put 5 down as the first quotientdigit and just prefix the remainder (3) up before the
9 of the dividend. In other words, our actual secondstep Gross Dividend is 39. From this, we, however,
deduet the product of the indexed 3 and the first
quotient-dight 5 (16. 3х5=15). The remainder
(24) is our actual Nett-Dividend. It is then divided
by 7 and gives us 8 as the second quotient-digit and
3 as the remainder, to be placed in their respective
places (as was done in the first step). From 38 (the
gross dividend thus formed), we subtract 3 хе
second quotient-digit 3 i.e. 9, get the remainder 29 as
our next actual dividend and divide that by 7. We
get 4 as the quotient and 1 as the remainder. This
means our next Gross Dividend is 12 from which,
as before, we deduct 3xthe third quotient-digit 4
(Le. 12) and obtain 0 as the remainder. Thus we
Say: Q is 534 and R is zero. And this finishes
the whole procedure ; and all of it is one-line mental
Arithmetic (in which all the actual Division is done
by the simple-digit Divisor 7)!
The Algebraical Proof hereof is very simple and is based
je de very elementary fact that all arithmetical numbers are
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

merely Algebraical expressions wherein x stands for ten. For |
instance, 3x24-5x--1 is merely the algebraical general expression
of which (with x standing for 10) the arithmetical value is 351.
Remembering this, let us try to understand the steps by
means of which 3 8 9 8 2 is sought to be divided by 73. Algebraically put (with x standing for 10), this dividend is 38x84
9х2--8х--2: and this divisor is 7x+3. Now, let us proceed
with the division in the usual manner.
divide 38x? by 7x, our 35x?--15x*
first quotient-digit is 3x3— 6x?
5x2; and, in the first —94x3-L8x
step of the multiph- 21x?-LOx
eation of the divisor Sgn
by 5x?, we get the 3x —x
and this gives us tbe саа |
remainder 3x°+9x2— x—10
l5x?, which really 10100
—24x?. This plus 8x being our second-step dividend, we
multiply the divisor by the second quotient-digit Зх and subtract
the product 21х2--9х therefrom and thus get 3x2—x as the
remainder. But this 3x? is really equal to 30x which (with
—x-F2) gives us 29х--2 as the last-step dividend. Again
multiplying the divisor by 4, we get the product 28x--12;
and subtract this 28x--12, thereby getting x —10 as the Remainder. But x being 10, this remainder vanishes! And there |
you have the whole thing in а nut-shell.
It will be noted that the arithmetical example just hereabove dealt with (ie. 88982) is merely the arithmetical form of
38x?-F9x?--8x--2 and the Arithmetical chart has merely
7x+3 shown the above given algebraical operation in its arithmetical shape (wherein 3:38 9 8: 2
Х--10) and that, whenever the algebraical 7 :: буд i)
working has taken a remainder-digit ND 3 c0
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ver to the right with a zero added, the arithmetical chart
owe that particular remainder prefixed to the dight already
thereThus, where 3x? has been counted as 30x? and added to the
9x? already there and produced 39x? as the result, this algebraical ,
operation has been graphically pictured as the prefixing of
3 to 9 and making it 39! And similarly, in the next step
of the division, the remainder 3 is prefixed to the 8 already
there; and we have to deal with 38; and similarly, at least,
the 1 prefixed to the 2 gives us 12 (which the 3x4 subtracted
therefrom cancels out) !
In other words, the given expression 88х8--9х2--8х--2
(with 10 substituted for x) is actually the same as 85х2--36х2--
37x+12. And we say:
7x-+3 EE
graphically, this algebraical operation 3:38 9 8: 2
is demonstrated arithmetically in the 7 : 8238 : 1
manner shown in the margin. { :
The procedure is very simple and needs no further exposition and explanation. A few more illustrative instances
(with running comments, as usual) will however, be found useful
and helpful and are therefore given below:
(1) Divide 529 by 23. 8з D АЕО
The procedure is exactly the same 201001 :0
and is simple and easy. | : 2 3: 0
ERIS НӨ аап SG
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(4) Divide 7632 by 94
(ü) New Nikhilam method or (1) Newest Vedic method
ӨРТ КӨ 3^2 : ДО Oo ОЕ: |
er) ЗЕРТ"
(B) Divide 601325 by 776.
Here, in the first division by 7, wecan ,'; Mab o
put 8 down as the first quotient-digit; . " 7 7 77
but the remainder then left will be 287707 [L9 113
too small for the subtraction expected
at the next step. So, we take 7 as the quotient-digit and prefix
the remainder 11 to the next dividend-digit. [N.B. For
purposes of reference and verification, it will be a good plan to
underline such a quotient-digit (because the chart offers itself
for verification at every step and any reconsideration necessary
at any stage need not involve our going back to the beginning
and starting the whole thing over again)]
uoa o АЫ: :
Note—In algebraic terminology, (8100--3х8--х2--
2х34-9х2--8х--20 and the above example is the arithmetical
way of stating that 2х3--9х2у 8ху2--20у3—(9х--5у) (х2--2ху
(7) Similar is the case with regard to the division cf
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ERE DD =

1 . Sepp Cas Баг ENE eyed |
"dcus Bs OT: ы ош Gr) а
EN Bar A ГЫ
places of decimals) places of decimals)
934-29! УВОТО
(16) Divide 220 by 52 (to 3 (17) Divide 7:3 by 53 (to 5
places of decimals) places of decimals)
ыб ый се, 7.1 c (a8. sic A
^ (18) Divide 71 by 83 (to 5 places of decimals)
0.85 O ATPT:
(i) By the New Nikhilam (ii) By the newest Vedic
method method |
OS ӨГ ie Tike ОзУ 135 4 лг
О ee с orm : mus 69:12
peer eA засни eu MEE ТӘ
! Se II
Ї
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

E.
1: 16 8 1: N.B.:—The Algebraical form is : |
eee x“+8x |
ае OVI :
or in Algebraical form :
(22) Divide 7458 by 127 (to (23) Divide 3517 by 127 (to 3
3 places of decimals) places of decimals)
Here, the Divisor is of
3 digits. All the difference з 122 х 22
which this makes to us is Me AS and
that, instead of putting one :85 4 4 383 R=273
extra digit on top, we put
both the extra digits (23) there; and we adopt a slightly
different modus operandi (on the ÜRDHVA-TIRYAK lines)
in respect of the subtraction- portion of the work. 00 |
In this instance, for instance, we divide 70 by 8 and set |
8 and 6 down in their proper places as usual. Thus, our second |
Gross Dividend is now 63. From that, we subtract 16 (the
product of the first of the flag-digits i.e. 2 and the first quotient
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

digit i.e. 8) and get the remainder (63—16—47) as the actual
dividend. And, dividing it by 8, we have 5 and 7 as Q and R
respectively and put them down at their proper places. So
now, our Gross Dividend is 71; and we deduct, by the UrdhvaTiryak rule, the cross-products of the two flag-digits (23) and
the two quotient-digits (85) i.e. 10-+24=84 ; and our remainder
is 71—34—37. We then continue to divide again by 8 and
subtract etc., in the same manner (by cross-multiplication)
as (just now explained) by the Ordhva-Tiryak method (until
the last digit of the dividend) is reached. And that finishes the
task.
And, in other divisions too, irrespective of the number
of digits in the divisor, we follow the same method. And, in
every case, our actual divisor is of one digit only (or at the most,
a small two-digit one (like 12, 16 and so on) which one can
easily divide by)! And all the rest of the digits (of the divisor)
are hoisted on the flag-top. And this is the whole secret of the
“Straight Division” formula.
Note :—If instead of the decimal places in the Quotient, you
want the remainder, you can have it in the usual way.
In this case, 23 and 44 (by cross-multiplication) give
us 20, which (when taken to the right) means 200; and
3х4 (the last flag-digit x the last obtained quotientdigit)=.12. Subtracting the total of these two
Some more instances (of division by three-digit divisions
ёс.) are cited below :
4 places of decimals) 3 places of decimals)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(3) Divide 888 by 672 (to 3 places of decimals)
or by mere Vilokanam (Inspection)
ЕЭ Бет 9: ЗӨ КОБ В Бл Т 9
(i) By the new Pardvartya (ii) By the new Paràvartya
method (Vinculum) method:
mum Таа 3 DOSES Т. 4.3:
: 7 :—1054 : = s Pr НРЕННРА
(14) By the newest Vedic method
BED CE 0
places of Decimals) 3 places of decimals)
Geo ol $S.l-U iu ale jo. 4 5
places of decimals) (to 3 places of decimals)
SEA A 0. ке Ву гу
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

3 places ot decimals).
Ape о О O° 9
SOS be ec. 91
| ЕБ О?»
Еа d MH ie
i.e. Q—59 and R=1538
or
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(21) Divide 50x 11 by 439 (to three places of decimals).
des GENE — And=182
SI AIO. -: SOLIS 415:
(22) Divide 1561 by 349 (to three places of Decimals).
(23) Divide 47 by 798 (to five places of decimals).
зо It : or
Е 8 : By mere Vilokanam (Inspection)
We now extend the jurisdiction of the Sūtra and apply
it to Divisors consisting of a large number of digits. The
principle involved being the same, the procedure 18 also
identically the same as in the foregoing examples. And the
division by a single digit (or a small two-digit divisor) continues
exactly the same. A few illustrative instances are given
hereunder :
(to 5 decimal places). 123:9 5: 3 1 1
Se wee сэлж pey эв
і, СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ji

ÉD .
: ped
Oye aces. ЇЙ УРАН R—16311—4647—11664
дез hes R=27300—40—1
(8) Divide 187 294 by 5749 (to 6 places of decimals).
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

гү oe жалаа ЕЕЕ гэ ” ий - — €
(9) Divide 53 247 by 4999 (to five places of decimals), — |
ПАТ DA Noct ea N.B. Better to
ОСБ Е ТЬ 8:22. divide by 50
(10) Divide 13 8462 by 39898 (to 3 places of Decimals).
or
4 Ч РЗА
: 8.4 7 03 9: Л.В. Better to divide by 40
(11) Divide 131 by 19799 (to 5 places of decimals).
дд До т о 0:0
1 ШЕЕ eT she 19>
or
2 : ttn
Tr 6 616 N.B. Batter to divide by 20
(12) Divide 76432 by 67998 (to 5 places of decimals).
[us rig ^g 9
: ПЕ бы Л ОТО
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |
1 p uw

(13) Divide ‘2537 by 48329 pen
O м a aaa
Di dc с =.
(14) Divide 371628:112 by 12734°(to 5 decimal places).
p on 14-8 7I Se DESEE Е
Анель сытан
or
Pee жна О 2202
N.B. Here we have divided by 18
(15) Divide 4:1326 by 31046 (to 5 decimal places).
сз Ine Бера: or 3 c En ДЕЛЕЛ
epos ta xv Жы 28 95D 0279
(16). Divide :20014 by 137608 (to 5 decimal places).
Pat ds БИЛА Ў А ЕЛА
N.B. Better divide by 13
(17) Divide .0034147 by 814256321 (to 6 decimal places).
N.B. The Vinculum method is always available but will not
make much difference. In fact, it may prove stiffer.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

m
ЗД а Е 2 4.07 TAG teil 9550 A
ОО 8 * I^ i4 Peron On 8201
(21) Divide 137496 by 743:2х1:249 x 80:04 (to 4 places of
decimals).
7 SOIT Ium D 4.8
: 184 : Great le. «9
42 : UIS My db. 7 1l
004 : olus
2 ОО О oa 7
IgE d. (approximately)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CmaPTER XXVIII
AUXILIARY FRACTIONS
In our exposition of vulgar fractions and decimal fractions,
. we have so far been making use of processes which help to
ive us the exact results in each case. And, in so doing, we
уе hitherto (generally) followed the current system whereby
multiplications and divisions by powers of ten are mechanically
effected by the simple device of putting the decimal point
backwards or forwards (as the case may be).
Conventional Method |
For instance, we manipulate the decimal point thus:
(Шу OL. (2)39 3:9. (З) ЛЛ tnter.
But after this has been done, the other operations—of
actual division etc.,—have had to be carried out in the usual
manner.
Auxiliary Fractions
There are certain Vedic processes, however, by which,
with the aid of what we call SAHAYAKS (AUXILIARY
fractions), the burden of the subsequent operations is also considerably lightened and the work is splendidly facilitated.
First Type ;
The first (and commonest) type thereof is a very simple
and easy application of our self-same old friend the Ekadhika
Pūrva. And the whole modus operandi is to replace the Denominator by its Ekadhika (i.e. to drop the last digit and increase
the penultimate one by 1) and make a consequential alteration
in the division-procedure (as in the case of other Ekadhika
Operations).
N.B. :—The student will remember that, in these operations,
the remainder at each step (of a division) is not prefixed
{о а series of zeroes from the right-hand side, but to
each quotient-digit. |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ee m жыды аА ГЭ. EN .
Auxiliary Fractions (A.F.) (First type)
(1) for #5, the Auxiliary fraction is $
(2) for d, the A.F. is $
(4) for $, AF is -92
(6) for ty AF is 14
(7) for zły, AF is ү
(8) for тту, AF— $3
(9) for туу, AF=47
(11) for $9997 AF ls mss.
(12) for Ives AF is 05S
(13) Тогзуууз, АЕ is 9952
(14) for zzsdgss»; AF = 22001 |
in the above cases, the first eight denominators end in
a single nine ; the remaining eight terminate in 2, 8, 4, 3, 4, 6,.7
and 4 nines respectively. The question now is: Does it stand
to reason that the Ekädhika should be the same in 47, and in
asx (irrespective of the difference in the number of nines) ? |
That would be tantamount to declaring that the same (signi- |
ficant) numerator (or dividend) with two different denominators
(or divisors) wil] yield the same quotient! And that would be
palpably absurd ! |
Yes; the objection is perfectly valid; and the relevant
Sutra has surmounted this difficulty beforehand, by-providing
for growps of quotient-digits (to which the remainder at each
stage of the mental division should be prefixed)! And that
solves the whole problem.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Modus Operands
For instance, let us take the sixteenth example supra
(namely, 21858 whose А.Е. is 21863 and whose denominator
ends in four nines) :
Here, F is 25893; and AF 15 24388; and we have to make
5 (in lieu of 49999) our working divisor. As we have dropped
4 nines from the original denominator and have 5 as our Ekadhika in the Denominator of the Auxiliary fraction, we have
to divide the numerator of the latter in bundles, so to say, of
4 digits each by 5; and, whatever remainder there is, has to be
prefixed not to any particular quotient-digit but to the bundle
just already reached.
Thus, we take up 2:1863 to start with and divide it by 5.
-4372 as the first [жес Rs
quotient-group and 3 as the remainder. We prefix this remainder to that group and say :
-4372 and we divide this dividend (namely, 34372)
3 by the same divisor 5; and we get:
1.6. 6874 is the second quotient-group; and 2 is the second
remainder, which therefore we prefix to the second quotient
group. And we continue this process with as many groups ав
we need,
Thus we have: EL 6874, 5374, 9074 and so on
(to any number, or tens, or hundreds or thousands etc., of Decimal places) !
The PROOF hereof is very simple :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

N.B. :—The prefixed remainders are not parts of the quotient P
but only prefixes to the quotient-group in question |
and are therefore to be dropped out of the answer!
This is а simple method by which we avoid divisions by
long big divisors and have small and easy denominators to
deal with.
The student will note that division by big denominators
(with a continuous series of zeroes on the right-hand side) and
division by the Ekadhika (with the prefixing of the remainder
at each step) yield the same result! And thisis why the Auxiliary Fraction scheme has been incorporated for lightening the
burden of long big divisions.
А few more examples are given below:
(1) Express 6 in its decimal shape.
Here, F= ê 2: A.
Ona 9
З) З тре сше
DERE CAN rs ?
E E
N.B. :—The upper row (*06633291614518...... ) is the answer
and the lower one (5 2 7 4 3 1...... ) is a mere scaffolding and goes out. ·
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

o SS
(9) Baggy APS 67157
SIC
Б
eges c ijj Bi 8
The student will have noted that the denominators in all
the above cases ended in 9 (or 3 which could be so multiplied
as to yield an easy multiple ending in 9). But what apout
those ending in 1 which would have to be multiplied by 9 for
this purpose and would, therefore, as already pointed out (in
the chapter on Recurring Decimals) yield a rather unmanageable
Ehüdhika? is there any provision for this kind oi fractions ?
Yes; there is. And this takes us on to the second type of
Auxiliary fractions.
Auxiliary Fractions (Second Type)
If and when F has a dencminator ending in 1, drop the 1
and DECREASE the numerator by unity. This is the required
second type of Auxiliary Fractions. Thus,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Modus operandi
The principles, the prefixing (to the individual quotientdigits or to groups of quotient-digits) etc., and other details are
the same as in the Ekādhika Auxiliary fraction. BUT the
procedure is different, in a very important (nay, vital) particular.
And this is that after the first division (or group-division is over)
we prefix the remainder not to each quotient-digit but to its
COMPLEMENT from NINE and carry on the division in this
way all through.
Ап illustrative instance will clarify this :
Tet When +) дҥ—12—1°2
(i) We divide 1.2 by 3 and set 4 down as the first quotientdigit and 0 as the first remainder. -4
(1) We then divide not 04 but 05 (the complement of 4
from 9) by 3 and put 1 and 2 as the second quotientdigit and the second remainder respectively. Therefore we have *4 1
(Ш) We take now, not 21 but 98 as our dividend, divide it
by 3 and get: +419
(iv) Thus, dividing 10 by 3, we have: 4
80 on, until finally our chart reads:
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

EM ИИ
m "therefore, remember to take the complement (from
9) of each quotient-digit (and not the quotient-digit itself) for
the purpose о 9 2
whole secret of the second type of Auxiliary Fraction.
f further division, subtraction etc. This is the
Some more illustrative examples are given hereunder :
s. F—:024 3 9/0 |n: thisis a definite recurring
0113 90/0 decimal.
27 81 8 5 02/5 curring decimal.
2101: Ap—l:30 (with groups of 2 digits)
1400 13°99 (with two-digit groups)
OBH о уцыш == ==
(т) F—243 . дү. 2142 (with groups of two digits)
Oye Ocalan ТЕТ
(8) F= E они те dé (with groups of two digits)
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(9) $2743 . үү, 27742 (with 3-digit groups)
DN БД
Т OO. 4
OR Fa2t 403 . 402 (with three-digit groups)
„. F=: 402/597 (evidently а recurring decimal)
11) F= 29 . үр--20198 (with three-digit groups)
Other Astounding Applications
Yes ; but what about still other numbers which are neither
immediately below nor immediately above a ten-power base
or a multiple of ten etc., (as in the above cases) but a bit remoter
therefrom? Well; these too have been grandly catered for, in
the.shape of a simple application of the £ nurivpya Sutra, whereby,
after the pre-fixing of each Remainder to the quotient-digit
In question, we have to add to (or subtract from) the dividend
at every step, as many times the quotient-digit as the divisor
(i.e. the denominator) is below (or above) the NORMAL which,
in the case of all these Auxiliary fractions, is counted as
ending, not in zero or a number of zeroes but in 9 or a series
of nines !
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

For example, let F be $$ and suppose we have to express
this vulgar fraction in its decimal shape (to, say, 16 places of
decimals).
Lest the student should have, in the course or these
peregrinations into such very simple and easy methods of work,
forgotten the tremendous difference between the current method
and the Vedic method and thereby deprived himself of the
requisite material for the purpose of comparison and contrast,
let us, for a brief while, picture the two methods to ourselves .
side by side and see what tlie exact position is.
According to the Vedic method, the process wholly mental
is as follows :
F=25, .. A.F.—25—. But 68 being one less than 69 (the
normal ending in 9) we shall have to add to each dividend, the
quotient-digit in question. Thus
(i) when we divide 1:5 by 7, we get 2 and 1 1:5
as our first quotient-digit 7
and our first remainder. Ор -9
(ii) our second dividend will not be 12 but
12--2—14 ; and by division of that by 33919.
7, our second Q and R are 2 and 0. 1 0
(Ш) our next dividend is 02--2—04 ; and 220
this gives us 0 and 4 as Q and R. Loos
(iv) our fourth dividend is 40+0, giving us 2205
5 and 5 as our fourth Q and R. 1 045
(v) So, our next dividend is 554-5(=60); 22058
and our Q and R are 8 and 4. 10454
We can proceed on these lines to as many places of decimals
38 we may need. And, in the present case (wherein 16 decimalPlaces have been asked for), we toss off digit after digit (mentally)
and say :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ae i ee RU M кышуы
Over against this, le& us remind ourselves of the current
method for answering this question :
[ер]
о
Alongside of this cumbrous 16-step process, let us once again
put down the whole working by the Vedic method and say : |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

A few more illustrative examples are given hereunder:
(1) Express 101 |138 in its decimal shape (20 places).
(i) Routine Method—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(ii) Vedic Method.
A.F.=19} (with one below the normal 139)
Note :—More-than-one-digit quotient if any, should
be carried over (as usual) to the left.
(2) Conventional method :
(ii) Рейс (at-sight) method
Data: F=3% .. AF= 48 (but with 2 below the normal 99).
7. Add twice the Q-digit at each step. |
Actual Working : | |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

E
(3) Express 217; as a decimal (20 places).
Current method— ———
ү (4) Vedic at-sight method—
E ОЕ 7. АР (but with 2 below the normal 129)
| -. Double the Q-digit to be added at every step.
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(4) Express $33
(i) Usual method—
£239 in decimal form (21 decimal places)
11218 What а TRE
at a AMEND17740 DOUS mass and
mess of multiplications, sub80973 17994 tractions etc. !
(i) Vedic at-sight method :
v 75236 . (4,15:236 (but with 2 below the
8997 '' 9 normal 8999 and also |
with groups of 3 digits |
at a time).
^ Add twice the Q-digit at every step.
7 qe. m zum D EUR c T
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(5) Express 21868 as a decimal (16 places)
Conventional method
118580 What a horrible
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(i) Vedic At-sight method—
s в-21808 „ др Pleni
(with 2 below the normal 49999 and With
groups of four digits each).
. Add double the Q-digit at every step)
N.B. : very carefully that the extra (or surplus і.е. left-hand
side) parts of Q-digits have been “carried over" to the
left.
This excess is due to the additional multiplication and
can be got over in the manner just indicated. А method for
avoiding this difficulty altogether is also available but will
be dealt with at a later stage.
(6) Express 11 as a decimal (eight places)
Current method —
Even this 18 bad enough.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(ii) Vedic At-sight method :
| » E=} 7 АЕ--4,1 (but with 3 165 ШАЛА
| normal 79)
Thrice the Q-digit is to be added at every step.
(т) Express $5598 as а decimal (12 places)
(i) Usual method—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(i) Vedic At-sight method :
АРА . 1:7195 (with 1 less the
59998 6 normal and with
4-digit groups)
2, only one Q-digit is to be added. |
These examples should suffice to bring vividly home to |
the student the extent and magnitude of the difference between |
the current cumbrous methods and the Vedic at-sight one-line |
process in question.
Yes ; but what about other numbers, in general, which are
nowhere near any power or multiple of ten or a “normal” denominator-divisor ending in 9 or a series of nines? Have they
been provided for, too ?
Yes; they have. There are methods whereby, as explained
in an earlier chapter (the one dealing with recurring decimals)
we can easily transform any miscellaneous or non-descript
denominator in question—by simple multiplication etc.,—to
the requisite standard form which will bring them within the
jurisdiction of the Auxiliary Fractions hereinabove explained.
In fact, the very discovery of these Auxiliaries and of
their wonderful utility in the transmogrification of frightful
-looking denominators of vulgar fractions into such simple and
easy denominator-divisors must suffice to prepare the scientifically-minded seeker after Knowledge, for the marvellous
devices still further on in the offing.
We shall advert to this subject again and expound it
still further, in the next two subsequent chapters (dealing with
DIVISIBILITY and the application of the Ekädhika Pūrva etc.,
as positive and negative OSCULATORS in that context).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

t
CHAPTER XXIX
DIVISIBILITY AND SIMPLE OSCULATORS
We now take up the interesting (and intriguing) question
ав to how one can determine before-hand whether a certain
owever long it may be) is divisible by a certain
given number (h
isor and especially as to the Vedic processes which
given div
can help us herem.
The current system deals wth this subject but only in an
ultra-superficial way and only in relation to what may be termed
the most elementary elements thereof. Into details of these
(including divisibility by 2, 5, 10, 3, 6, 9, 18, 11, 22 and so on),
we need not now enter (as they are well-known even to the
mathematics-pupils at a very early stage of their mathematical
study.) We shall take these for granted and start with the
intermediate parts and then go on to the advanced portions of
the subject.
The Osculators
As we have to utilise the “Asas”? (Vestanas —Osculators)
throughout this subject (of divisibility), we shallbegin with a
simple definition thereof and the method of their application.
Owing to the fact that our familiar old friend the Ekadhika
is the first of these osculators (i.e. the positive osculator), the
task becomes all the simpler and easier. Over and above the
huge number of purposes which the Ekadhika has already been
shown to fulfil, it has the further merit of helping us to readily
determine the divisibility (or otherwise) of a certain given
dividend by a certain given divisor.
- | Let us, for instance, start with our similar familiar old
friend or experimental-subject (or shall we say, *Guinea-pigs"
| the number 7. The student need hardly be reminded that the
| Eküdhika for 7 is derived from 7X'1—49 and is therefore 5.
The Ekadhika is a clinching test for divisibility ; and the process
by which it serves this purpose is technically called Vestana
or *Osculation".
т
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar `

Suppose we do not know and have to determine Whether
91 is divisible by 7. We multiply the last digit (i.e. 1) by the
Ekadhika (or Positive Osculator ie. 5) and add the product
(i.e. 5) to the previous digit (1.6. 2) and thus get 7. This process
is technically called "Osculation". And, if the result of the
osculation is the divisor itself (or a repetition of a previous
result), we say that the given original dividend (21) is divisible
by 7.
‘A trial chart (for 7) will read as follows :
21 (already dealt with);
28; 8x5-4-2—42; 2x5--4—14 (already dealt with)
35; 5X5+3—28 (already dealt with) ;
42 (already dealt with) ;
49;9x5-4-4—49. (Repetition means divisibility).
56; 6x5--5—35 (already dealt with) ;
63; 3х54-6=21 (already dealt with) ;
71; 1x54-1—42 (already done);
84; 4х5--8=28 (already over);
91; 1x54-9—14 (already dealt with);
98; 8X5+9=49 (already done);
Now let us try and test, say, 112.
We next {ту and test for 13 ; and we find the repetitions
more prominent there. The Hkddhika is 4. Therefore we go
on multiplying leftward by 4. Thus,
39:9х4--8-439 The repetition etc., is uniformly
52; 2X4+5=13 there and in correct sequence
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Ezamples of the Osculation Procedure ( Vestana)
A few examples will elucidate the process:
(1) 7 continually osculated by 5 gives 35, 28, 42, 14, 21
and 7.
(2) 5 so osculated by 7 gives 35, 38, 59, 68, 62, 20, 2 and
so on.
8) 46 (by 3) gives 22, 8 etc., etc.
(10) 237 (by i gives 79, 79 etc., and is .. divisible by 79.
etc., etc.
N.B. :—We need not carry this process indefinitely on. We
can stop as soon as we reach a comparatively small
number which gives us the necessary clue as to
whether the given number is divisible (or not) by the
divisor whose Ekadhika we have used as our osculator !
Hence the importance of the Ekadhika.
Rule for Ekadhikas
(1) For 9, 19, 29, 39 etc., (all ending in 9), the Ekadhikas
(2) For 3, 13, 23, 33 etc., (all ending in 3) multiply them by
3; and you get 1, 4, 7, 10 etc., as the Ekadhikas.
(3) For 7, 17, 27, 37 etc., (all ending in 7) multiply them by
7; and you obtain 5, 12, 19, 26, etc., as the Ekadhikas.

(4) For 1, 11, 21, 31, etc., (all ending in 1), multiply them
by 9; and you get 1, 10, 19, 28 etc., as the Lkadhikas,
Osculation by own Ekadhika
Note that the osculation of any number by its own Ekàdhika will (as in the case of 7 and 13) go on giving that Very
number or a multiple thereof. Thus,
(1) 23 osculated by 7 (its Ekàdhika) gives 7 X3--2—23 ;
46 (osculated by 7) gives 7X6+4=46 ;
69 (similarly) gives 7x 94-6—69 ;
92. (likewise) gives 2X'1--9—23 ;
115 (similarly) gives 7х54-11=46 And so on.
Now, 276 (osculated by 7) (by way of testing for divisibility by 23) gives 7х6--27--69 which again gives 69!
^. YES. Thus, all the multiples of 23 fulfil this test i.e. of
osculation by its Ekādhika (T). And this is the whole secret
of the Vestana sub-Sütra. i
Modus Operandi of Osculation
Whenever a question of divisibility comes up, we can
adopt the following procedure. Suppose, for instance, we wish
to know—without actual division—whether 2774 is divisible
by 19 (or not). We put down the digits in order as shown
below. And we know that the Ekadhika (osculator) is 2.
(i) We multiply the last digit (4) by 2, add the product
(8)to the previous digit 7 and put
the total (15) down under the second md Тр 5
right-hand digit.
(ii) We multiply that 15 by 2, add that 30 to the 7 on
the upper row, cast out the nineteens 2774
(from that 37) and put down the 8715
remainder 18 underneath that 7. (18)
N.B.—This casting out of the nineteens may be
more easily and speedily achieved by first osculating the
15 itself, getting 11, adding it to the 7 7 т 4
(to the left-hand) on the top-row and 18 15
n putting the 18 down thereunder.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| (iti) We then osculate that 18 with the 2 to the left on
| the upper row and get 38; or we may osculate the
18 itself, obtain 17, add the 2 and get "accus
19 as the final osculated result. (19 18 15.)
And, as 19 is divisible by 19, we вау.
the given number (2774) is also divisible thereby.
This is the whole process ; and our chart says:
By 19 ? 1 Ds NT so eae Pe BS
2. The osculator is 2 19 18 15
OR Secondly, we may arrive at the same result-as effectively
but less spectacularly by means of a continuous series of osculations of the given number (2774) by the osculator (2) as hereinbefore explained. And we can say:
* 9774 (osculated by the osculator 2) gives us 285. 38
and 19
", 2774 is divisible by 19.
N.B. :—The latter method is the shorter but more mechanical
and cumbrous of the two; and the former procedure
looks neater and more pictorially graphic, nay,
spectacular. And one can follow one’s own choice
as to which pocedure should be preferred.
Note :—Whenever, at any stage, a bigger number than the
divisor comes up, the same osculation-operation can
always be performed.
Some more specimen examples are given below:
(1) By 29? .. The osculatoris3.({3 28 9 6 | i“ No.
OR Е (osculated by 3) gives 3307 351, 38, 27, etc. .°. No.
(2) By 292 2. The osculator is 3. { 93S VT i 8) 2, YES
OR The osculation-results are 9338, 957, 116 and 29
2. YES
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
| БИТИР

(3) Ву 292% .. The osculatoris3.{2 43 45 21). YES
OR The osculation-results are 248455, 24360, Hee 261
and 29 г, YES
(4) By 39? .°. The osculator is © 4 9 T j^ . YES
OR Тһе osculation-results are 507, 78 and 39 .. YES
(5) By 49? .. The osculatoris5.( 5 3 3 2
OR The osculation-results are 543, 69, 51 and 10 .. No.
(6) By 59? 2, The osculator is te eee «9 15. Y HS
OR The osculation-results are 19175, 1947, 236 and 59
" YES
(7) By 59? 2. The osculator is °-[ а 6 Тү, YRS
OR The osculation-results are 1298, 177 and 59 .-. YES.
OR Theosculation-results are 40185, 4048, 452 and 57 .'.No.
(9) By 79? .:. The osculator is in 3094 82 Ч 2. No.
OR The osculation-results are 6309490, 630949, 63166,
(10) By 43 2 5. The osculator is 13. n 0 6 17. YES
OR The сон are 1419, 258 and 129 .. YES
(11) By 53 ? .-. The osculator is | ОЕП О Б 8 | .. No
OR The osculation-results ar 2243, 272 and 59 2. No.
(12) By 179? .". The osculatoris Ви 1 45 5 0 1| X BS
OR The osculation-results are 714568, 71600, 7160, 716
and 179 .. YES
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

а“
ermine whether 5293240096 is divisible by 139 (or not)
current method (just by way of contrast) :
а
(В) By the Vedic method :
By 139? .. The Hkadhika (osculator) is 14.
OR The osculation-results: are 529324093, 52932451
(13) Det
(A) By the
Note :—In all the above cases, the divisor either actually ended
in 9 or could—by suitable multiplication—be made to
yield’ a product ending in 9 (for the determination of
the required Ekddhika or Osculator in each case).
But what about the numbers ending in 3, 7 and 1 (whose
Eküdhika may generally be expected, to be a bigger
number)? Is there a suitable provision for such
numbers being dealt with (without involving bigger
Ekadhika-multipliers) ?
Yes; there is ; and this we proceed to deal with.
The Negative Osculator
. This is an application of the Pardvartya Sūtra and is called
the Negative Osculator because it is a process not of addition
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(as in the case of of the Ekadhika) but of Subtraction (leftward) |
And this actually means a consequent alternation of plus and
minus.
Examples of the Negative Osculation Process
(1) 36 thus osculated by 9, gives 8--54----51,
(2) 7(osculated by 5) gives 0—35— —35
(3) 35712 (osculated by 4) will yield 8—3571— —3503. -
How to Determine the Negative Osculator
Just as the Ekadhika (the positive Vestand) has been duly
defined and can be correctly ascertained, similarly the N egative |
Osculator will also require to be determined by means of a |
proper definition and has been so defined with a view to proper
recognition.
It consists of two clauses :
(i) 1n the case of all divisors ending in 1, simply drop the
one; and
(ii) in the other cases, multiply so as to get 1 as the last
digit of the product (i.e. 3 by 7, 7 by 3 and 9 by 9);
and then apply the previous sub-clause (i.e. drop the 1).
Note :—Tor facility of symbolisation, the positive and the
negative osculators will be represented by P and Q
respectively.
Examples of Negative Osculators
(1) For 11, 21, 31, 41, 51 and other numbers ending
in 1, Q is 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and so on. [Note that, by
this second type of oscultors, we avoid the big
Ekadhikas (produced by multiplying these numbers
(2) For 7, 17, 27, 37, 47, 57 etc., we have to multiply
them by 3 (in order to get products ending in 1).
And they will be.2, 5, 8, 11, 14, 17 and во on.
(In these cases too, this process 15 generally calculated to yield smaller multipliers than the
multiplication by 7 is likely to do).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| (3) For 3, 13, 23, 33, 43, 53 etc., we have to multiply
them by 7; and the resultant Negative Osculators
will be 2, 9, 16, 23, 30, 37 etc., (which will generally
be found to be bigger numbers than the Ekddhikas).
(4) For 9, 19, 29, 39, 49, 59 etc., we have to multiply
these by 9; and the resultant Negative Osculators
| will be 8, 17, 26, 35, 44, 53 etc., (all of which will
| be much bigger than the corresponding Ekädhikas).
Important and Interesting Feature
Note:—A very beautiful, interesting and important feature
about the relationship between F and Q, is that,
whatever the Divisor (D) may be, P+Q=D. ie. the
two osculators together invariably add up to the
Divisor. And this means that, if one of them is known,
the other is automatically known (being the complement thereof from the divisor ie. the Denominator).
Specimen Schedule of Osculators P and Q
Number Multiple for P Multiple for Q P Q Total
(19) 171 OE Ime cit
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ым
` N.B. It will be noted :—
(i) that P+Q always equals D ;
(ii) multiples of 2 and 5 are inadmissible for the purposes
of this schedule ;
dii) and these will have to be dealt with by dividing
off all Ше powers of 2 and 5 (which are factors of the
Divisor concerned).
A few sample examples
(8) for 93, Q is 65 .. P= 98 P+Q=D throughout
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Note :—(1) If the last digit of a divisor be 3, its P<its Q;
(2) If the last digit be 7, its Q < its Р; and
(3) in the actual working out of the subtractions of the
osculated multiples (for the negative osculators),
the actual result will be an alternation of plus and
minus.
) In the removal of brackets, a series of subtractions actually materialises in an alternation of
+ and—For example,
—a—b+c—d-+e.
Exactly similar is the case here.
(2) When we divide a"--b" by (a+b), the quotient consists of a series of terms which are
alternately plus and minus. Exactly the same
is the case here.
Note :—The student will have to carefully remember this alternation of positives and negatives. But the better
thing will be, not to rely on one’s memory at each
step but to mark the digits beforehand, alternately, say,
by means of a Vinculum (from right to left), on all the
even-place digits, so that there may be an automatic
safeguard against the possible playing of any pranks by
one's memory.
Armed with this safeguard, let us now tackle a few illustrative instances and see how the plan works out im actual
practice.
(1) By 41? .. The (Negative) Osculator is 4
| Ice De бз
Explanation (1
Or :
The osculation-results are 16564, 1640, 164 and 0 .°. YES
Or
The osculation-results are 651, 62 and 0 ~. YES.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Or
The osculation-results are 1107, 82 and 0 ©. YES
Or
The osculation-results are 74146, 7330, 733 and 31 .. NO
Or
The osculation-results are 43727, 4337, 398 & 1 .. NO
The = ате 1959, 183 and 0 .". YES
Or
The osculation-results are 1017060, 101706, 10050, 1005
_ and 0 ~. YES.
The osculation-results are 98045878, 9804515, 980406
The osculation-results are 1221281, 192192, 19200, 1220,
122 and 0 г. YES
The osculation-results are 80869, 8023, 781 and 71 .'. YES
The osculation-results are 133751, 13362, 1310 & 131... YES
N.B. But this dividend (yielding the same UE is divisible
by 47 (whose Q is also 14). (94-47х2)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXX
DIVISIBILITY
AND
COMPLEX MULTIPLEX OSCULATORS
The cases so far dealt with are of a simple type, involving
only small divisors and consequently small osculators. What
then about those wherein bigger numbers being the divisors,
the osculators are bound to be correspondingly larger ?
The student-inquirer’s requirements in this direction
. form the subject-matter of this chapter. It meets the needs
in question by formulating a scheme of groups of digits which
j]
can be osculated, not as individual -digits but in a lump, so to say.
Examples of Multiplex Vestana i.e. (Osculation)
(1) 371 osculated by 4 for 2 digits at a time, gives 3+
71 x4 (=287) and 3 —284 (=—281) for plus oscillation
and minus oscillation respectively.
(2) 1572 osculated by 8 for 2 digits gives 15--576 (=591)
and 15—576 (----561) respectively.
(3) 8132 osculated by 8 (Р and 0) for 2 digits gives 81
(4) 75621 osculated by 5 (P and Q) for 3 digits gives
tively.
(5) 61845 osculated by 7 (P and Q) for 3-digit groups
respectively.
(6) 615740 osculated by 8 (P and Q) for 3-digit packets
respectively.
(7) 518 osculated by 8 (P and Q) for 4-digit bundles gives
(8) 73 osculated by 8 (P and Q) for five-digit groups yields
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(9) 210074 osculated by 8 (P and Q) for five-digit bundles
respectively. :
(10) 7531 osculated by 2(Р) for 3 digits gives 7--1069— 1069
(11) 90145 osculated by 5 (Q) for 3 gives —725--90 = —635
(12) 5014112 osculated by 7 (Q) for 4 gives 501—28784
(13) 7008942 osculated by 3 (Р) for 2 gives 126--70089
(14) 7348515 osculated by 8 (P) for 3 gives 73484+4120
Categories of Divisors and their Osculators.
In this context, it should be noted that, as there are
various types of divisors, there are consequent differences
as to the nature and type of osculators (positive and /or negative)
which will suit them. They are generally of two categories :
(i) those which end in nine (or a series of nines)
[in whch case they come within the jurisdiction
of the Lkadhika (i.e. the Positive) Osculator]
or, which terminate in or contain series of zeroes
ending in 1, (in which case they come within the
Scope of operations performable with the aid of
the Viparita (і.е. the negative) osculator; and
(ii) those which, by suitable multiplieation, yield а
multiple of either of the two sorts described in subsection (i) supra and can thus be tackled on that
basis.
The First Type.
We shall deal, first, with the first type of divisors, namely,
those ending in 9 (or a series of nines) or 1 (or a series of zeroes
ending in unity) and explain a technical terminology and
symbology which will facilitate our operations in this context.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(1) Let the divisor be 499. It is obvious that its osculator
P is 5 and covers 2 digits. This fact can be easily
expressed. in symbolical language by saying: Р„=
(2) In the case of 1399, it 1з obvious that our osculator
(positive) is 14 and covers 2 digits .. P,—14.
(3) As for 1501, Q obviously comes into play, is 15 and
covers 2 digits. In other words, Q,—15.
(4) For 2999, P is 3 and covers 3 digits .'. P,—3
Correctness of the Symbology
The osculation-process invariably gives us the original
number itself (or a multiple thereof) or zero: For example,
(iii) 1501 (with Q,—15) gives 15x 1—15—0
(vi) 7001 (with Q,—7) gives 7Х1--7--0
N.B. :—The osculation-rule is strictly adhered to; and the P's
and the Q’s invariably yield the original dividend itself
and zero respectively !
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

"n
Utility and Significance of the Symbology
The symbology has its deep significance and high practica]
utility in our determining of the divisibility (or otherwise) of a
certain given number (however big) by a certain given divisor
(however large), inasmuch as it throws light on (1) the number
of digits to be taken in each group and (2) the actual osculator
itself in each individual case before us.
A few simple examples of each sort will clarify this :
| (1) Suppose the question is, Is 106656874269 divisible by 499 ?
| Here, at sight, Р,--5. This means that we have to
| split the given expression into 2-digit groups and osculate
by 5. Thus,
Or
The osculation-results are 1066569087, 10666125, |
Here Q,—4
Or
The osculation-results are 1261436101, 12614357,
(3) Is 69492392 divisible by 199 ?
Or |
The osculation-results give 695107, 6965 and 199 |
~ YES |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

"n
Here P,=6
Or
The osculation-results are 1931678 and 599 .. YES
Here Q,=7 eo
Or
The osculation-results give 21 886 064 134, 21885126,
Here Р,--1
Ав P,=1 and continuous multiplications by 1 can
make no difference to the multiplicand, the sum of the
' groups will suffice for our purpose : |
The second method amounts to the same thing and
ү need not be put down.
Here P,—1
2. (by both methods) YES.
Here Р =]
| | 5. (By both methods), YES.
f Here Р,-- !
| 5 . (By both methods) YES.
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

EN “Эш
ke
Here Q,—1 ; and
-. Divisible by 13
But 1001--7х 11х 13 .. Divisible by 13 but not by 7 or
у. МО
The Second Category
The second type is one wherein the given number is of
| neither of the standard types (which Р and Q readily and instan-
| taneously apply to) but requires a multiplication for the
| transformation of the given number to either (or both) of the
standard forms and for the ascertaining of the P and Q (or both)
suitable for our purpose in the particular case before us.
The Process of Transformation
In an earlier chapter (the one on “Recurring Decimals”)
we have shown how to convert a given decimal fraction into its
vulgar-fraction shape, by so multiplying it as to bring a series of
nines in the product. For example, in the case of :142857,
we had multiplied it by 7 and got 999999 (=1) as the product
and thereupon argued that, because 7X the given decimal —1,
.. that decimal should be the vulgar fraction 1
Similarly, with regard to ‘076923, we had multiplied it
by 3 (їп order to get 9 as the last digit of the product) ; argued
that, in order to get 9 as the penultimate digit, E- : |
we should add 3 to the already existing 6 (2) ee |
there and that this 3 could be had only by |
multiplying the original given decimal by 1; |
then found that the product was now a series 21222: |
of nines; and then we had argued that, 999999 =1
`` 13x=1, 2. x must be equal to +. And Хэг A
we had also given several more illustrations of the same kind |
(for demonstrating the same principle and process). |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

esent context) requires, for osculation,
mbers ending in 9 (or a series of nines), we have to adopt
BO tar procedure for the same purpose ; and, in the case of
: apply a similar method for producing a number
Q too, we have to : ; f
| which will terminate in 1 or a series of zeroes ending in 1. .
| As Р (in the pr
The Modus Operands
A few examples of both the kinds will elucidate the process
and help the student to pick up his P and Q. And once this
is done, the rest will automatically follow (as explained above).
(1) Suppose the divisor is 857. *.. 857X7=5999, we can
therefore at once say: P6:
The test and proof of the correctness hereof is that any
multiple of the divisor in question must necessarily fulfil this
condition ie. on osculation by Ps, must yield 857 (or a
multiple thereof).
For instance, let us take 857 X13 = 11141. As P,=6
^. 11-46 (141)=857! And this proves that our osculator is
the correct one. :
Taking 43x3 (=129) for the test, we see 129 yields
A 29x3—1=86; and 86 is a multiple of 43 (being exactly
double of it). So, our Q is correct.
The significance of this fact consists in the natural
consequence thereof, namely, that any number (which is really
divisible by the divisor in question must obey this rule of divisibility by the P process or the Q process.
| N.B. :—Remember what has already been explained as regards Р
от Q being greater.
| In this very case (of 43), instead of multiplying it by 7,
getting 301 as the product and ascertaining that Qg—3 is
the osculator, we could also have multiplied the 43 by 3, got
Л 129 ав the product, found Рү--18 to be the positive osculator
| pag verified it. Thus, in the case of 43 X2—=86, .`. 8-1-6(13)—86
| ^ Ру=13 is the correct positive osculator.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

з МОО ааа.
Multiplication by 13 at every step being necessarily |
more cumbrous than by 3, we should naturally prefer Q,—3
In fact, it rests with the student to choose between P and Q
and (In view of the bigness or otherwise of multiplier-osculator
etc.) decide which to prefer.
(3) Ascertain the P and the Q for 137.
Obviously Q,—14 is preferable (to Р,--37).
(4) Determine the P and the Q for 157.
Р,--11 is to be preferred
(5) Find out the P and Q for 229 Ee .
This Osculator being so simple, the Q need not be
tried at all. But on principle, ** 229 69—15801
at all. But on principle, ,. 229 х69--15801
. Q,—159 (obviously a big multiplier)
(Test for P,—3
.(6) Find P and Q for 283
^. P3—15 is preferable |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(7) Find P and Q for 359
Obviously Q,=14 is to be preferred.
(8) Ascertain P and Q for 421
obviously P4—8 is the better one
(9) Determine P and Q for 409
Obviously the Q osculator is preferable.
Having thus studied the multiplex osculator technique
and modus operandi, we now go on to and take up actual examples
of divisibility (which can be easily tackled by the multiplex
osculatory procedure).
Model Applications to Concrete Examples
(1) Is 79158435267 divisible by 229 ?
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ee ee ees

(3) Is 7392 60251 divisible by 347 2
(5) Is 885648437 divisible by 367 ?
But 734—367 x2 г. YES
Li N.B. :—The alternative method of successive mechanical oscula- |
tions is also, of course, available (but will prove generally |
less neat and tidy and will also be more tedious)
'. NO
ши. eS
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

| 11) What change should be made in the first digit of the
| | above number in order to render it divisible by 421 ?
684 is exactly 4x421, the only change needed
der to reduce the actually present 1694 into
s the alternation of the first digit from 4 to 3.
Answer :—As 1
in ог
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ДЕР | с еа |
(P
CHAPTER XXXI
SUM AND DIFFERENCE OF SQUARES
Not only with regard to questions arising in connection
with and arising out of Pythagoras’ Theorem (which we shall
shortly be taking up) but also in respect of matters relating to
the three fundamental Trigonometrical-Ratio-relationships (as
indicated by the three formulae Sin? 0-Lcos? 0—1, 1-Ltan?
Q—BSec? 0 and 1--cot? 0— cosec? 0) etc., etc. we have often
to deal with the difference of two square numbers, the addition
of two square numbers etc., etc. And 1618 desirable to have
the assistance of rules governing this subject and benefit by them. |
Difference of two Square numbers
Of the two, this is much easier. For, any number can
be expressed as the difference of two square numbers. The
| Algebraical principle involved is to be found in the elementary
formula a?—b?—(a--b) (a—b). This means that, if the given
number can be expressed in the shape of the ргойис ГОЁ two
numbers, our task is automatically finished. And this “if”
imposes a condition which is very easy to fulfil. For, even if
the given number is a prime number, even then it can be correctly
described as the product of itself and of unity. Thus 7—7X1,
In the next place, we have the derived formula:
(a--b)?—(a—b)*—4ab; and therefore ab сап
| always come into the picture as 84-52 /a—b\2_.
E. (half the sum)®—(half the diffe- (2) (2, ) E
| rence)?; and as any number can be expressed as ab,
| the problem is readily solved. And the larger the number
of factorisations possible, the better. In fact, if we accept
| fractions too as permissible, the number of possible
| solutions will be literally infinite.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ЗВ O EE м. т-м че Мыр: ^к

i For example, suppose we have to express 9 as the difference
i of two squares. We know that—
9=9 х1 e шир 10 Similarly
The question, therefore, of expressing any number as the
difference of two squares presents no difficulty at all!
The Sum of Two Square Numbers
Inasmuch, however, as а2--Ъ? has no such corresponding
advantage or facilities etc., to offer, the problem of expressing
any number as the sum of two square numbers is a tough one
and needs very careful attention. This, therefore, we now proceed
to deal with.
A Simple Rule in Operation
We first turn our attention to a certain simple rule at
work in the world of numbers, in this respect.
We need not go into the relevant original Sütras and
explain them (especially to our non-Sanskrit-knowing readers).
Suffice it for us, for our present purpose, to explain their purport
and their application.
Let us take a particular series of "mixed" fractions,
Which fulfil three conditions:
(1) that the integer-portion consists of the natural
numbers in.order ;
> (Ш) that the numerators are exactly the ваше; and
=o
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(11) that the denominators are the odd numbers, in order,
commencing from 3 and going right on.
It will be observed that, when all these fractions are
put into shape as "improper" fractions,
Le. аз $, ^, 7, o> уу Өбо., eto.
the sum of D? and N? is invariably equal to (N--1)?! And the
General Algebraical form being,
аа)
The shape of it is perhaps frightening ; but the thing in
itself is very simple : and the best formula is D?-- N?—(N-L-1)2.
This means that when a? (given)--x? is a perfect square, we
сап readily find out x?. Thus, for instance,
(1) If a (the given number) be 9,-.2n--1—9 ..1-4
$ is the fraction we want. And 92--402—41?
(ü) If а be 35, 2n+1=35 .. n=17 .. The fraction
(ш) If a—57, 2n+1=57 .. n=28 .. The required
(iv) If 4—141, 2п--1-4141 ..n=70 .. The fraction
Note :—Multiples and sub-multiples too behave in exactly
the same manner (according to Anuriipya i.e. proportionately). For instance,
Let a=35 .°. 2n--1—35 .. n=17 .. The fraction
4 Simpler Method (for the same) |
This same result сап also be achieved by a simpler and
easier method which does not necessitate the “mixed” fractions, •
the transforming of them into the “Improper”’—fraction—shape |
etc., but gives us the answer immediately. |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |

ть will be observed that, in all the examples dealt with
above;
Since D?-+N?=(N-+1)?
In other words, the square of the given number is the
sum of two consecutive integers at the exact middle. For instance,
if 7 be the given number, its square—49 which can be split up
| into the two consecutive integers 24 and 25
and so on. And all the answers are exactly as we obtained
before (by the firs& method).
The Case of Even Nwmbers
Yes ; the square of an odd number is necessarily odd and
can be split up into two consecutive integers. But what about
even numbers whose squares will always be even and cannot be
split up into two consecutive numbers ? And the answer is that
such cases should be divided off by 2 (and other powers of 2)
until an odd number is reached and then the final result should
be multiplied proportionately. |
For example, if a=52, we divide it by 4 and get the
"5 (multiplying all the terms by 4), we say : 52?-1-3362—340?.
There are many other simple and easy methods by which
we can tackle the problem (of 42-1-52--02) by means of clues and
conclusions deducible from 3242—52, 52--122--1832, 824-152
17" etc. But into details of these and other allied matters
we do not now enter.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXXII
ELEMENTARY SQUARING, CUBING ETC.
In some of the earliest chapters of this treatise, we have
dealt, at length, with multiplieation-devices of various sorts,
and squaring, cubing etc., are only a particular application |
thereof. This is why this subject too found an integral place |
of its own in those earlier chapters (on multiplication). |
And yet it so happens that the squaring, cubing etc., of |
numbers have a particular entity and individuality of their
own ; and besides, they derive additional importance because of
their intimate connection with the question of the square-root,
the cube-root etc., (which we shall shortly be taking up). And,
consequently, we shall now deal with this subject (of squaring,
cubing etc.), mainly by way of Preliminary Revision and Recapitulation on the one hand and also by way of presentation of
some important new material too on the other.
| The Yàvadünam Sutra (for Squaring)
In the revision part of it, we may just formally remind
the student of the YAVADUNAM formula and merely cite some
| examples thereof as a sort of practical memory-refresher :
оа C qp БӘ
к н на ы
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

The Anuriipya Sūtra (for Cubing)
This is new material А simple example will, however,
suffice to explain it:
Take the hypothetical case of one who knows only the
cubes of the “first ten natural numbers" (i.e. 1 to 10) and wishes
to go therebeyond, with the help of an intelligent principle and
procedure. And suppose he desires to begin with 11°.
1. The first thing one has to do herefor is to put down the
cube of the first digit in a row (of 4 figures in a Geometrical
Ratio in the exact proportion subsisting between them). Thus—
(ii) The second step is to put down, under the second and
third numbers, just two tunes the said numbers themselves and
add up. And that is all!
A few more instances will clarify the procedure :
DUNS 2197
| CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

or, better still, 973—(100— 3)3
mullo TD e зс щн ннн
N.B.:—1f you start with the cube of the first digit and take
Ње next three numbers (in the top row) in a Geometrical
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Proportion (in the ratio of the original digits themselves) you find that the 4th figure (on the right end)
is just the cube of the second digit!
The Algebraical explanation hereof is very simple:
If a and 6 are the two digits, then our chart reads:
а3-- a%b+ ab?-F-b?
TIR CAMCN SINE.
and this is exactly (a+b)? !
Almost every mathematical worker knows this; but
very few people apply it! This is the whole tragedy and the
pathos of the situation !
| The Yavadiinam Sütra (for Cubing)
The same YAVADUNAM Sūtra can, in view of the above,
be applied for cubing too. The only difference is that we take
here not the deficit or the surplus but exactly twice the deficit
| or the surplus as the ċase may be and make a few corresponding
alternations in the other portions also, as follows :
Suppose we wish to ascertain the cube of 104. Our base
being 100, the excess is 4. So we add not 4 (as we did in
the squaring operation) but double that (i.e. 8) and thus have
104--8 (= 112) as-the left-hand-most portion of the cube.
Thus we obtain 112.
| Then we put down thrice the new excess multi
plied by the original excess (і.е. 12X4 = 48) and 112/48
put that down as the middle portion of the product.
And then we affix the cube of the original
excess (i.e. 64) as the last portion thereof. And the 112/48/64
answer 1s complete.
_ Some more illustrative instances are given below for
| familiarising the student with the new process (which is not
really new but only a very useful practical application of the
| (a+b)? formula just above described :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
E S f

| Fourth Power
We know that (a+b)4=a4+-4a3b+6a2b?2+-4ab3-+b4.
This gives us the requisite clue for raising any given number
to its fourth power. Thus,
(10) ES и тт
The Binomial Theorem
The “Binomial Theorem” is thus capable of practical
application and—in its more comprehensive Vedic form—has
thus been utilised, to splendid purpose, in the Vedic Sütras.
And a huge lot of Calculus work (both Differential and Integral)
has been (and can be) facilitated thereby. But these details,
we shall hold over for a later stage.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXXIII
STRAIGHT SQUARING
Reverting to the subject of the squaring of numbers, the
ardly be reminded that the methods expounded
y chapter and even in the previous
to special cases and that a General
student need h
and explained in an earl
chapter are applicable only cial cases an
formula capable of universal application is still due.
And, as this is intimately connected with a procedure
known as the Dwandwa Yoga (or the Duplex Combination
Process) and as this is of still greater importance and utility at
the next step on the ladder, namely, the easy and facile extraction of square roots, we now go on to a brief study of this procedure.
| The Dwandwa-Yoga (or the Duplex Combination Process)
The term “Dwandwa Yoga" (or Duplex) is used in two
B different senses. The first one is by squaring ; and the second
one is by Cross-multiplication. And, in the present context,
it is used in both the senses (a? and 2ab).
In the case of a single (central) digit, the,square (a? eto.;)
is meant; and in the case of a number ef even digits (say, a
and b equidistant from the two ends), double the cross-product
(2ab) is meant.
A few examples will elucidate the procedure.
Denoting the Duplex with the symbol D, we have:
| СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

This is merely a recapitulation of the Ürdhva Tiryak
process of multiplication as applied to squaring and needs no
exposition.
Note :—If a number consists of » digits, its square must have
2n or 2n-l digits. So, in the following process, take
extra dots to the left (one less than the number of
digits in the given numbers).
Examples-
(7) 8972 eit s a Dr
Or (by Yavadiinam Sütra)—184[1032—80409
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

шиг
Ow SUED = 0800 Lp ies Ern
Or (by Угай тат Sütra)
СЭР
(ша ИРЕ ИЕ 8 2
Or (by Yàvadünam Sütra) 7956/1022?—80604484
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXXIV
VARGAMULA (SQUARE ROOT)
Armed with the recapitulation (in the last chapter) of
the “Straight Squaring method” and the practical application
of the Dwandwayoga (Duplex Process) thereto, we now proceed
to deal with the Vargamüla (i.e. the Square Root) on the same
kind of simple, easy and straight procedure as in the case of
“Straight Division".
a ae
Well-known First Principles
The basic or fundamental rules governing the extraction
of the square root, are as follows:
(1) The given number is first arranged in two-digit groups
(from right to left); and a single digit (if any) left
over (at the left-hand-end) is counted as a simple
group by itself.
(2) The number of digits in the square root will be the.-
same as the number of digit-groups in the given
number itself (including a single digit (if any such |
there be). Thus 16 will count ав one group, 144 ав
two groups and 1024 as two.
(3) So, if the square root contains n digits, the square must
consist of 2n or 2-1 digits.
(4) And, conversely, if the given number has n digits,
the square root will contain n or n+1 digits.
(5) But, in cases of pure decimals, the number of digits
in the square is always double that in the square root.
(6) The squares of the first nine natural numbers are
(i) that an exact square cannot end i253, 7 or 8;
(ii) (a) that a complete square ending in 1 must have
either 1 or 9 (mutual complements from 10) as |
the last digit of its square root; 4 |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
M ng E Li

(b) that а square can end in 4, only if the square
root ends in 2 or 8 (complements) ;
| ' (с) that the ending of a square in 5 or 0 means that
| its square root too ends in 5 or 0 (respectively) ;
(d) that a square ending in 6 must have 4 or 6
(complements) as the last digit ш its square
root ; and
(c) that the termination of an exact square in 9 is
possible, only if the square root ends in 3 or 7
(complements). |
| In other words, this may be more briefly
formulated thus :
(a) that 1, 5, 6 and 0 at the end of a number reproduce
themselves as the last digits in its square ;
(b) that squares of complements (from: ten) have the
| same last digit. Thus, 1? and 92; 2? and 8? ; 3? and
72; 4? & 62; 5? and 5? ; and 0? and 10? have the same
ending (namely 1,4,9,6,5 and 0 respectively) ; and
(c) that 2,3,7 and 8 are out of court altogether, as the
final digit of a perfect square.
Readily Available First Data.
Thus, before we begin the straight extracting of a square
root by “straight division” method, we start with previous
knowledge of (1) the number of digits in the square root and
(2) the first digit thereof. Thus—
(1) 74562814 М--8 .. N in square root—N/[2—4 ; and
the first digit thereof is 8. )
& the first digit thereof is 3. 2
But (3) (-7104)? must contain 8 decimal digits.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Modus operandi (of Straight Squaring)
The procedure of Straight Squaring as inculcated in the
Vedie Sütras is precisely the same as in Straight Division but
with this difference, namely, that in the former the Divisor should
be excatly double the first digit of the square root.
N.B. Аз a single digit can never be more than 9, it follows
therefore that, in our method of straight squaring, no
divisor above 18 is necessary. We may, of course,
voluntarily choose to deal with larger numbers ; but there
is no need to do so.
Initial Chart
We thus start our operation with an initial chart, like the
samples given hereunder :
Oe EE 4 4 5
Зэ дар 9 Эз
S6 7. : ENT See ;
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ро : Spe es
Seer psc rt [uie TET
Further Procedure
Let us now take a concrete case (the extraction of the
square root of, say, 119716) and deal with it:
(i) In the above given general chart, we have not only
put down the single first digit of the square root
wanted but also prefixed to the next dividend-digit,
the remainder after our subtraction of the square of
that first digit from the left-hand-most digit or
digit-group of the given number. ‘ee eee
And we have also set down б. 215
as our divisor, the exact double
of the first digit of the quotient.
Our next Gross Dividend-unit is thus 29. Without
subtracting anything from it, we simply divide the
29 by the divisor 6 and put down Il: 9716
the second quotient-digit 4 and 6: 25
the second remainder 5 in their
proper places as usual.
Thus our third Gross Dividend is 57. From this we
subtract 16 (the square of the second quotient-digit),
get 41 as the Actual Dividend, ll: 9716:
divide it by 6 and set down the 6: :255
Q (6)and the R (5) in their НЭГ
proper places ав usual. ———
Our third gross dividend-unit is 51. From this we
subtract the Dwandwa Yoga (Duplex) (—48), obtain
3 as the remainder, divide it 11 : 9716
by 6 and put down the Q 6: : 2553
(0) and the R (3) in their > 3: 46.00
proper places, —————————
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(v) This gives us 36 as our last gross dividend-unit.
From this we subtract 36 (the Dwandwa Yoga of
the third. quotient digit 6); get 0 as © and as R.
This means. that the work has been completed,
that the given expression is 11: 9716
a perfect square and that 346 6: “255 3
18 its square root. And that SEO 9:0
18 all. а кї,
COMPLETE
Proof of Completeness & Correctness
(1) A manifest proof of the Complete-squareness of the
given expression (and of the correctness of the square root
ascertained) is by squaring the latter and finding the square to
be exactly the same as the given complete square. Thus,
(2) But this is too mechanical. We obtain a neat and
valid proof from the very fact that, if and when the process is
continued into the decimal part, all the quotient-digits (in the
decimal part) are found to be zeroes and the remainders too
are all zeroes !
Proof to the Contrary
A number can not be an exact square in the following
circumstances :
(1) if it ends in 2, 3, 7 or 8;
(2) if it terminates in an odd number of zeroes;
(3) if its last digit is 6 but its penultimate digit is even ;
(4) if its last digit is not 6 but its penultimate digit is
odd ; and
(5) if, even though the number be even, its last two digits
(taken together) are not divisible by 4;
AND a square root cannot be correct if it falls to fulfil
any of the requirements hereinabove indicated :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Examples
dome instructive illustrative examples are given below:
М.
7: 291 :3 1...(incomplete)
3: 748 ...(incomplete)
: 6:423 `0 00 .. А complete square
ты —
2: 71 883-0000 X .. An exact square
5:07 4:000 .. A perfect square
6: 732:000 .. A complete square
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
2:3 (complete) : : 5:7 (complete:
Re 6: 4 (complete) : : 1: 2 8 (complete):
.. A complete square

ОВ enous от 000 .. An exact square
(14) 14: 52: 443 90 7 (to 2 places of decimals)
(15) 16: 73: 2 1 0 8 (to 3 decimal-places)
6) 8:18: E34 5 I 2 6 (to 3 decimal-places)
(17) 6: 13: 87000 (to 4 decimal-places)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
CIR L гайг 2.800080 2

| Eos o =
ui m ссн
HESS |
Rau ak «=з =
6::09: 0 0 4 5 13 (to 5 decimal-places) |
jor eee
ET |
о а=]
:1:44. 00 .. А complete square.
Or, taking the first two digits together at the first step,
we have:
: 4. 0 2. An exact square
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXXV
—À
CUBE ROOTS
of
EXACT CUBES
(Mainly by Inspection and Argumentation)
(Well-known) FIRST-PRINCIPLES
(1) The lowest cubes (1.6. the cubes of the first nine natural
(2) Thus, they all have their own distinct endings; and
the is no possibility of over-lapping (or doubt as in the case
of squares).
(3) Therefore, the last digit of the cube root of an exact
cube is obvious: с
(i) Cube ends in1; .. cube root ends in 1;
(п) С ends in ; .. C R ends in 8;
1 О R ends in 7;
-. € R ends in 4
.-. О R ends in 5;
.. € R ends in 6
г. € R ends in 3;
; . C R ends in 2; and
; СВ ends in 9;
(ш) С ends in
(iv) C ends in
(v) C ends in
we
. we
(vi) C ends in
we
(vii) С ends in
we
(уш) C ends in
ооло л нњ wo WN
- (ix) О ends in
(4) In other words,
(i) 1, 4, 5, 6, 9 and 0 repeat themselves in the cubeendings ; and
(1) 2, 3, 7 and 8 have an inter-play of complements
(from 10).
(5) The number of digits in a cube root is the same as the
P number of 3-disit groups (in the original cube) including a
single digit or a double-digit group (if any such there be).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ceu N

(6) The first digit of the cube-root will always be obvious
from the first group in the cube).
(7) Thus, the number of digits, the first digit and the
| be root of an exact cube are the data with
ligit of the cu
last C18 hen we enter on the work of extractmg
which we starb, when
the cube roob of an exact cube.
Examples · |
(Let a, 1 and n be the symbols for the first digit, the leet
digit and the number of digits in the cube root of an exact
cube). *
The Chart-Preliminary and Procedure
The procedure is similar to the one adopted by us in
“Straight Division” and particularly in the extraction of square
roots.: The only -difference is that our divisor (in this context) |
will not be double the first digit of the root but thrice the square |
thereof. Ав we know the first digit at the very outset, our
| chart begins functioning as usual (as follows) : ;
sepes sure ES |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

En сз 7 -—
Algebraical Principle Utilised
Any arithmetical number can be put into its proper
algebraical shape ав:
Suppose we have to find the cube of a three-digit arithmetical number. Algebraically, we have to expand (a--10b--
1000) Expanding it accordingly, we have:
Removing the powers of ten and putting the result in
algebraical form, we note the following :
(1) The units’ place is determined by аз.
(2) The tens' place is determined by 3 a?b
(3) The hundreds’ place is contributed to by 3 ab?--3a?c
(4) The thousands’ place is formed by b3--6abc
(5) The ten thousands' place is given Бу 3ac?--3b?c
(6) The lakhs’ place is constituted of 3bc?; and
(7) The millions’ place is formed by o3.
N.B. :—The number of zeroes in the various coefficients (in the
Algebraical expansion) will prove the correctness of this
А analysis.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
+ eS eS eee гн

je :—1f one wishes to proceed in the reverse direction, one
E may do во; and, for facility's sake, the letters substituted (for a, b, c, d etc.) may be conveniently put down
as L, К, J, H etc.
The Implications of the Principle
This Analytical sorting of the various parts of the
expansion into their respective places, gives us the
necessary clue for eliminating letter after letter and determining
the previous digit. And the whole procedure is really of an
argumentational character. Thus, |
(i) From the units’ place, we subtract a? (or 13) ; and that
eliminates the last digit.
(ii) From the ten’s place, we subtract 3a?b (or 3L?K) and
thus eliminate the penultimate digit.
(iii) From the hundreds’ place, we subtract 3a?c--3ab*
(or 2 3L?J--31k?) and there-by eliminate the prepenultimate digit.
(iv) From the thousands’ place, we deduct b3-+6abc ;
and so on
N.B.:—In the case of perfect cubes we have the additional
advantage of knowing the last digit too, beforehand.
algebraical
Some instructive examples are given below:
(1) Extract the cube root of the exact cube 33, 076, 161.
Here a=3 ; L=1 ; and n=3.
-. Subtracting 1, we bave
deua: al
(К) 3L2K=8k (ending in 6) .. K=2 | 6
Deducting 3K ; we have 33 0761
.. 3J endsin 9 .. J—3
N.B. :—The last step is really unnecessary (as the first digit is
known to us from the outset).
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |

(2) Extract the cube root’of the exact cube 1728.
Here, a=1; L—2 and n—2 e CR=12
(3). Extract the cube root of the exact cube 13,824
Неге a=2; L—4; and n—2 mu (CR 24
(4) Determine the cube root of the exact cube 83, 453, 453.
Here F=4; L=7; and N=3
Subtracting this, we have | ЫЛЕ 349%
21 subtracting 441. .88 448 7
(J) 3L?J-4-3LK?—147J 4-189 (ending in D)
N.B. :—Exactly as in the previous example.
(5) Find out the cube root of the exact cube 84, 604, 519
(L) L=9 ». 18—729 .. Subtracting this _. 729
. Subtracting 729, . “845965 0
N.B. :—As before. 4%
(6) Extract the cube root of the exact cube 2488 58189
(J) 3L*J--3LK?—243J--108 (ending in 6) >
N.B. Same as before,
(7) Determine the cube root of the-exact cube 105823817
(L) L=3 ~.. L3—97. Subtracting this 27
- (K) 812К--27К (ending in Е lhe 180:
ү Subtracting 189, we have. } - 1058219
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

N.B. As before, bath:
(8) Extract the cube root of the exact cube 143 055 667
(L) 1=3 ., L8=27. deducting this 27
Subtracting 54, we have 143 055 1
(J) 3L?J+3LK?=27J 4-36 (ending in 1) |
SESS .. CR=523
N.B. Exactly as before.
(9) Find the cube root of the cube 76, 928, 302, 277.
Here 4224, L=3 ; [ш last 4 digis are 2277
and n=4. 27
(L) L=3 .. L3—27. Subtracting this, ,
(К) 3L?K —27K (ending in 5) | 185
2. К--5 .. Subtracting 135, 09
(J) 3L2J-+3LK2=27J-+225 (ending }
N.B.:—But, if, on principle, we wish to determine the first
digit by the same method of successive elimination of
the digits, we shall have to make use of another algebraical expansion (namely, of (L--K-F-J--H)*. And,
on analysing its parts as before into the units, the tens,
the hundreds etc., we shall find that the 4th step will
reveal 3L2H+6LKJ-+K® as the portion tc be deducted.
So,
(10) Determine the cube root of the cube 11,345, 123, 223
(L) L=7 .. 13—343. Subtracting it, 343
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(K).3L?K--147K (ending in 8) 588
(ending in 0) .. J—2 пз 4
~. Subtracting 330, we have
on BE
N.B. The last part (for ascertaining the first digit) is really
superfluous.
(11) Extract the cube root of the cube. 12, 278, 498, 443
(L) L=7 .. L3—343 .. Deducting it 343
(К) 3L?K—147K (ending in 0)
TUNI Їїе 278 498 1
(J) 3L3J--3LK?—147J--0 (endingin1) 441
.. Subtracting 441, we have
and ends in 4 .. H—2 Ёс CR=2307
N.B. As in the last example.
(12) Find the cube root of the cube 355 045 312 441
(1) L—1 .. L§=1, Deducting it, 1
7 К=8 2. Deducting 24. 24
(H) 3L*H-F6LKJ--K3—3h-L-0-L-512
and ends in3 .* h=7 ` 2, CR=7081
N.B. Exactly as above.
Note :—The above method is adapted mainly for odd cubes.
‚ If the cube be even, ambiguous values may arise at
each step and tend to confuse the student’s mind.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
SSS SE eee eae

Determine the cube root of the cube · 792 994219216
(L) L=6 . - L3=216. Deducting this, 216
. K=0 or 5. Which isit to be ? 772 994 21386
Let us ek 5 (a pure gamble) !
(J) 3 a LORI ADU (ending Je SS 666
(К) E 108K (ending in zero) 540
Which should we prefer ? Let us
accept 2 (another perfect gamble) !
2. H=4 or 9! Which should we
choose ? Let us gamble again
and pitch for 9! . «. CR=9256
Here, however, our previous knowledge of the first digit
may come to our rescue and assure us of its being 9. ‘But the
other two were pure gambles and would mean 2 x2 Le. four
different possibilities !
A Beiter Method
At every step, however, the ambiguity can be removed
by proper and cogent argumentation ; and this may also prove
interesting. And anything intellectual may be welcomed ; but
it should not become too stiff and abstract; and an ambiguity
(in such a matter) is wholly undesirable (to put it mildly). A
better method is therefore necessary, is available and is given
below.
All that has to be done is to go on dividing by 8 ern an
odd cube emanates), work the sum out and multiply by the
proper multiplier thereafter. Thus,
Т ey
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Here a=1; L=7; and n—4
Subtracting this, | 343
(К) 3L3K—147K (ending in 5) 735
", К--5. Deducting 735. 672
(J) шла +595 (ending in }
2) .. J—1 Deducting 672, we have: J1548 742
(Н) 3L?H+6LKJ+K%=147K+210 Io The cubeа= 147H-+-335 (ending in 2) root is 1157
i= And \
ша ‚ CR (of the original cube=8 x1157=9256
N.B. Here too, the last step is unnecessary (as the first digit
is already known to us).
(14) Determine the cube rot of the cube 2, 840, 362, 499, 528
Here a=1 ; L=2 ; andn=5
* Deducting this, we have )2840 362 499 52
(K) 312К--12К and ends in 2 72
Deducting 12K. 228
Let us Dus 1!
—4 or 9: Let us take 4!
(G) We need not bother ourselves
about Gand the expansion of
(a+b+c+d-+te)? and so on.
Obviously G—1 2: CR=14162
i ` But the middle three digits have been the subject of un-
: certainty (with 2x2x2 =8 different possibilities). We
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
| LE

E st. therefore work this. case. too out by the- other—the
mustu- |
snambiguous—method.
Here a=7; L=1; and n—4
2. Subtracting this, we have 1 |
(К) 3L?K—3K (ending in 4) 24
and ends in2 2, J=0 | 19 2
2. Subtracting 192, 355 045 13
and ends in 8 .. H—7 г. Cube Root=7081
CR of the original expression=14162
(15) Find out the 12-digit exact cube whose last four digits are
Here a= 7; L=1 ; and n=4 ie Gaal
(L) L=1 “. L§=1 .. Subtracting it, 1
(К) 3L2K=8K and ends in 4 : 24
К--8 ..Deducting 24. j DONDE
(J) 3L?J-4-3LK?—3J 4-192 and ends eres
m On } ЕЕ
2, Subtracting 195, we have
512=3H-+560 and ends in 7. . The original
goat) Cube Root is 9181
N.B. Аз we did not know the first digit beforehand, all the
Steps were really necessary.
(16) A 13-digit perfect cube begins with 5 and ends with 0541.
Find it and its cube root.
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar Н

Here a=1; L=1; and n=5. 0641
(L) L=1 .; 18-41. Deducting it. 1 |
Cb am
2. Subtracting 24, we have j up NUES UE
and ends in 8 .. J—7 ЕЗУ ЭОЕ E:
2. Deducting 213, we have | ;
НЕЯ
And the cube—
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
b ee e gud ner

CHAPTER XXXVI
CUBE ROOTS (GENERAL)
Having explained an interesting method by which the
T roots of exact cubes can be extracted, we now proceed
o deal with cubes in general (i.e. whether exact cubes or not).
Л all numbers cannot be perfect cubes, it stands to reason that
‚ there should be a general provision made for all cases. This,
‘of course, there is; and this we now take up.
First Principles
It goes without saying that all the basic principles explained and utilised in the previous chapter should hold good
here too.
of the last chapter but may just, by way of recapitulation,
remind ourselves of the conclusions arrived at there and the
modus operandi in question.
We need not, therefore, re-iterate all that portion
The Sequence of the Various Digits
Її) The first place by ад
2) The second place by 8а?
3) The third place by 3ab?+3a%c
The fourth place by барс- 58
5) The fifth place by 3ac?+3b?c
6) The sixth place by 3bc?
7) The seventh place by c?; and so on.
The Dividends, Qotients, and Remainders
| (1) The first Р, Q апа R are available at sight.
From the third, subtract Зар?
| : (2) From the second dividend, no deduction is to be made.
From the fourth, deduct 6 арс-)-58
5) from the fifth, subtract 3ac?--3b?c
from the sixth, deduct 802
7) from the seventh, subtract c?.; and so on.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Modus Operandi
Let us take a concrete example, namely, 258 474 853 and
See the modus operandi actually 258: 4 74853
at work (step by step) 108 : :42 100
- Nc cpu EE ЕЕЕ
DANI UFU HMM.
(а) Put down 6 and 42 as first Q and first В by mere
Vilokanam (inspection).
(b) The second Gross Divident 228814 74853
tract any thing thereform. : 6: 3 7
. Merely divide it by 108 Тык: PME E
and put down 3 and 100 as Оз and В,
(с) So, the third Gorss : 258: 4 7 4853
tract therefrom 3ab? (i.e. М6 37 А
third Actual Working Dividend therefore is 1007—
162--845. . Divide this by 108 and set down 7 and 89
ав 05 and Б,
(4) Thus, the fourth Gross 258: 4 7 4 858
tract therefrom 6 арс-- - END ат: 9
So, the fourth actual working dividend is 894--783--
111. Divide this again by 108 and put down 0 and
111 as Q,and R,.
(0) Our next gross dividend is 258: 474 853
from 3ac?-L-35 20, — que
—1071. Therefore our fifth LL UNO ы с ОНЕ
actual working dividend is 47, Divide it by 108 and |
v put down 0 and 47 ав Q; and R;
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
SS ee ee

Our sixth gross divi- 958: 47 4 8 5
therefrom 3bc?(—441) ОЕ 0 а
So, our Q, and Re бойы сн
now are 0 and 34.
(0) Our last gross dividend is thus 343. Subtract C?
(—343) therefrom and set down 0 and 0 as our ©,
and 6,
This means that the given number is a perfect cube,
that the work (of extracting its cube root) is over and that
the cube root is 637.
N.B. Proof of the correctness of our answer 18, of course,
readily available in the shape ofthe fact that 637? is the
given number. But this will be too crudely and cruelly
laborious. Sufficient proof, however, is afforded by the
very fact that, on going into the decimal part of the
answers, we find that all the quotients and all the remainder sare zeroes.
An Incomplete cube is now dealt with as a sample :
Extract the cube root of 417 to 3 places of decimals.
Here the divisor is 147.
yore e Tt sel
(a) Here Q, and R,—7 and 74
(Б) 2: The second gross dividend is 740. No subtraction
is required. 2. Dividing 740 by 147, we get 4 and
152 as Q, and Rp.
(c) .. The third gross dividend is 1520. Subtracting
8452 (—330) therefrom, we have 1184 ав our third
actual working dividend. We divide it by 147 and put
down 7 and 155 as our Q,'and Rs.
(d) Our fourth gross dividend is 1550. We subtract 6abc+
ЪЗ (—1176-4-64—19240) therefrom, obtain 310 as our
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
А
T ; F

ee
fourth actual working dividend, divide it by 147 and
set down 1 and 163 as ош Q, and R,.
(e) Our next gross dividend is 1630. We subtract Зас2--
8520 (=1029+336=1365) therefrom, get 265 as our
fifth actual working dividend, divide it by 147; and
so on.
Note :—The divisor should not be too small. Its ultra-smallness
will give rise to big quotients (sometimes of several
digits), the insufficiency of the remainders for the
subtractions to be made and other such complications
which will confuse the student’s mind.
In case the divisor actually happens to be too small,
two simple devices are available for surmounting this difficulty,
(i) Take the first four (or 5 or 6) digits as one group and
extract the cube root. For example, suppose we
have to find out the cube root of 1846, 085. Our
chart will then have to be framed thus:
Let us now take an actual concrete example and apply
this method for extracting the cube root of 6334625 :
T E >
18 C IMS
(0) No subtraction being needed at this point, divide 5026
by 972 and put down 5 and 166 ав Q, and R,. |
(c) Our third gross dividend (G.D) is 1662; subtract 3ab? j
(=1350) from 1662, divide the resultant. Actual !
“3 dividend (AD) i.e. 312 by 972 and set down 0 and 312
1 аз Qs and Ry.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Mu e СИЕ ТУРУУ rn ee

(d) Our next GD is 3125. Subtract 6abe+b? (=0+125=
125) from 3125, divide the AD (3000) by 972 and put
down 2 and 1944 as ©, and R4; and so on,
Or, Secondly, multiply E (the given expression) by
оз, 33, 43 or 5? etc., (as found necessary and most
convenient) find the cube root and then divide the CR
by 2, 3, 4, 5 etc. For instance, instead of taking 3
(as the divisor), take 3x 49 (—3 х 64=192), find the cube
root and divide it by 4.
Here again, a concrete example may be worked out by
both the methods:
First Method
m o mS
(b) Now, GD=AD=10. Divided by 3, it gives 2 and 4 as
Q and Reg.
(c) The third GD is 40. From this subtract Зар? (=12).
After this subtraction, the AD is 28. Divide this by
3 and put down 6 and 10 as Q and Rs.
(4) The fourth GD is 100. From this deduct барс--08
Now, as for dividing this 20 by 3, the directly apparent
Q, and R, are 6 and 2. But the actual quotient and Remainder
are difficult to determine (because of the smallness of the divisor)
and the insufficiency of the Remainders for the next subtractions and a good number of trial digits may fail before one can
arrive at the correct figures! This is why the other method
is to be preferred in such cases. And then the working will
be as follows :
Multiplying 2 by 5°, 250: 000
oM UA) 9
(b) E,—340. Dividing this by 108, we have Q,—2 and
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

d - (c) 3ab3—72. Deducting this from 1240, we get 1168.
| Dividing this by 108, Q,—9 and R,—196
(d) 6abe+b?=648+8=656 2. The Working Dividend
—1960—656—1304. Dividing this by 108, we have
.. Dividing by 5, the actual cube root—1-259..
(2) Let us take another 1500: 0 0 0
concrete example ie. 363 : : 169 238 400 387
312. We multiply SM EU T ye x
12 by 5? and put I T 3
1500 down as the Total Dividend. And we take the
first four digits as one group.
(а) Thus Q,—11 and R,—169
(b) Dividing 1690 by 363, we have Q,—4 and R,=238
(c) 3ab?—528 2. Working Dividend—2380—528—1852
.. Dividing it by 363, we have 05=4 and R—400
(d) 6abo-I-b3—1056-1-64—1120. Deducting this from 4000,
we get 2928. Dividing this by 363, 0,--7 and
-. The CR=11-447 etc.
=. The cube root of the original E—2-989. ..
Some more examples may be taken:
(exact cube)
(0) 7 divided by 8 gives 2 and 1 as О» and Б,
(c) Third Gorss Dividend=12; 3ab?—12; .. Actual
dividend=0 .. Q,—0 and Re—0
(d) Fourth gross dividend—8; барс--53--0--8--8
“2. Subtracting the latter from: the former, Q,—0
+ апа R4-—0
^. The CR=12 P
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ÍO C

N.B. The obvious second proof speaks for itself.
(Perfect cube)
(b) 48 gives Q5—4; and R,—10
(c) Gross Dividend=102; 3ab?=96.
2, Actual dividend=6. Divided by 12, this gives
and R,=0 2, The OR is 24.
(complete cube).
(b GD=AD=60; Divided by 27, this gives 2 &6 as,
Q and К,
(с) GD is now 67; 3ab?=36 2, A.D—31. Divided by
27, this gives us 1 and 4 as Q, and Rg.
divided by 27, this gives 0 and 2 as Q, and R,.
divided by 27, this gives 0 and 0 as Q; and Rs.
(f) GD 156; 3bc?—6 -2 AD=0. And, divided by 27,
this gives us 0 and 0 as Q, and Rg.
(9) GD=1; 68-41, AD=0. Divided by 27, this gives us
0 and 0 as Q, and R, . The OR is 321.
N.B.—The second proof is clearly there before us.
~ (b GD=AD=370; and, divided by 48, this gives us 6
and 82 as 9, апа Б,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

p КО с рс е с ое
(с) GD=820; 3ab?—432 .. AD=888. and, divided
by 48, this gives us 5 and 148 as Q and В,
с. AD-—544. And this, divided by 48, gives us 9
and 112 as Q, and В,
©. AD=280. And, divided by 48, this gives us 5
and. 40 as Q; and R; ; and so on.
(а) Here Q,=8; and R,—2; and D=27
(6) GD=AD=27 ; and, divided by 29: 791
27, this gives us 1 and 0 as. 21: :20
Q, and В,. IE
(complete cube)
(c) GD—9 ; and 3ab?—9 ; .. AD=0, and, divided by 27,
this gives us 0 and 0 а8 0, and В, .. The OR is 31.
N.B. :—The proof is there-before us as usual.
(6) The given expression (E)—83, 453, 453
by 48, this | : 4: 3 T. 0 0 0 (exact cube)
gives us 3 and 50 as Q, and К,
(с) GD=505 ; and 3ab?—108 ..АГ--397. And, divided
by 48, this gives us 7 and 61 as Оз and Rg
And, divided by 48, this gives us 0 and 82 as Q, & R;
=47 And this, divided by 48, gives us 0 and 47 as |
i ^. The CR is 437. !
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar |

EE И
( зав).
N.B. :—The proof is there as usual.
and В,=20 : 4: 39- 0 0 0 (perfect cube)
(b) @G@D=AD=206. And, divided by 48, this gives us 3
and 62 as 9, and К,
(c) GD=620 ; and 3ab?—108 ..AD-512. And, divided
by 48, this gives us 9 and 80 as Q4 and К;
And, divided by 48, this gives us 0 and 129 as Q, & К,
<. AD—80. And, divided by.48, this gives us 0 and
80 as Q; and R;
(f) GD—801 ; and 3be?—729 .. AD=72. And, divided
by 48, this gives us 0 and 72 as Q, and Re
2. The CR is 439
N.B. :—The proof is there as usual.
and D=48 : 4 : 73: 0 0 0 (complete cube)
(b) GD=AD=418. And, divided by 48, this gives us
7 and 82 as Q, and К,
(с) GD=822; and 3ab?—588 ... AD—234 ; and, divided
by 48, this gives us 3 and 90 as ©» and R,
And, divided by 48, this gives us zero and 56 ав О, & R4
=19. And divided by 48, this gives us zero and 19
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar Ё

чар
(f) GD—191; and 3bc?=189 .. АР--2: and,-divided
by 48, this gives us zero and 2 ав О, and Б,
Ёо Lhe CR=473
N.B. :—The proof is there as usual.
(b GD=AD=180 ; and, divided by 75, this gives us 2
` and 30 as Q, and К,
(c) GD—305 ; and 3ab?—60 .. AD—245 ; and, divided
by 75, this gives us 3 and 20 as Q, and Б,
And, divided by 75, this gives us 0 and 17 as Q, and By
And, divided by 75, this gives 0 and 5 as Q; and Е,
(f) GD—56 ; and 3bc?—54 .. AD=2; and, divided Бу
75, this gives 0 and 2 as Q, and Re.
. The CR is 523
N.B. :—The proof is there as usual.
: 6: 2 9. 0 0 O(perfect cube)
(b GD=AD=328. And, divided by 108, this gives us 2
and 112 as Q, and R,
(c) GD—1125 ; and 8ab?=72 .-. AD—1053 ; and, divided
by 108, this gives us 9 and 81 as Q, and B.
And, divided by 108, this gives 0 and 162 ав Q, & В,
.-. AD=55. And, divided by 108, this gives us 0 and
: : 65 аз Q; and Ry.
ГИ!
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(f) GD=558 ; and 3bc?—486 г, AD=72 ; and, divided Бу
108, this gives us 0 and 72 and Q, and R,
*. The CR is 629
N.B. :—The proof is there as usual.
Note:—The cube root in this case being of four digits, the
method obtained from the expansion of (a--b--c)?
will naturally not suffice for this purpose ; and we shall
have to expand (a+-b-++c-+d)? and vary the above pro- -
cedure in accordance therewith. This is, of course, perfectly reasonable.
The Schedule of Digits
The Analytical digit-schedule for (a--b--c-4-d)? now stands
as follows :
(а) First digit (9 zeros)—a3—
(b) Second digit (8 zeros) =8a2b—
(c) Third digit (7 zeros)—3ab?-]-3a?c
(d) Fourth digit (6 zeros)—6abc--b34-3a?d
(e) Fifth digit (5 zeros)—6abd--3ac?--3b?c —
(f) Sixth digit (4 zeros)—6acd-F-3bc?-I-3b?c—
(9) Seventh digit (3 zeros)—6bcd--3ad?--c?—
(7) Eighth digit (2 zeros)—3bd?-F-3c?d—
(? Ninth digit (1 zero)—3cd?—
(7) Tenth digit (no zero)—d?
| Consequent Subtractions
(1) Qı and В, by mere inspection.
(2) 0, and R, by simple division (without any subtraction
whatsoever).
(3) From all the other Gross Dividends, subtract :
(b) 6abd-L-3ac?-I-3b?c
(6) 6acd --3bc?-I-3b?d
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar :

respectively, in order to obtain the actual working dividend
and thence deduce the required Q and R.
Note :—It will be noted that, just as the equating of d to zero
in (a+b-+c-+d)$ will automatically give us (a+b+c)8
exactly so will the substitution of zero for d in the above
schedule give us the necessary schedule for the
three-digit cube root: |
Аз we go higher and higher up (with the number of digits
in the cube root), the same process will be found at work. In
other words, there is a general formula for n terms (n being any
positive integer); and all these are only special applications
of that formula (with n equal to 2, 3, 4 and so оп). This general
form of the formula, we shall take up and explain at a later stage
in the student's progress.
In the meantime, just now, we explain the application of
the (a+b-+c-+d)8 schedule to the present case.
Application to the Present Case
— ee
(a) 0,--2: R,—3; and Divisor is 12
(6) GD=AD=83. Dividing this by 12, we get Q,—2 and
с. Q,—' and R,—37
г. AD=76 „у. QQ—0 and RQ—76.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Oe eS eee

Ry=34
2. The cube root is 2247
N.B. :—The ocular proof is there, as usual. This is the usual
procedure. There are certain devices, however, which
can help us to over-come all such difficulties; and,
if and when a simple device is available and can serve
' our purpose, it is desirable for us to adopt it and minimise
the mere mechanical labour involved and not resort
to the other ultra-laborious method.
The devices are therefore explained hereunder :
The First Device .
The first device is one which we have already made use of,
namely, the reckoning up of the first 4, 5 or 6 digits as a group
by itself. Thus, in this particular case:
22 : 4 7. 0 O0 0 (complete cube)
(a) Ө, (by the same process) is the double-digit number
(6) GD=AD=6971 ; and, divided by 1452, this gives us
4 and 1163 as 9, and К,
divided by 1452, this gives us 7 and 412 as Qs and Е,
363; and, divided by 1452, this gives us 0 and 363
as Q, and R,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

-. AD=62; and, divided by the same divisor 1452,
this gives us zero and 62 as 0, and R,
and R,—34
N.B. :—(1) And the Proof is there before us, as usual.
(2) By this device, we avoid the complication caused by
shifting from (a+b+c)3 to (a--b--c4-d)*. 1,
however, suffers from the draw-back that we have
first to find the double-digit Q, cube it and subtract
it from the first five-digit portion of the dividend
and that all the four operations are of big numbers.
Second Device
This is one in which we do not magnify the first group
of digits but substitute (c-|-d) for c all through and thus have
the same (a--b--c)3 procedure available to us. But, after all,
it is only a slight alteration of the first device, whereby, instead
of a two-digit quotient-item at the commencement, we will be
having exactly the same thing at the end.
The real desideratum is a formula which is applicable
not only to two-digit, three-digit, or four-digit cube roots but
one which will be automatically and universally applicable. But
this we shall go into at a later stage of the student’s progress.
In the meantime, a few more illustrative instances are
given hereunder (for further elucidation of—or at least, the
student’s practice in, the methods hereinabove explained :
Here too we may follow the full procedure or first ascertain
the first two-digit portion of the cube root of 12, 278, treat the
whole five-digit group as one packet and extract the cube root
E of the whole given expression in the usual way. The procedure
will then be as follows :
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
ln-—————————ABoó | P— — neta

(i) Single-digit method
2: 307: 0 0 00 (perfect cube)
(а) Qy=2; Ry=4; and D=12
'. Qg=0 and К„=8
and R,,—0
г. The CR=2307
N.B. :—The proof is before us, as usual.
(ш) Two-Digit method
Preliminary Work "да 278
ДӘ eae
^. Q, (of two digits) is 28;
ВО О)
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

N.B.
(а) Q, (of two digits)=23 ; R,=111; and D—1587
^. The CR is 2307
:—The proof is before us, as usual.
(i) Single-digit method
“УЛТ ҮГҮТ сл ————É
IE cx
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Ryy=0. ~. The CR=4253
N.B. :—Proof as usual.
(ii) Double-digit method
or, secondly, 12653599
г. Qi (double-digit) —42 48: : 12 33
(f) GD=137; апа! зроз= лБ = Хро
and Б,--2
.. The CR is 4253
N.B. Exactly as above.
(1) Single-Digit method.
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

г. The CR is 7081
N.B. As above.
(1) Double-digit method.
гс. Q4—1 and R,—391
(f) GD=24; and Sbe?—94 i.s AD=0 .. Q,=0 and |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

N.B. As above.
(i) Single-Digit method.
and R4—216
в=0 and Б,д--56
N.B. As above.
| Double-Digit Method
243 ius : 2 ө 2400, (of two digits is 92 and
Beans AS | eee 5 6. 00000
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

-. The CR is 9256
N.B. As above..
Note :—It must be admitted that, although the double-digit
method uses the (a+b-+c)® schedule and avoids the :
(a+b-+c-+d)? one, yet it necessitates the division,
multiplication and subtraction of big numbers and is
therefore likely to cause more mistakes. It is obviousby better and safer to use the (a+b+c+d)3 and deal
with smaller numbers.
In this particular case, however, as the given number
terminates in an even number and is manifestly divisible by
8 (and perhaps 64 or even 512), we can (in this case) utilise
a third method which has already been explained (in the immediately preceding chapter), namely, divide out by 8 (and its
powers) and thus diminish the magnitude of the given number.
We now briefly remind the student of that method.
Third Method
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

(a) Q=! and R,=0
(b) dis =AD=05 .. Q,=1 and R,—2
Rio™=0
*. The C.R. (of the sub-multiple)—1157
*. The C.R. of the given number=9256
Or, Fourthly, the derived submultiple may be dealt
with (by the two-digit method) thus :—
LY 5d 0 о 0
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

г. The cube root of the sub-multiple is 1157
-. The CR of the original number— 9256
N.B. As above.
ГҮ UOS NE д,
En Ou. а
ee og.
This very number having already been dealt with (in
example 3 of this very series, in this very portion of this subject),
we need not work it all out again. Suffice it to say that, because,
7081 is the cube root of this derived sub-multiple,
^. The C.R. of the original number is 14162
Note :—All these methods, however, fall in one way or another,
short of the Vedic ideal of ease and simplicity. And
the general formula which is simultaneously applicable
to all cases and free from all flaws is yet ahead. But
these matters we shall go into, later.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XX XVII
PYTHAGORAS’ THEOREM ETC.
Modern Historical Research has revealed—and all the
modern historians of mathematics have placed on record the
historical fact that the so-called *Pythogoras Theorem" was
known to the ancient Indians long long before the time of
Pythagoras and that, just as although the Arabs introduced the
Indian system of numerals into the Western world and distinctly spoke of them as the “Hindu” numerals, yet, the European
importers thereof undiscerningly dubbed them as the Arabic
numerals and they are still described everywhere under that
designation, similarly exactly it has happened that, although
Pythagoras introduced his theorem to-the Western mathematical
and scientific world long long afterwards, yet that Theorem
continues to be known as Pythagoras’ Theorem !
This theorem is constantly in requisition in a vast lot of
practical mathematical work and is acknowledged by all as
practically the real foundational pre-requisite for Higher Geometry (including Solid Geometry), Trigonometry (both plane
and Spherical), Analytical Conics, Calculus (Differential and
Integral) and various other branches of mathematics (Pure and
Applied). Yet, the proof of such a basically important and
fundamental theorem (ав presented, straight from the earliest
sources known to the scientific world, by Euclid etc., and as still
expounded by the most eminent modern geometricians all
the world over) is ultranotorious for its tedious length, its
clumsy cumbrousness etc., and for the time and toil entailed
on it!
ie There are several Vedic proofs, everyone of which is much
simpler than Euclids' etc. А few of them are shown below:
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

First Proof
Here, the square AE—the square KG
the four congruent right-angled traingles all
> around it.
Their areas are c?, (b—a)? and 4x hab
respectively.
Q.E.D.
Second Proof 28
CONSTRUCTION :
CD=AB=m; and DE=BC=n. .. ABC
and CDE are Congruent ; and ACE is rightangled Isosceles. Now, the trapezium |
ABDE=ABC+CDE+ACE .. 4mn-+$h?+ |
$mn—4(m-F-n) X(m-+n)=4m?2+mn+4n2 |
QoS. [jh?—dm?-.pin? s. h2=m2+n2 Q.E.D. |
(N.B. Here we have utilised the proposition that the area of
a trapezium—4 the altitude xthe sum of the parallel
sides).
Third Proof |
А deii Here, AE=BF=CG=DH=m and EB— E
m ОО ко орна. |
Now, the squae AC=the square EG-- |
T the 4 congruent right-angled triangles around |
um <. V=m2+n?2 Q.E.D.
Fourth Proof
(The proposition to be used here is that the areas of
similar triangles are proportional to the squares on the homologous:sides), Here, BD is | to-AC |
а. ^. The triangles ABC, ABD and BCD
are similar.
. As between (1) the first two triangles
and (2) the first and third ones,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

АВ? ADB. and BC? _ BCD
AC? ABC’ АС? ABC
АВ?2--ВС2 ADBJ4-BCD ABC _
АС? АВО a ABCs
5. AB2+BC?=AC? Q.E.D. |
Fifth Proof
(This proof is from Co-ordinate Geometry. And, as
modern Conics and Co-ordinate Geometry (and even Trigonometry) take their genesis from Pythagoras’ Theorem, this
process would be objectionable to the modern mathematician.
But, as the Vedic Sütras establish their Conics and Co-ordinate
Geometry (and even their Calculus), at a very early stage, on
the basis of first principles and not from Pythagoras’ Theorem
(sic), no such objection can hold good in this case.
The proposition is the one which
| gives us the distance between two
points whose co-ordinates have been
given. Let the points be А and B
and let their co-ordinates be (a, 0)
and (0, b) respectively.
уа .. BA2=a2+b? Q.E.D.
Note:—The Apollonius’ Theorem, Ptolemy's Theorem and a
vast lot of other Theorems are similarly easy to solve
with the aid of the Vedic Sütras. We shall not,
however, go into an elaborate description thereof
(except of the Apollonius Theorem) just now but shall
reserve them for a higher stage in the student's studies.
с, By addition,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXXVIII
APOLLONIUS’ THEOREM
Apollonius’ Theorem (sic) is practically a direct and
elementary corollary or offshoot from Pythagoras’ Theorem.
But, unfortunately, its proof too has been beset with the usual
flaw of irksome and needless length and laboriousness.
The usual proof is well-known and need not be reiterated
here. We need only point. out the Vedic method and leave
it to the discerning reader to do all the contrasting for himself.
And, after all, that is the best way. Isn't it. ?
Well, in any triangle ABC, if D be
the mid-point of ВО, then AB?+AC?=
2(AD?+BD?). This is the proposition
which goes by the name of Apollonius'
Theorem and has now to be proved by
us by a far simpler and easier method than
the one employed by him.
Let AO be the perpendicular from A
on BC; let XOX’ and YOY’ be the axes of co-ordinates ;
and let BO, OD and ОА be m, n and p respectively
-~ DB=DC=m-tn
B огнени
©. AB*--AC?—2 (AD?--DB?) Q.E.D.
Note We faintly remember to have read a proof of Apollonius'
Theorem on these lines in some publication of Prof.
S. L. Loney ; but we are not sure. However that may
be, this proof (by means of. Co-ordinate Geometry)
was well-known to the ancient Indian mathematicians
and specifically finds its place in the Vedic Sütras.
And all the Geometrical Theorems about the concurreney of certain straight lines and about the orthocentre,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
O оо SI cU EM 20221
eum ————

the circum-centre, the in-centre, the ex-centres, the
centroid, the Nine-Points-circle etc., can all be similarly
proved (very simply and very Зайн) by means of
Co-ordinate Geometry.
We shall go into details of these theorems and their
Vedic: proofs later on ; but just now we would just merely point
out that, like the Arabic numerals" and “‘Pythogoras’ Theorem",
the “Cartesian” co-ordinates are a historical MISNOMER, no more,
апа no less.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

CHAPTER XXXIX
ANALYTICAL CONICS
Analytical Conics is a very important branch of mathematical study and has a direct bearing on practical work in various
branches of mathematics. It is in the fitness of things, therefore, that Analytical Conics should find an important and predominating position for itself in the Vedic system of mathematics (as it actually does).
A few instances (relating to certain very necessary and
very important points connected with Analytical Conics) are
therefore given here under (merely by way, let it be remembered, of illustration).
I. Equation to the Straight Line.
For finding the Equation of the straight line passing
through two points (whose co-ordinates are given,
The current method tells us to work as follows:
Take the general equation y—mx-Lc.
Substituting the above values therein,
We have: 9m+c=17; and ™m+c=—2.
| Solving this simultaneous equation in m and c, we have ;
Substituting this value of m (in either of the above two equations)
we have, 664--c——2 .. 0——68$. Substituting these values
of m and cin the Original General Equation (y=mx-+tc), we
get y=94 х —684. 2. Removing fractions, we have 2y=19x—
137. And then, by transposition, we say, 19x—2y=137. But
this method is decidedly too long and cumbrous (and especially
for such a petty matter) !
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

And the Second Current Method (which uses the formula
a Уз (хх) is equally cumbrous and confusing.
улуй icr It ultimately amounts to the right
thing ; but it does not make it clear and requires several more
steps of working!
But the Vedic at-sight, one-line, mental method (by the
Pardvartya Sutra) enables us to write the answer mechanically
down by a mere casual look at the given co-ordinates. And
it is as follows:
The General Equation to the straight line (in its final
form) 18 ..x—..y=.. [where the co-efficients of x and
y (on the left hand side) and the independent (on the Right
hand-side) have to be filled in]. The Sütra tells us to do this
very simply by :
(i) putting the difference of the y —co- -ordinates as the
x-coefficient and vice versa; and
(i) evaluating the independent term оп that basis.
For example, in the above example, the co-ordinates are :
(i) so our x-coefficient is 17—(—2)=19
(ii) and our y—coefficient is 9—7=2.
Thus we have 19 x —2y as our L.H.S. straightaway.
(ii) As for the absolute term on the R.H.8., as the straight
line in question passes through the two given points,
the substitution of the original co-ordinates of each
of the points must give us the independent term.
So, the substitution of the values 9 and 17 in the L.H.S.
. of the equation gives us 19 9—2 X 17—171—34—137 |
Or Substituting the values 7 and —2 therein, we get 19 ХТ
—2x—2—133--4—137! And that is additional confirmation
and verification !
But this is not all. There is also a third method by
which we can obtain the independent term (on the R.H.S).
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

And this is with the help of the rule about Adyam Antyam
and Madhyam i.e. be—ad (i.e. the product of the means minus
the product of the extremes)! So, we have 17X7—9x—
2—1194-18—137 ! And this is stil further additional
confirmation and verification !
So, the equation is:—19x—2y —137 which is exactly the
same as the one obtained by the elaborate current method
(with its simultaneous equations transpositions and substitutions eto; galore)! And all the work involved in the Vedic method
has been purely mental, short, simple and easy !
A few more instances are given below:
.. The Equation to the straight line joining them is:
(3) (10, 8) and (9, 7) 2. х—у=2 (by Vilokan too)
* x(b—d)—y (a—c)=bc—ad
| II. The General Equation and Two Straight Lines. `
| The question frequently arises :—When does the General
Equation to a straight line represent two straight lines ?
` Expounding the current conventional method, Prof. S. L.
Loney (the world-reputed present-day authority on the subject)
devotes about 15 lines (ot of argument or of explanation
but of hard solid working) in section 119, example 1 on page -
2 97 of his “Elements of Co-ordinate Geometry”, to his model
solution of this problem as follows:
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

“2, abo+2fgh—af2—bg?—ch?
ЕЕГ)
. The equation represents two straight lines.
Solving it for.x, we have: |
ier ASINI y+ y= Oy y+ +( VE )
Ту--18 23y МЗ
CLAVE EM EDU
2. The two straight lines are 3x —2y —7 and 4х==—5у--5
Note :—The only comment possible for us to make hereon is
that the very magnitude of the numbers involved in the
fractions, their multiplications, subtractions etc., ad
infinitum is appalling and panic-strikmg and that it
is such asinine burden-bearing labour that is responsible
for, not as a justification for, but, at any rate, an extenuation for the inveterate hatred which many
youngsters and youngstresses develop for mathematics
— assuch and for their mathematics-teachers as such!
We make no reflection on Prof. Loney. He is perhaps
one of the best, the finest and the most painstaking of mathematicians and is very highly esteemed by us as such and for his
beautiful publications (which are standard authorities on the
various subjects which they deal with). It is the system that
we are blaming, (or, at any rate, comparing and contrasting with
the Vedic system).
Mow, the Vedic method herein is one by which we can
immediately apply the “Ordhwa” Sūtra the Adyam Adyena
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Siitra and the Гората Sthapana Sutra and by merely looking at
the frightful looking (but really harmless) Quadratic before
us, readily by mere mental arithmetic, write down the answer
to this question and say :—‘‘Yes; and the straight lines are
3x—2y--7—0 and 4x--5y—5—0. How exactly we do this (by
mental arithmetic), we proceed to explain presently. /
: The Vedic Method
Ф217 By the “Ordhoa Tiryak”, the 3x—9y-L7.
“Тората Sthapana” and Ње“ Adyam Adyena" — Ayo :
Sutras (as explained in some of the 12x*+7xy—l0y
earliest chapters), we have (mentally): | ————— —————
12x*—Txy +10y?=(3x—2y) (4x--5y) and we find 7 and—5 to
be the absolute terms of the two factors. We thus get
(3x—2y+7)=0 and (4x--5y—5)—0 as the two straight lines
represented by the given equation. And that is all there is to it. .
The Hyperbolas amd the Asymptotes.
Dealing with the same principle and adopting the same
procedure in connection with the Hyperbola, the Conjugate
Hyperbola and the Asymptotes, in articles 324 and 325 on pages
293 & 294 of his “Elements of Co-ordinate Geometry", Prof.
5. L. Loney devotes 27 +14 (—41) lines in all to the problem and
concludes by saying:
“Ав 3х2—5ху—2у2 5x4 lly—g—0 is the equation of the
Asymptotes,
mM i. 08 (ир
in) Ps "o eomm ор 0
^. The Equation to the Asymptotes is 3x?—6xy —2y?-L
And Consequently the Equation to the Con
bola is 8х2--8ху--2у24-5х-11У--16,
Well; ай this is not so terrifi
| : c-looking, because of the
very simple fact that all the working (according to Art, 116 on
pages 95 etc.) has been taken for granted and done “out of Court?
jugate HyperСС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

or in private, so to speak. But even then the substitution of the
values of a, b, c, f, g, and h in the Discriminant to the General
Equation and so on is, from the Vedic standpoint, wholly
supererogatory toil and therefore to be avoided.
By the Vedic method, however, we use the same Lopan
Sthapana the Ürdhva Tiryak and the Adyam Adyena Sütras ;
we first get-mentally 8х--у and 3x--y —4
x—2y and then—4 and 3 as the _X—2y+3
only possibilities 1 in the case; and 253 mi E eae a ee
as this givesus-12 in the product, Зай--бхуг-2у ааг угаа Е
we get this product—0 as the Equation to the Asymptotes ;
and, as the Conjugate Hyperbola is at the same distance-in the
opposite direction from the Asymptotes, we put down the same
equation (with only —16 instead of—8) as the required Equation
to the Conjugate Hyperbola (and have not got to bother about
the complexities of the Discriminants, the inevitable substitutions and all the rest of it)! And that is all.
A few more illustrative instances will not be out of place:
", The Equation to the Asymptotes is 8х2-4-10ху —3y?—2x
+4y=1; and the Equation to the Conjugate Hyperbola is
' The Asymptotes are (y-++-x—2) (y—2x—3)=0 р
And the Conjugate Hyperbola is y?—xy —2x?-|-x —5y 4-18—0
CC-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

2. This is the Equation to the Asymptotes; andthe Equation
to the Conjugate Hyperbola is 55x?—190xy +20y?+ 64x —48y +
,;. The Asymptotes ате: 12x2—23xy-+10y2—25x-+26y
And the Conjugate Hyperbola is ) 12x2—23xy+10y?—25x- 26y
.'. Independent term —4
2. Two straight lines.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ee =
tee САА
re er Үл Др
CHAPTER XL.
MISCELLANEOUS MATTERS
There are also various subjects of a miscellaneous character
which are of great practical interest not only to mathematicians
and statisticians as such but also to ordinary people in the
ordinary course of their various businesses etc., which the modern
system of accounting etc., does scant justice to and in which
the Vedic Sütras can be very helpful to them. We do not propose
to deal with them now, except to name a few of them:
(1) Subtractions ;
(2) Mixed additions and subtractions ;
(3) Compound additions and subtractions ;
(4) Additions of Vulgar Fractions etc ;
(5) Comparison of Fractions ;
(6) Simple and compound practice (without taking
Aliquot parts etc.)
(7) Decimal operations in all Decimal Work ;
(8) Ratios, Proportions, Percentages, Averages etc. ;
(9) Interest ; Annuities, Discount etc ;
(10) The Centre of Gravity of Hemispheres etc ;
(11) Transformation of Equations; and
(12) Dynamics, Statics, Hydrostatics, Pneumatics etc.,
Applied Mechanics etc., etc.
N.B. :—There are some other subjects, however, of an important
character which need detailed attention but which
(owing to their being more appropriate at a later stage)
we do not now propose to deal with but which, at the
same time, in view of their practical importance and
their absorbingly interesting character, do require
a brief description. We deal with them, therefore,
briefly hereunder,
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ИЕЫ ЭРХ Л Л ТТЕ ШЫ Л ү ОГУ НД
Solids, Trigonometry, Astronomy Ete.
In Solid Geometry, Plane Trigonometry, Spherical Trigonometry and Astronomy too, there are similarly huge masses
of Vedic material calculated to lighten the mathematics students’
burden. We shall not, however, go here and now into a detailed
disquisition on such matters but shall merely name a few of the
important and most interesting headings under which these
subjects may be usefully sorted :
(1) The Trigonometrical Functions and their interrelationships ; etc.
(2) Arcs and chords of circles, angles and sines of angles
eto ; Р
(3) The converse i.e. sines of angles, the angles themselves,
chords and arcs of circles etc;
(4) Determinants and their use in the Theory of Equations, Trigonometry, Conics, Calculus etc ;
(5) Solids and why there can be only five regular Polyhedrons ; etc., etc.
(6) The Earth's daily Rotation on its own axis and her
annual relation around the Sun;
(7) Eclipses ;
(8) The Theorem (in Spherical Triangles) relating to the
product of the sines of the Alternate Segments 1.6. i
about : :
Sin BD Si CE Sin AF
Sin DC Sin EA ` Sin FB
(9) The value of 11 (i.e. the ratio of the circumference of a
circle to its Diameter).
N.B. :—The last item, however, is one which we would like to
explain in slightly greater detail.
Actually, the value of = is given in the well-known
уен "РЕ
=1 and
Anustub metre and is couched in the Alphabetical Code-Lan guage |
(described in an earlier chapter) : |
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

NET. 7 7 E MEE
| It is so worded that it can bear three different meanings—
| all of them quite appropriate. The first is a hymn to the Lord
$1 Krsna; the second is similarly a hymn in praise of the
Lord Shri Shankara ; and the third is a valuation of XT 32
places of Decimals! (with a “Self-contamed master-key” for
extending the evaluation to any number of decimal places !
As the student (and especially the non-Sanskrit knowing
student) is not likely to be interested in and will find great
difficulty in understanding the puns and other literary beauties
of the verse in respect of the first two meanings but will naturally
feel interested in and can easily follow the third meaning, we
give only that third one here :
on which, on understanding it, Dr. V. P. Dalal (of the Heidelburg
University, Germany) felt impelled—as a mathematician and
physicist and also as аг Sanskrit scholar—to put on record his
comment as follows: !
*Tt shows how deeply the ancient Indian mathei maticians penetrated, in the subtlety of their
calculations, even when the Greeks had no numerals
above 1000 and their multiplications were so very
complex, which they performed with the help of the
i counting frame by adding so many times the multiplier !
7х5 could be done by adding 7 on the counting frame
5 times" etc., etc. !
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION a
In these pages, we have covered a large number of branches
of mathematics and sought, by comparison and contrast, о таке
the exact position clear to all seekers after knowledge. Arithmetic and Algebra being the basis on which all mathematical
operations have to depend, it was and is both appropriate and
inevitable that, in an introductory and preliminary volume of
this particular character, Arithmetic and Algebra should have
received the greatest attention in this treatise. But this is |
only a kind of preliminary “PROLEGOMENA” and SAMPLE
_ type of publication and has been intended solely for the purpose
of giving our readers a foretaste of the delicious delicacies in
store for them in the volumes ahead.! If this volume achieves
this purpose and stimulates the reader's interest and prompts
him to go in for a further detailed study of Vedic Mathematics
we shall feel more than amply rewarded and gratified thereby.
1 No subsequent volume has been left by the author.—Editor.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

a с ттлт SR Se Tl
А REPRESENTATIVE PRESS OPINION
Reproduced from the Statesman, India, dated 10th January, 1956.
EVERY MAN A MATHEMATICIAN
(Mr. Desmond Dota)
Now in Calcutta and peddling a miraculous commodity is
His Holiness Jagad Guru Sri Shankaracharya of the Govardhan
| Peeth, Puri.
Yet Sri Shankaracharya denies any spiritual or miraculous
powers, giving the credit for his revolutionary knowledge to
anonymous ancients who in 16 Sutras and 120 words laid down
simple formulae for all the world’s mathematical problems.
The staggering gist of Sri Shankaracharya’s peculiar
knowledge is that he possesses the know-how to make a mathematical vacuum like myself receptive to the high voltage of
higher mathematics. And that within the short period of one
year. To a person who struggled helplessly with simple equations and simpler problems, year after school-going year and
without the bolstering comfort of a single credit in the subject,
the claim that I can face M.A. Mathematics fearlessly after
only six months of arithmetical acrobatics, makes me an immediate devotee of His Holiness Jagad Guru Sri Shankaracharya
of the Goverdhan Peeth, Puri.
I was introduced to him in a small room in Hastings, a
frail but young 75 year-old, wrapped in pale coral robes and
wearing light spectacles. Behind him a bronze Buddha caught
the rays of a trespassing sun, splintering them into.a form of
aura; and had ‘His Holiness’ claimed divine inspiration, I
| would have belived him. He is that type of person, dedicated
as, much as I hate using the word; a sort of saint in saint’s
clothing, and no inkling of anything so mundane as a mathematical mind.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

Astounding3W onders.
My host, Mr. Sitaram, with whom His Holiness Sri
Shankaracharya is staying, had briefly prepared me for the
interview. I could pose any question I wished, I could take
photographs, I could read a short descriptive note he had
prepared on “The Astounding Wonders of Ancient Indian
Vedic Mathematics”. His Holiness, it appears, had spent years
in contemplation, and while going through the Vedas had
suddenly happened upon the key to what many historians,
devotees and translators had dismissed as meaningless jargon.
There, contained in certain Sütras, were the processes of mathematics, psychology, ethics, and metaphysics.
“During the reign of King Kamsa" read a Sutra, “rebellions,
arson, famines and insanitary conditions prevailed”. Decoded,
this little piece of libellous history gave decimal answer to the
fraction 1/17 ; sixteen processes of simple mathematics reduced
to one.
The discovery of one key led to another, and His Holiness
found himself turning more and more to the astounding knowledge contained in words whose real meaning had been lost
to humanity for generations. This loss is obviously one of the
greatest mankind has suffered ; and, I suspect, resulted from
the secret being entrusted to people like myself, to whom a
square root is one of life's perpetual mysteries. Had it survived,
every-educated-“soul” ; would, be; a, mathematical- "wizard" Ч
and, жтайһз-“тазїетї” would “starve”. For my note reads
“Little children merely look at the sums written on the blackneeding pen, pencil, paper or slate). This is the sort of thing
one usually refuses to believe. I did. Until I actually met His
Holiness.
On a child’s blackboard, attended with devotion by my
host’s wife; His Holiness began demonstrating his peculiar.
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar
Кыыс SE es ee oon ql
D ЧЕ

skill; multiplication, division, fractions, algebra, and intricate
excursions into higher mathematics for which I cannot find a
name, all were reduced to a disarming simplicity. Yes, I
‹ even shouted out an answer. (‘Algebra for High Schools’,
Page 363, exercise 70, example ten). More, I was soon tossing
off answers to problems, which ; official-Maths-books ; “described”,
as; "advanced", difficult, and very difficult. Cross my heart!
His Holiness’s ambition is to restore this lost art to the
world, certainly to India. That India should today be credited
with having given the world, via Arabia, the present numerals
we use, especially the epochmaking “zero”, is not enough.
) India apparently once had the knowledge which we are today
rediscovering. Somewhere along the forgotten road of history,
calamity, or deliberate destruction, lost to man the secrets he
had emassed. 16 might happen again. :
In the meantime, people like His Holiness Jagad Guru
Sri Shankaracharya of the Govardhan Peeth, Puri, are by a
devotion to true knowledge, endeavouring to restore to humanity
an interest in great wisdom by making that wisdom more easily
acceptable. Opposition there is, and will be. But eminent
mathematicians both here and abroad are taking more than a
passing interest in this gentle ascetic’s discoveries. I for one,
& as а representative of all the mathematically despairing, hope,
| sincerely hope, that his gentle persuasion will prevail.
t
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

е
A
la
"d
a
СС-0. In Public Domain. Gurukul Kangri Collection, Haridwar

ШЕЛ
au Tis
А
ийг
ЕЕ
