READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: the_agni_purana_part_4.json
Dataset number: 390 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 758,250 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: The Agni Purana, Part 4
Creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
Date: 1955
Description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-4-aitm-vol-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-4-aitm-vol-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: The Agni Purana, Part 4
  • creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
  • date: 1955
  • description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-4-aitm-vol-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-4-aitm-vol-30-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>
  • subject: West Bengal Public Library
  • identifier: dli.bengal.10689.20265
  • source_folder: dli.bengal.10689.20265
  • total_pages: 338
  • total_words: 127308
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.922
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE
AGNI PURANA
PART IV
TRANSLATED AND ANNOTATED BY
N. GANGADHARAN
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS • DELHI

First Edition: Delhi, / 955
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
Branches
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Madras 600 004
PRINTED IN INDIA
BY JAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT KIRI J AINENDRA PRESS, A-45 NARAINA
INDUSTRIAL AREA, PHASE I, NEW DELHI 110028 AND PUBLISHED BY
NARBNDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR MOTILAL BANARSIDASS, DELHI 110007.

CONTENTS
CHAPTERS
312. The occasions for the use of the Tvarild-manira
and the benefits 863
313. The wawfraj relating to the worship of different
gods 865
3 14. Alantras relating to the worship of Goddess
Tvarita 868
315. Narration of mantras relating to paralysing,
captivating etc. 871
316. Narration of different kinds of mantras 872
317. The different kinds mantras of Siva 873
318. The mode of worshipping Ganapati, accom¬
plishing all things 876
319. Mode of worshipping Vagisvari (Goddess of
speech) 878
320. The different mystic diagrams 879
321. The appeasing rites relating to 883
322. The appeasing rite employing the mantra of
the weapon of Pasupati 885
323. The mantra of the weapons of Aghora and
the six constituents 887
324. Appeasing rite for lord Siva 891
325. The benefits of wearing the rosary beads and the
counting of the formulae with- them 894
326. Description of the mode of worshipping
Goddess Gauri for gaining enjoyment,
‘emancipation etc. 896

Contents
327. The greatness of establishing a liAga and
worship with the accessories 899
328. The rules of prosody 901
329. An abridgement of rules of prosody relating to
the Vedic metres 902
330. An abridgement of the rules of metres 902
331. Metres of diiferenl kinds 905
332. The metres of un-equal characteristics in the
four quarters 908
333. Description of metres having equal characteris¬
tics in the alternate quarters 910
334. Description of metres having similar charac¬
teristics in the four quarters 91 1
335. The tabular representation of long and short
vowels of different metres 915
336. Description of phonetics 915
337. Description of the characteristics of a 918
338. Description of the different types of drama 92 1
339. Description of the santiments, emotions, hero
340. Description of diction and mode 927
341. Description of the actions and movements of
the limbs 928
342. Definition of dramatic representation 930
343. Definition of the embellishment of words 933
344. Description of the embellishment of sense 939
345. The embellishments of sound and sense 942
346. Investigation into poetic excellences 944
347. Investigation into poetic blemishes 946
348. List of mono-syllabic words 950
349. The pratyaharas and fundami ntal rules in
grammar 953
350. The forms of completed euphonic combinations 954
351. Perfected forms of inflection in the nouns 957
352. Narration of the finished forms of the substan¬
tives in the feminine 966
353. The finished forms of substantives in the
neuter 968

Contents
354. The relation between a noun and a verb in a
sentence 970
355. Different kinds of compounds 973
356. The rules governing the formation of taddhita
(secondary nominal bases) 976
357. The formation of the primary nominal bases by
adding primary afhxes known as beginning
with affix u 980
358. The completed form of the verbs after adding
the conjugational signs etc. 981
359. The finished forms after adding the krt affixes
(primary affixes added to verbs) 985
360. The synonyms of group of words denoting the
celestial region and the nether world 986
361. The indeclinables 996
362. Words having many meanings 1001
363. The words denoting earth, city, forest and herbs 1005
364. Words denoting men and four classes of men 1013
365. Words relating to the class of brahmins 1017
366. Words relating to ksatriya, vailyas and other
classes 1018
367. The class of words dependent on the substantives
for their genders 1024
368. Constant dissolution, occasional and total
dissolution 1028
369. The description of absolute dissolution and the
process of creation 1030
370. The constituent parts of a body 1 034
371 . The description of hells 1 037
372. The major and minor religious observances
{yama-s and myama-‘s) 1041
373. Description of asanas (different physical
postures) and control of breath 1044
374. Contemplation 1046
375. Fixing-up of the mind in the object of
contemplation 1049
376. Deep meditation {samSdhi) 1051
377. ^ Knowledge of Brahman 1055

Contents
378. Knowledge of Brahman 1057
379. Knowledge of Brahman again 1059
380. Knowledge of non-dual Brahman 1062
381. The essence of the 1068
382. The Yamagitd 1073
383. The glorification of the Agnipurdna 1077
INDEX 1085

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWELVE
The occasions for the use of the Tvarita-mantra and the benefits
Fire-god said:
I’S. I shall describe the application of the (Tvarita) Vidya
that would bring about success in matters pertaining to dharma
and fulfil worldly desires. One who knows the mantra divided
and spread over nine squares in the regular and reverse order
as a whole and divided in combination with karnd-vikar^a{?)
and then by their parts combined in the different triangular forms
together with the image of the Goddess would know the man¬
tras that confer success as well as the manifold external appli¬
cations.
4-10. The mantras are manifold in different scriptures. It is
difficult to find (the description of) their application therein.
The first would be long. It is not described in the early hours
of the morning. (The mantras) having a single letter, two
letters and three letters would be applied. (The mystic dia¬
gram) should be divided by four lines each drawn horizontally
and vertically. Thus there would be nine chambers. These
(letters) should be established in the central region clockwise
and then the order is split. One who finds the order by means
of combination of the order that votary would have all the des¬
ired things in his folded hands. The three worlds would be at
his feet. He would get the earth consisting of nine sections. The
votary should write the principle of Siva all around on the skull
or on a rag (got) from the cremation ground after he has come
out. The name should then be written on it at the centre or on
the pericarp. It should then be fumigated with the burning
charcoal of khadira (tree). Then a piece of birch-bark should
be held under the feet. (By this process) one would be able to
bring under his control the entire universe together with the
movable and immovable things in seven days.
11-12. (Otherwise) the name (of the enemy) should bewritten
inside a thunderbolt (shaped) diagram drawn inside (a circle

Affd Purdiia
having) twelve spokes sanctified with (the piinciple of) Sada^iva
(‘always auspicious’). (Alternatively) (the name should be
written) on a wall, or a plank or a stone slab with turmeric.
There would be paralysis of the face, the arrest of movement
and the arrest (of the movement) of the army.
13-1 7. A wiseman should write (the name of the adversary)
with poison and blood inside a diagram of a club in the middle
of a hexagon on a skull in the cremation ground and add (the
principle of) the Goddess. This would kill the enemy struck in
the cremation ground in no time. It will also ruin the kingdom.
The name of the enemy should be written on a disc. The God¬
dess should be invoked on the blades of the disc. The enemy
would be destroyed by means of his name. A person should
write the principal letter (of the jmnlrd) of Tark$ya in the middle
part of the sword. Then the name of the enemy should be wri¬
tten with the ashes (collected) from the cremation ground. One
would be able to win a country. One should strike with the
ashes of a dead person. (The mantra of) 8iva should be used in
creating dcssension, division and death. The Tdraka and Netra
{mantras) should be employed in propitiatory and nourishing
(rites) .
18-21. This is the application (known as) dakanadi (capa¬
ble of) captivating even 8akini (an attendant of Goddess Durga).
(The diagram) having the Vanin! {maaitra) at the centre and
endowed with Vakratunda (bent tusk) would no doubt destroy
the diseases such as leprosy and the like. Repeating the Karali
{mantra) set up (as spreading) from the middle and ending with
the northern direction would guard one’s own amulet. The same
should be coupled with the principle of 8iva and directed against
the opponent. Then it should be located in (tlie directions)
beginning with the west. This would destroy sufferings due to
fever. (If the location is done) commencing with the north and
ending with the middle, it would cause heaviness in the body.
(If it is done) beginning with the east and ending with the
middle, it would make (the body) light in a moment.
22-25. After having written this on the bhurja leaf (with
resin) endowed with the marks of thunderbolt, one should add
the principal letters of the mantra. This would offer protection
to the bodies etc. If it is encircled by engraved gold* this amulet

would annihilate death. The same worn (on the body) would
(remove) obstacles, sins and subdue enemies. (It) would (also)
confer good fortune and longevity. No doubt, it would give
victory in gambling and battle even if the army ofindra (is to
be fought against). This amulet is one like the (gem) cintdimat},i
and would confer progeny on barren women. One would be
able to conquer other kingdoms, (recover one*s own) kingdom
and gain sovereignty over the earth. By repeating (the syllables)
phati strirhf kse^ hiitfi a lakh (number of times), one would gain
control over tht yaksas (semi-divine beings) and others.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTEEN
The mantras relating to the worship of different gods
Fire-god said:
1-2. I shall describe the mode of worshipping (lord) Vinayaka (the lord of obstacles). One should first worship the energy
of the pedestal. One should worship the eight (things) such as
the virtue and the like on the stem. The pericarp, filaments etc.
(of a lotus) and a lotus representing the three qualities (should
be worshipped). Then (the Goddesses) Jvalini, Nanda, Suyaia,
Ugra, Tejovat! and Vindhyavasini should be worshipped.
3-6. (The different) forms ofGanapati should then be wor¬
shipped (as follows) : “Victory to would be for the heart.
(Obeisance) to one having single tusk that is strong (is) for the
head. (Obeisance) to the one having immovable ears (is) for
the tuft. (Obeisance) to the elephant-faced (is) for the armour.
The assignment should end with ^h&rfi phat\ (Then the following)
eight (forms of Gai^apati should be worshipped): Mahodara
(big-bellied) , Da^dsthasta (one that holds the club in the hand),
Jaya (victorious), Ga^adhipa (lord of the Ga^s), Ga^nayaka
(leader of the Ga^as), Gane^vara (lord of the Ganas), Vakratu^da (one havingbent trunk) and Ekadanta (one having single
tusk) should be worshipped in the east (and other directions) ;
one that is fierce, Lambodara (big-bellied) uGajavaktra (having

Agni Purdm
elephant face), Vikatenama (known as dreadful) and Vighnanaiana (the destroyer of obstacles) should be worshipped in the
east (adding the syllable) huifi, Dhumravarna (grey-coloured),
Mahendra and others (should be worshipped) outside (the
diagram) . This is the mode of worshipping the lord of obsta¬
cles.
7-12. I shall describe the mode of worshipping (Goddess)
Tripuri. (One should worship first) Asitahga (black-coloured
one), Ruru, Canda (wrathful) , Krodha (angry one), Unmatta
(intoxicated), Kapah (one wielding the human skull), Bhl^ana
(the dreadful one), Samhara (the destroyer) and Bhairava
(the terrible one) in order. (The Godde.sses) Br^ml, Hrasva,
Bhairava, Brahmani, $anmukha and Dirgha (should be
worshipped). The four celebates — Samayaputra, Yoginiputra,
Siddhaputra and Kulaputra should be worshipped in
(the angular points such as) the south-east and others. Hetuka,
K^etrapala, Tripuranta, Dvitiyaka, Agnivetala, Agnijihva,
Karili, Kamalocana, Ekapada and Blumaksa should be
meditated as the seat of the pretas and worshipped with (the
(mantras) airh and kserh. Goddess Tripura, seated on a lotus seat,
holding a book and offering protection (with the right hand)
and a garland and conferring boons with the left hand (should
be worshipped with) the two (mantras) airh, and (nh. The loca¬
tion in the heart etc. is also done with the principal (mantra) .
It is a perfect net (that yields) the desired (result).
13-16. The name (of the enemy) should be written at the
centre of (a diagram of) an eight-petalled (lotus drawn) on the
ground. (Or it should be written) on a piece of cloth at the
cremation ground with a charcoal from the cremation groimd.
Or an image (of the enemy) should be made with charcoal of
the funeral pyre ground well. After contemplation (the incan¬
tation) should be placed inside the stomach (of the image) and
it should be bound with blue thread. Then there would be the
magic incantation. OiA, obeisance ! O Fortunate One ! Jvalamalini (one having the flames as a garland) ! One surrounded
by flocks of eagles ! Oblations. A person who goes to the battle
after repeating (this) mantra would become victorious. Orh, hhH
hritfi, klirh obeisance to 8ri. One has to worship Gkxldess Ghrmid
belonging to the sun on a square (drawn) in (the directions)

commencing with the north. (Goddesses) Aditya, Prabhavati,
Hem^ri, Madhura and Sri (should be propitiated). Otht hriiii
obeisance to Gaurl. This mantra of (Goddess) Gaur! would yield
all things when (it is used) for doing oblation, meditation, re¬
petition and worship.
17-20. A person who prays to the Goddess of red comple¬
xion, liaving four arms and holding a noose and conferring boons
with the right hand and holding a goad and offering protection
(with the left hand) , after contemplation of Her form, would
live for a hundred years. He would be a wiseman. There would
not be fear due to thieves and enemies. An angry person would
become graceful by drinking the water charmed with the mantra
in the battle. A collyrium or mark (made with the same) would
make one get poesy at the tip of his tongue. The repetition of
that {mantra) at the time of coition would captivate (the con¬
cerned person) . (One would captivate a person) by looking at
the genital organ after the repetition of the {mantra), (A person
would be captivated) by the touch (after the repetition of the
same) . One would accomplish all things by doing oblation with
sesamum. A person who eats food that has been charmed seven
times (with the above) would always (get) fortune.
21-22. This {mantra) is a form of Ardhan^^ (hermaphro¬
dite form of lord Siva), as well as (Goddess) Lak^mi, (lord)
Visriu and others. One has to repeat (the mantras of Goddesses)
Anahgarupa, Madanatura, Pavanavega, Bhuvanapala, Sarvasiddhida, Anahgamadana and Anahgamekhala for (gaining)
fortune.
23-24. (The syllable) the vowels and (the letters) ka
etc. should be written at the centre and on the petals of a lotus
or on a hexagon or on a pot. (A person that looks at women
after doing thus) would captivate the women. Orfi, hrlrht churh,
O Nityaklinna (ever moist) 1 O Madadrava (one who exudes
intoxicating fluid) ! Orht Orh. This principal man/rj after location
on the six limbs (the two shanks, two arms, head and middle)
(and then written) on red-coloured triangle (and worn on the
body) would have great power to melt (the heart), make happy
and agitate.
25-26. (Goddess) Nitya (should be worshipped) at the
centre as well as (the angular points such as) the north-east to-

Agni Purdtia
gethcr with the noose, goad, skull, the wish-yielding tree, lute
and red-coloured ( ?). (Goddesses) Nitya, Abhaya, Mahgala,
Navavira, Mahgala ( ?) , Durbhaga, Manonmani and Drava should
be worshipped in the (directions) commencing with the east.
27-28. 0n%, Arf/n obeisance to Anahga^ (without a body),
Oifi, hriihf hrifhy obeisance to Smara ( one that makes one to re¬
member), (obeisance) to Manmatha (one that agitates the
mind ), to Mara and to Kama. The five (forms of God of love)
should be contemplated as holding a noose, goad, bow and
arrows and as in the union of Rati (Goddess of love) (and her
companions) Virati (non-attachment), Priti (pleasure), Vipriti
(displeasure), Mati (thought), Dhrti (firmness), Vidhyti (fickle¬
mindedness) , and Pusti (nourishment). Orhf charhy O Nityaklinnh (ever moist) ! Madadrava (exuding intoxicating liquid) !
Oift, Oifiy a, a, if i, u, fi, f, r, /, /, ai, o, au, arh, aA, Aa, khay ga^
ghxif hay cay chayjdyjhay ha, fa, fka, (/, (fAa, ^a, ta, thaydaydba, ruiypa,
pka, baybha, ma,ya, ra, la, aa,fa, sa, sa,hayksa,OThyCharh oblations
to Nityaklinna and Madadrava, The energy of support and the
lotus (should be worshipped) on the lion and the Goddess in the
heart and other (limbs). Oift, hrirfi, Gauri (white coloured) !
The consort of Rudra (Siva) lYoge^vari (mistress of faculties) !
EPMiy phap oblations.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FOURTEEN
Mantras relating to the worship of Goddess Tvaritd
Fire-god said ;
1-3. Oi*, hrvthy hrUrh, khe, che, ksah, strim, hr&rfi, kse, hritfi,
phap obeisance to (Goddess) Tvarita. After doing the nyasa
(locatiixi of the mantra) (Goddess) Tvarita possessing two or eight
arms should be worshipped. The energy of support and lotus
(should be worshipped) in (a diagram of) a lion and the GkKldess
and the heart etc. (should also be worshipped) . Gayatri (perI. This and the following four names denote the God of love.

soniiication of the mantra) should be worshipped in a circle in
the east (and other directions) (showing) the pranitd (mudrS).
(The Gk)ddesses) Humkara, Khecarl, Canday Chedani and
K^an! (should also be worshipped). Huihkara, K$emakari
and Phatkari should be worshipped at tlie centre. Jaya and
Vijaya (should be worshipped) at the entrance. The servant
(should be worshipped) in front of them.
4-10. (One should do) oblations with sesamum with (the
repetition of) the vyahtiis in order to get all things. Obeisance to
Ananta^ ! Oblations. Obeisance to Kalika ! Svadha. Oblations
to King Vasuki. Vau$at to SahkhapMa. Va$at to Tak^aka
always. Obeisance to Mahapadma. Oblations to Karkotanaga
Obeisance to Padma. (The diagram oQ nigrahacakra {xh&
magic circle that causes obstruction) should be drawn on one's
clothes, or a piece of cloth or on the body, or tlie birch-bark
(leaf) or on a slab or on staffs. The name of the sadhya ( the
object to be accomplished, namely, the enemy) (should be
written) in the middle chamber and (the syllables) orii^ hrirfit
ksurh on the chambers on the east and other (directions). The
thorns and Kalaratrika (should be written) in the north-east,
west etc. and (lord) Yama (the lord of death) outside. (The
following mystic couplet should be written on the other
chambers) :
Kallnaravamali kallnamaksamalini
mamodetat tadomoma rak^ata sva sva bhaksa va
yamapata^ayamaya matamo tatamo tama
vamo bhurivabhumeya fiataii^va^varl tata.
(The syllable) vard (should be located) outside the chamber of
lord Yama and (the syllable) taifi that has the potency to kill.
11-12. (The above verse should be written) with crow's
quill at the cremation ground or the junction of four roads with
a mixture of lamp soot, the resin of neem, marrow, blood, poison,
charcoal, and pihgaladhara (?) and placed under a pitcher.
Otherwise it should be placed in an ant-hill. The spell (placed)
under a bibhitaka tree is capable of destroying all the enemies.
13-16. The anugrahacakra (a circular figure that confers
1. This and the f(rflowing are the names of difTerent serpents.

Agni Pufdt^
grace) should be written on a white leaf or on the bhurja (bark)
with shellac or saffron or red sandal. The name (of the enemy)
should be written in the central chamber on the earth and the
wall. (The mantra) Orh harfisa and the patfiSa (a kind of spear)
should be written in the region of the west. The charm of
(Goddess) Lak^mi and l^iva and others should be written in the
north-west etc. in order. (The mystic verse is) :
^rih s^amoma sa ^rih sanau yajile jfieya nausa
matha lila lali vama yajfie jfieya nausa maya
Sighra (should be worshipped) outside where the six (is
placed). The pitcher is also (placed) outside. Sighra is outside
where is placed. (The syllable) rarh is in the different
direction. The pitcher would be outside.
17. The wheel of lotus on a lotus (figure) would conquer
death, convey (a person) to heaven and (give) firmness. It is
the foremost appeasing rite among such rites. It confers fortune
etc.
18-22. (In the wheel known as) Rudra, there should be
chambers of the number of Rudras (i.e. eleven). That (mantra)
should be written therein beginning with the syllable orh and
ending with hrurh phaty the first letters of the vidya being
written at tlie end. This is known as the pratyahgira which
accomplishes all the desired objects. In (a circle having) eightyone chambers, the first letters (of the vidyd) (should be located)
such that they would be from the beginning to the end and the
name (of the enemy should be added) ending with va^af. This
is (known as) a diffeient pratyahgira (vidyd) which would
accomplish all tasks. The nigraha and anugraha (obstruction and
grace) circles should be drawn to have sixty-four chambers.
This is (known as) amjrti vidyd (reviving) . , (The syllables) krtrh
sah hurii with the name (of the enemy) at the centre and the
syllable phaf at the beginning (written) on a leaf should be
encircled by three syllables of krirh. This (charm) worn with (a
mark of) a pitcher will kill all enemies and yield all things.
If ( this mantra) is repeated in the ear letter by letter or as a
demdaka (a group of letters), it would destroy poison.

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTEEN
Narration of mantras relating to paralysing^ captivating etc.
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe to you (the mantras and acts) relating
to paralysing, stupefying, captivating, ruining the enemy,
neutralising the ( effects of) poison and diseases and causing the
death (of an enemy).
2-4. A twice-born should draw (the figure of) a tortoise
of six inches (length) on a birch-bark by (the act of) tadnna
and then locate the mantra on the face and four feet. The
syllable krirh should be written on the four feet, the syllable
hrirtiBXihe centre of the face, the vidya {mantras) on the belly
and ( the name of) the person concerned on the back. After
having encircled it with the mdlamantras (garland of letters), it
should be placed over a brick. It should then be covered with the
back of a tortoise and then charmed with the kardla (mantra) .
5-8. After having worshipped the great tortoise (manifest¬
ation of Visnu), (the votary) should sprinkle water on the feet
(of that form). After having thought of the enemy, (the votary)
should kick seven times (on the ground) with the left foot (of
the toroise) . It would cause paralysis to the enemy. One should
assume a terrible form by having change in the complexion of
the face and write the garland of mantras, Orh ! One who
paralyses the face of the enemy ! An embodiment of desire !
One that stands with arm discharging an arrow ! Hrirh pherh,
Phetkarim ! Paralyse (2^) the face of my enemies given by the
gods ! Paralyse (2) the face of all my enemies ! Om, hurhy pherhf
Phetkarini ! Oblations ! Phat ! After having written the mantra,
one would gain great strength at the end of its repetition. One
should draw (the fig^e of) a tree and the trident on the right
hand with the left hand. The mantra of lord Aghora (a form of
§iva) should then be written. One would paralyse the enemies
in the battle. Orii, obeisance to the Fortunate One ! O Bhagamalinil Agitate (2) 1 Throb! O Nityaklinna I melt (2),
hmh sah ! Embodiment of the syllable krirh I Oblations. Oiw
who wears a mask with the resin with ( the repetition of) this
(mantra) would stupefy the world.
1. 'ITie figure indicates repetition of the preceding word.

Agni Purdr^
9- 13a. Orhf pherfit hurhy pha} Plutkdriifi ! Hrith, burn (2),
stupefy (2) the three worlds. O Guhyakalika ! Oblations.
One would captivate the king and others by making a (fore¬
head) mark with this {mantra). The dust (under the feet) of a
donkey mixed with the sulaka^ fluid and the menstrual blood of
a woman should be thrown on the bed (of a person) in the
night. This would cause enmity. The hoof and horn of a cow,
the hoof of a horse and the head of a serpent (charmed as be¬
fore and) thrown into the house (of a person) would cause the
ruin of the enemy. The root of the yellow karavira together with
mustard (would be potent) to cause death. The blood of a
serpent and a musk-rat together with would also produce
similar result. A lizard, bee, crab and scorpion are ground
well and thrown into oil. One who anoints with that (oil)
would get leprosy. Oth (obeisance) to the nine planets. Conquer
(2) my enemies. Kill (2) (them). Arhy sorhy marhy burhy curfiy orfty
§aihy vathy kerhy orh oblations.
1 3b- 14. After having worshipped ( the planets) with hundreds
of arka (flowers) , this should be placed in a cremation ground.
The planets should be drawn on a birch-bark or in an image
for the ruin of the enemies. Oth Kuhjari, Brahmani! Orh Mafijari,
Mahe^vari ! Orh Vetali, Kaumarl! Orh Kali, Vaisnavi ! Orh
Aghora, Varahi! 0;^ Vetali, IndranI, Urvall! Orh Vetali, Gan(;lika!
0)^Jayani, Yaksini! ONine Mothers ! eh ! Seize (2) my foe.
After having written the name of the enemy on a birch-bark,
if it is worshipped in the cremation ground, (the foe) would
die.
CHAPITER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTEEN
Narration of different kinds of mantras
Fire-god said:
1-5. The syllable kurh is at the beginning. Then the letters
khsy cOy chcy and the visarga that is outside the group of conson1. The discharge at the time of the birth of a child.

ants (arc added). It ends with strirh, hfirfi, ksepa and phaf. This
vidyd is known as subduing all things. It also destroys the
poisons of serpents. khe^ che should be practised to revive
a person bitten by a deadly serpent. Orhy htirhy ke, ksah should
be used to destroy poison and enemies. Strirhy ktlrfiy phaf is (the
mantra) to be used for conquering sins and diseases etc. Kke^ cha
is the application for removing evil obstacles. The application
of hurfi, strirhy orh would captivate women. The application of
khcy striihy khe, cha should be used for captivating and conquest.
Airfiy hrirh, Srirhy spherh, kairh, ksauihy Bhagavatl! Ambika! Kubjika!
spherhy orh, bhatfiy tarh subjugate. Obeisance to Aghora on the
face ! BrSrhy brdrhy kilt, kili, viced, sphaurh, herfi, sphutfi, Sraurh, hrirh,
airhy Srirh. This vidyd of Kubjika is known to accomplish all the
things. I shall describe to you again the mantras narrated by
(lord) Isa (Siva) to (lord) Skanda.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTEEN
The different kinds of mantras of i^ioa
The Lord said:
1. (The mantras) of Siva are divided into eight kinds, such
as (endowed with parts), nfrAa/a (without parts), iunya
( void) , kalddhya ( abounding in parts ) , khamalaftkrta ( adorning
the sky), ksaparm (suppressing), ksaya (destroying) and hva
(benevolent). The letters which lay inside and belong to (the
regions of) the throat and lips (should be present in them).
2. O Guha (name of Kumara, son of Siva and Parvati) !
There are eight kinds of the benevolent (mantra) known as
para ( supreme) . The form of the word Sada^iva is efficacious
for accomplishing all things.
3-8a. (The forms) of the vowels are Amirta, Am^umat, Indu,
livara, Ugra, Dhaka, Ekapada, Oja and Au^adha. Amhunat
(among these) is capable of subjugating. (The forms) of the
letters ka Xok§a are: Kamadeva, Sikharidh Ga^ela, Kala, Sankara,
Ekanetra, Dvinetra, Trihkha, Dirghabahuka, Ekapad, Arddha-

Agni Pitrg^
candra, Balapa, Yogimpriya,§akti$vara, Mahagranthi, Taxpaka,
Sthanu, Dantura, NidhiSa, Nandi, Padma, l§akin!priya, Mukhabimba, Bhlsa^a, Krtanta, Pra^a, Tgasvi, 8akra, Udadhi,
Srikanfha, Simha, 8a^^ka, ViSvarupa and Narasimha (repre*
senting) ksa.
8b- Ha. (The syllable of) Vi^varupa should be made to be
pervaded by the syllables of Surya (Sun) . After having coupled
the syllable of Sail (Moon) with Amiumat, ( the syllable of)
ll^a pervaded by (the syllable of) Ojas should first be raised
up. (Among the above names), the third should be known as
(Tat)Puru$a, the fifth as Daksina, the seventh as Vlunadeva,
the next one as Sadyojata and the ninth as coupled with the
rasa {bija). This is known as the brakmapaficaka (the five
brahmans) .
1 lb-14. All the mantras begin with the syllable orh and end
with (the name in) the fourth case and obeisance. (The first
one is presided over by) Sadyojata. The second one is the heart
together with the subordinate one. The fourth should be known
as the head known by the name I^vara. Dhaka should be known
as the tuft endowed with Vilvarupa. Its mantra is known to be
the eighth. The eye is considered as the tenth. O l§ikhidhvaja
(Kumara, having peacock as the banner) ! The weapon is said
to be the Moon known as Siva. Obeisance, oblation, vaufaf,
hurh zndphafka is the order.
15-17. I shall describe the prasada mantra (the benevolent
one) relating to the heart etc. belonging to phafka. One should
raise the (syllable) known as Rudra from liana adorned with
Aihlu that remains above the group in the region of head per¬
vaded by Au^adha. It has half-crescent nada (nasal sound) up¬
wards having two dots in the middle. Vilvarupa is at the end
bent thrice. This is the pras&da mantra capable of accomplishing
all the things.
18-2 la. After having raised the syllables of the tuft ending
with the syllable phat placed on the half crescent, it is known as
Kamadeva that flows (and is verily) the great Palupata wea¬
pon that destroys all evils. 1 have described the priUSda {mantra)
endowed with parts. 1 will describe (the mantra) without parts
now. (This consists of)Au$adha, Vilvarupa, Rudra, orb of Sun,
coupled with nada of the form of half-moon, without designa-

tionand bent. The niskaUt (mantra) confers enjoyment and
emancipation. It is always benevolent because it is endowed
with five parts.
21b-31. (The mantras) that are void (consist of) Axhsumat,
Viivarupa and divested of Brahmahga (class of letters). Its
form is the essence. It destroys obstacles when worshipped by
boys and ignorant men. Am^umat coupled with Vilvarupa and
situated over the Ohaka is the mantra known as kala(}hya (fully
endowed with parts) . It is always used in the worship in the
same way as the mantra with parts. The khamalankria consists of
Narasiihha {mantras) situated in K^tanta pervading above the
radiant life force, coupled with Amsumat and pervaded by
Dhaka above and below. It is composed of half-moon nada
adorned by Brahma and Vi^nu. The Udadhi (mantras) and
Narasimha should be divided with the vowels of Surya. The
other subsidiary rites should be done as before. The first letter
is that which is known as Ojas, coupled with Amsumat that is
to be raised. The foremost among the second letter is the Aihlumat pervaded by ArhSu. Similarly the Amsumat (pervading)
the Ilvara is capable of conferring emancipation. The Ohakas
are pervaded by Am^u and (followed by) Varuna, Prana and
Taijasa (syllables). It is known as the fifth one. The next one
is the Krtanta. The Amsumat (coupled with) Udaka and
Prana is raised as the seventh one. The Padma is pervaded by
Indu. The Nandila is coupled with Ekapada. The first one is
added at the end. (That is known) as Ksapanaka consisting of
ten syllables. The third, fifth and seventh would number half of
it. The Sadyojata would be the ninth, the hrd and other (man¬
tras) (taken) from the second. The mantras consisting of the
(above said) ten syllables should end with phaf. This astra
(rrumtra) should be raised.
32>34. The subordinate mantras (in the above) should be
coupled with obeisance. It is not done in any other way. From
the second to the eighth are considered as the Vidyeivaras ( the
lords of the mantras) — Anante^, Suk$ma, Sivottama the third,
Ekamurti, Ekarupa, Trimurti the next one, Srika^fha and
l§ikhandi are known to be the eight Vidyeivaras. The ends of
the mantras from that of l^ikha^di to the end of Ananta are said
to be the embodied form.

Agai PurW^a
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTEEN
The mode of worshipping Ganapati, accomplishing all things
The Lord said :
1-2. The Visvarupa (syllable) should be raised and placed
above the Tejas. Then the Narasiihha and Krtanta are placed
below one below the other. Th^pranava {orfi) should be placed
below that and the Udaka below that. The AmiSumat that re¬
mains in the Visvamurti, the letter of the throat and lip region
and the pranava {prh ) (should be below that ) .
3. The first four letters should end with obeisance. It
should then be coupled as before with the aAgamantras adding
also the syllables of Surya and ViSvarupa, the cause.
4. The syllable orh should be raised first and the luminous
form without a second one should be repeated. The Ghoraghoratara (terrible one) (should be repeated). That form
should then be remembered.
5-6. After having made the cata sound twice, the (syllable)
orh should be repeated. Then one has to repeat twice *burn* and
then twice *mTna\ After having stated ^kill* twice, one should
repeat hurh phaf at the end. This would be the mantra of the
weapon for (lord) Aghora. I shall describe the gay atri {mantra)
(sacred to the same deity) now--‘*We know the true self of
(lord) Maheia. We meditate on the supreme god. May that
auspicious god kindle our (mind) to that.** This gdyatri {mantra)
is capable of accomplishing all things.
7-14. One has to worship ( lord) Ga^ia (Ganapati) when
one sets on a journey or in battle etc. for prosperity. One has
to draw ( the figure of a lotus having three petals inside a tri¬
angle on a fourth part of a square place divided into twelve
chambers. On its back (back of the lotus) steps and pathway
(should be drawn) having (the mark of) a horse on (each)
petal. There should be silken cloth for footrest together with
eight lotuses having three petals. The platfo^ should be made
above that measuring a fourth part. (The figure) should have
a door containing (a figure of) a lotus. The side door firom the
chamber should be made pale. The circle drawn with doors
and side-doors would destroy obstacles. The central lotus should

be red. The lotuses outside that should (also be red) . The path¬
way should be made white. The doors (should be coloured) as
one wishes. The pericarp as well as the iilaments would be
yellow in colour. This circle is known as destroying obstacles.
(Lord) Ganapati should be worshipped. The first name would
be that of (lord) Siva together with Indra and others. The
head is struck with Tatpurusa. Orh is the first (syllable) with
obeisance at the end.
15. (The gods) Gaja (elephant), Gaja^ir$a ( elephant-head¬
ed), Gangeya (son of Gahga),Gananayaka (lord of the Ganas),
Triravartta (turned round thrice), Gaganaga (one who travels
in the sky), Gopati (a leader) (should be worshipped) in the
first row.
16-22.' Vicitrarhsa (one possessing strange characteristics),
Mahakaya (one having a big body), Lambosta( having a hang¬
ing lip), Lambakarnaka (one having drooping ears), Lambodara (big-bellied), Mahabhaga (very fortunate one), Vikrta
( h.'iving strange appearance) , Parvati-priya (one who is dear
to Parvatl), Bhayavaha (frightening), Bhadra (auspicious),
Bhagana (the cluster of asterisms), Bhayasudana (one that
destroys fear) are the twelve (to be worshipped) on the ten
rows. Devatrasa (frightening the celestials) (should be worship¬
ped) on the west. Mahanada (one having a great sound), Bhasvara (one having lustre), Vighnar^a (lord of obstacles),
Ganadhipa (lord of the Ganas), Udbhata (the pre-eminent
one), Svanabha (self-originating), Gan^a (wrathful), Maha-
^uii^a (one having a big trunk), Bhlmaka (the terrible), Manmatha (captivating the mind) , Madhusuda (the destroyer of
Madhu), Sundara (beautiful one), and Bhavapus^aka (one that
nourishes one’s thoughts) (should be worshipped). (Lord)
Brahmesvara (lord of Brahma), Brahma, Manovrtti (mental
attitude) , Samlaya (well-absorbed) , Laya (absorption), Dutyapriya (fond of being a messenger), Laulya (extremely desirous),
Vikarpa (having a strange ear), Vatsala (affectionate) , Krtanta
(the destroyer) and Kaladapda (death) (should be worshipped)
on the north. A sacrificial pitcher should be worshipped as
before. The mantra should be repeated ten thousand times. Ob¬
lation should be done one tenth of that number. When the other
{mantras) are repeated oblations should be made ten times.

Agni Purina
After having performed the final oblation, one should do the
consecration. One would accomplish everything. A person
should honour the preceptor by (giving) land, cows, horse, ele¬
phant, clothes and other articles.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND NINETEEN
Mode of worshipping VagiSvari ( Goddess of speech)
The Lord said :
1. I shall describe the worship of (Goddess) Va^svan
(Goddess of speech) in a circle. The mantra (made up of syllabic
of) Dhaka together with ( that of) Kala added with the letters
(would be the for the Goddess).
2-4. O Ni^ada (hunter) (denotes Kumara) ! The mantra
(for Gk>ddess Vagisvari) should be used like that of the Moon
and Sun. No letter need be assigned. One should contemplate
(the Goddess) as having the complexion of jasmine and moon,
embodying the fifty letters^ (of the alphabet), adorned with
garlands of pearls and flowers, (holding the postures of hand)
offering boons and protection and holding books and possessing
three eyes. One should repeat the garland of letters from *a* to
*k9a* remembering as pervading (the body of the Goddess) upto
the tip of the head and the ends of the shoulders.
5-10. The preceptor should make a circle for the sake of
initiating (the disciple) in a mantra. A lotus (figure) that is good
(for the worship of the Goddess) should have twelve tips divided
into two parts. One should make ready the pathway and steps.
There should be eight lotuses on the cross-road. The pathway
and steps should be provided outside also. There should be
doors in two squares. Similarly the side-doors, the construction
of angular points and two strips of cloth should be done. The
nine lotuses (should be) white. The pericarp of the lotus
(should have) the hue of gold. The filaments should be variegat1. The letters a to kfa of the Sanskrit language.

cd. The angular points should be filled with red (-coloured
substance) . The inner space between the lines of the sky (should
be painted) black. The doors should be of the measure of the
elephant of Indra. (Goddess) Sarasvati (should be contempla¬
ted) at the centre of the (above) lotus. (Goddess) VagiSi
(should be contemplated) on the eastern lotus. (Goddesses)
Hfllekha, Citrav&gisi, Gayatrl, Visvarupa, Sankari, Rati and
Dhfti (should also be worshipped). (The syllable) hririi and the
respective syllables ( should be worshipped) in the east and
other (directions). (The Goddess) should be contemplated as
(Goddess) Sarasvati. Oblations (should be done) with clari¬
fied butter from the milk of a tawny cow. One would then be¬
come a Saihskrta and Prakrta poet and one who is well-versed
in the science of poesy and other things.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTY
The different mystic diagrams
The Lord said :
l-5a. O Guha^ ! I shall describe to you the Sarvatobhadraka^ ( that which confers good from all sides) . A wiseman
should worship the favourite Goddess of energy on the east at
(the time of) the equinox. Then he should hold the thread castwest having the middle point between ( the asterisms) Gitra and
Svati and mark at its centre after causing it to move gently.
Two points on the north and south should be marked from its
middle point. The two points should be brought in line with
the middle point after having moved (the string) gently northsouth. The junctions of angular points should be marked such
that one would have one hundred and fifty divisions. Thus a
quadrangle would be formed by causing the four lines to movcgently. The auspicious Bhadra diagram should be drawn in that.
1. denotes Kumara, soiic^ 8iva and Parvati.
2. a kind of mystical diagram.

Agni Purdna
5b-8a. (The quadrangle) should be divided into eight
squares. The pathways and doorways should be made in two
squares each. The cupola should be proportionate to the mea¬
sure of the lotus. The excellent angular joints should be formed
by turning round two squares. The lotus should be (painted)
white, the pericarp yellow', the filaments variegated, the path¬
way red and the door having the hue of Loke^a (Lord of the
world) . The angular point (should be) red. (This is the lotus to
be drawn) in the case of a daily rite. Listen to me ! (I shall
describe the mode of drawing) a lotus for an occasional ( rite) .
8b-9. There are two varieties of lotus (diagrams), (the
diagram) that does not touch and (the diagram) that touches,
which confer enjoyment and emancipation. That which does not
touch (is intended) for those who desire for release (from
worldly existence). That which touches is of three (kinds) —
young one, middle one and old. (These three) yield the fruits
and perfection according to their respective names.
10-14. Lines should be drawn in the different directions as
well as the directions in between in the place for the lotus. Five
circles should be drawn (having dimensions) equal to that of
the lotus. There should be nine lotuses around the pericarp in
the first (circle). The second (circle) should have twentyfour
pericarps. There should be a union of petals, the tip of the
petal resembling the temple of an elephant. The fifth should be
of the form of the sky. This is known as contiguous (type of)
lotus. In the uncontinguous one, the tip of the petal should be
divided into four from the bottom. After having discarded two
parts, a petal should be set with one-eighth of the remaining.
The petal should be anointed with the line at the union from
the base. This would be Vrddha class on the left and right.
15- 17a. In the alternative one should whirl round from
the middle of the union to form a semi-circle. The two unions
and the foremost line (should be made into circles) .This would
form a yotmg type of lotus. One should turn it from behind
with half the measure of the union line. This lotus having
pointed tip known as youthful class is capable of conferring
enjoyment and emancipation. The bala class of lotus is known
as of two kinds — mukta and vrddha useful in subjugating (one’s
enemy) etc.

1 7b-22. A ground measuring nine cubits should be made
ready as having nine central points with parts possessing
A lotus (should be drawn) at the centre having a banner at
the centre and a door proportionate in size to that of the lotus.
Leaving its neck portion and the adjacent parts, a pathway
should be made outside. The pathway should have five parts.
There should be ten parts around that. Lotuses (should be
drawn) in the eight directions and the directions in between.
The lotus at the entrance should have a pathway. A pathway
of five foot (breadth) adorns outside that. The door and the
neck ( should measure) like that of the lotus. The frontal and
neck (should measure) a foot. The cupola should be made a
foot. There should be three doors in the (different) directions.
The angular joints will have three chambers. Two chambers
would bear the mark of a mace. The central lotus (should be)
white (and other lotuses should be) yellow, red, blue, whitish
yellow, smoky, red and yellow conferring emancipation.
23-24a. One should worship 8iva, Vi§nu and others in the
eight lotuses on the east etc. After having worshipped Indra and
others at the centre of the edifice, the weapons in the lotuses
and (lord) Vi^nu and others in the external pathway, one
would get (the fruits of performing) the aivamedha (sacrifice).
24b-30a. One should draw a great circle in connection with
the investiture of the sacred thread on the idol etc. A piece of
ground (measuring) eight cubits should be divided into eight
chambers. There should be a lotus in two chambers at the
centre and the pathway in one chamber. Eight blue lotuses
should be marked in the different directions and the spaces in
between. Thirty blue lotuses without the union of petals (should
be drawn) measuring the same size as the central lotus. There
should be a pathway behind occupying a chamber. There
should be (the figure of) above that. As before the
pathway outside should be in eight (chambers) divided into
twenty parts having (the figure of) svasiikas in two chambers.
The doors and the boundaries should be proportionate to the
lotus. The angular point, the pathway and the lotus in the
circle should be red, yellow and blue respectively. O Guha I
^titsvastika (figure) etc. of varied colour are capable of fulfill¬
ing all the desires.

Agni Pwrdtfa
30b-33. (The circle having) five lotuses should measure
five cubits. It should be wholly divided into ten parts. The path¬
way (should occupy) two chambers of the lotus, and the tablet
(in one chamber) . There should be four lotuses at the cardinal
points. There should be a pathway on the rear in one chamber
or two chambers. The doors should be endowed with bounda¬
ries and adjacent spaces. There should be a lotus at the centre.
In this circle consisting of five lotuses, (the lotus) in the east (is)
white and yellow, the lotus in the south (is) of the hue of lapis
lazuli, the lotus in the west (is) of the colour of jasmine, the
lotus in the north (is) of the colour of a conch and all the rest
of varied colour.
34-37. I shall describe a circle of ten cubits which yields all
the desires. It should be a four-sided one divided into ten
parts. The door would occupy two chambers. As (described)
earlier (there should be) a lotus at the centre. I shall now des¬
cribe (the circle known as) the destroyer of obstacles. After
having made (ready) a place (measuring) four cubits, a circle
measuring two arms length (should be drawn). The pathway
(should measure) only a cubit. It should be made to contain
many figures of svastika. The doors should measure a cubit.
There should be circle containing lotus (figures) in the cardinal
points. Five white coloured lotuses (should be drawn) . God
without any attributes should be worshipped at the centre.
The heart (and other limbs) (should be worshipped) in the
east and other directions. The weapons should be worshipped
in the directions in between (these directions).
38-41. As before the five Brahmans (forms of i§iva * should
be worshipped) . I shall describe the support of intellect. A
place should be divided into hundred parts and a lotus (should
be drawn) in fifteen parts. (Figures) of eight iiAgas should be
drawn in the (eight) directions. The girdle should occupy a
part and the boundary would be in two chambers. The preceptor
should provide decorative festoons etc. making use of his crea¬
tive thinking.^ There are one thousand four-hundred and forty
circles for the gods Hari, l^ambhu and Sun and the goddess.
1. Verse number 40 is cryptic and has not been trandated.

42-48. Listen to me ! I shall describe the decorations and
marks to be made in (a place) divided into seventy (parts) .
Fifteen, one, three and five (chambers) in the cardinal points
should be erased. The temple of linga should be made above in
two chambers on the sides. A lotus should be drawn in two
chambers at the centre. A lotus should be drawn in one cham¬
ber on either side of the liftga. By destroying the six lines of the
decorations the remaining (would form lines) for (lord) Hari.
After having erased the two squares above, it is said to form the
Auspicious as taka (having eight parts) of (lord) Hari. It is
decorated by erasing four lines and possessing beam like (lines).
Then the lotus for a seat is made in twentyfive (chambers) .
After having retained two chambers on each side, the eight
secondary decorations (are made). The diagram sacred to the
goddess is big at the centre and small above. There should be
a lotus at the centre in nine chambers and four chambers in the
cardinal points. The remaining thirteen chambers form a circle
resting on one's intellect. That one having one hundred and
sixty petals based on one’s intellect (is intended) for Hara
(8iva) and others.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYONE
The appeasing rites relating to Aghordstra
The Lord said:
1. (The propitiatory) rite for the weapons has to be done
first. It is capable of yielding the results in aU actions. The wea¬
pons relating to (lord ) l^iva and others should be worshipped at
the centre. The thunderbolt and others (weapons) (should be
worshipped) from the east onwards in order.
2. One would gain victory in battle etc. by worshipping
five discs in (a place measuring) ten cubits. In the worship of
the planets the Sun (has to be worshipped) at the centre and
the Moon and others (planets) in the east and other directions.
3-4. All the planets (would be beneficial) as if they are in

Agni FvfUaia
the eleventh house, by their worship. I shall describe (the rite
of) appeasing the weapons that would destroy all the portents,
remedy the baneful influences of planets and crush the epidemics
and enemies. One should repeat (the mantra sacred to) the wea¬
pon of Aghora^ that would bum the impediments.
5-6. (The repetition of the mantra) a lakh times would des¬
troy (the baneful influences of) the planets. (One should do)
oblations with sesamum (to nullify) portents. (In the case of
portents occurring) in the sky one should do (oblation or repe¬
tition) half a lakh times which would destroy the portents. It
is beneficial to do oblation with ghee a lakh times in the case of
portents relating to the earth. All types of portents are nulli¬
fied by doing oblation with ghee and guggalu (fragrant gumresin) .
7. There is no doubt that diseases (get cured) by perform¬
ing oblation with dUrva (grass) , unbroken rice and clarified
butter and bad dreams get destroyed (by doing oblation) one
thousand times.
8. The evil effects of the planets would get nullified (by
doing oblation) with ghee mixed with japd (flower) ten thousand
times. Oblation performed with ghee ten thousand times would
appease the afflictions due to Vinayaka (an evil spirit) .
9-10. The spirits and goblins would be appeased by (the
oblation of) guggulu ten thousand times. (One would get good
results) by offering oblations with durvd (grass), clarified butter
and unbroken rice when a giant tree falls down or a serpent or
a heron perches on the house or while one enters the forests
etc. One would get good results by offering oblations with
sesamum and clarified butter when a portent or earthquake
occurs.
11 -12a. (Oblations done) with ten thousand times
would be beneficial if the trees ooze out blood. Oblations made
with sesamum and clarified butter half a lakh times (would be
beneficial) when (the trees) bear flowers and fhiits in improper
season, (when there is) unrest in the country, (when enemies)
invade the country and epidemics affect the bipeds etc.
1 . One of the five forms of 8iva.

12b- 13a. It is said that rite of appeasement should be done
ten thousand times in order to appease the epidemics in eleph¬
ants, in order to strengthen the tusk of the female elephants and
when the elephants are found rutting.
13b.-14a. When there is a miscarriage of the foetus at an
improper time, or when the child perishes after birth, or when
the children are born deformed or when one undertakes a jour¬
ney, one should do oblations ten thousand times.
14b-15a. Oblations done with sesainum and clarified butter
one lakh times would yield excellent results, half that number
(would yield) medium results and a quarter of that number
(would yield) poor results.
15b-c. Similar to the repetition (of the mantra) oblation
done (with the mantra) would confer victory in battle. One
should repeat (the mantra of) the weapon of Aghora after mak¬
ing the (mental) location (of the mantra on the limbs) and
contemplating the excellent hvc-faced (lord).^
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTWO
The appeasing rile employing the mantra of the weapon of Pasupati
The Lord said'.
1. I shall describe first the appeasing rite and repetition
with (the mantra) of the weapon of Pasupati. If it is repeated
with phaf at the end it would remove one’s misfortune. Orh !
Obeisance to the lord ! to great lord of the flock ! to one posses¬
sing matchless prowess and strength ! to one having fifteen eyes !
to the person having varied forms ! to one who is armed with
different kinds of weapons ! to one having blood besmeared all
over the body ! to one who is blended with a mass of collyrium !
to one who is fond of the cremation ground and goblins ! to one
who removes all impediments ! to one who confers all perfcc1. Aghora is one of the five faces of lord l§iva; the other faces are :
H&na. Tatpuruja, Vamadeva and Sadyojata.

Purdi^
tions I to one who is gracious to the devotees I to one who has
innumerable faces, arms and feet ! to the one who has attained
perfection ! to one who frightens the goblins ! to one who causes
commotion in l§akinl (female attendant on goddess Durga) I to
the person who controls the diseases ! to one who destroys the
sins ! to one who has the Sun, Moon and Fire as the (three)
eyes ! to one who is the armour of (lord) Visnu ! to one who
(holds) the sword and thunderbolt in the hand ! to one who
has the club of Yama and the noose of Varuna (ihe lord of the
West and upholder of moral law) ! to the one holding the tri¬
dent of Rudra ! to the person who has the burning tongue ! to
the person who drives away all diseases ! to one who controls
the plants ! to one who annihilates the malicious serpents ! Orh
phaf to the black and brown ! PImt to the person having the
sound hurh as the weapon ! Phaf to one holding the thunderbolt
in the hand ! Phaf to the spear ! Phaf to the club ! Phaf to Yama \
Phaf to the sword ! Phaf to lord of north-west ! Phaf to Varuna !
Phaf to the noose ! Phaf to the banner ! Phaf to the goad ! Phaf
to the mace! Phaf to Kubera (lord of wealth) ! Phaf to the tri¬
dent ! Phaf to the hammer! Phaf to the disc ! Phaf to the lotus !
Phaf to the serpent weapon ! Phaf to I^ana ! Phaf to the club
weapon (called khefaka) ! Phaf to the headless trunk! Phaf to
the weapon, the headless trunk! Phaf to the weapon, the skeleton !
Phaf to the weapon, the feather of a peacock ! Phaf to the weapon,
the sharp knife ! Phaf to the weapon Brahmastra! Phaf to the
weapon l§aktyastra! Phat to the weapon of the Gana (attendant
of lord Siva) ! Phaf to the accomplished weapon! Phaf to the
weapon pilipicckal Phaf to the weapon of the Gandharva (semi¬
divine being)! Phaf to the weapon of 77ziirz>a (a kind of grass
from which strings and girdles of ksatriyas are made) ! Phaf to the
weapon of the right! Phaf to the left! Phaf to the weapon of the
west ! Phaf to the weapon oimantral Phaf to the weapon of Sakin! (female attendant o£ Goddess Durga) ! Phaf to the weapon
of yogini (another female attendant of Goddess Diuga)! Phaf
to the weapon, the club! Phaf to the weapon, the great club!
Phaf to the weapon, the serpent! Phaf to the weapon of Siva! Phaf
to the weapon of l^ana! Plmf to the weapon of (Tat) puru$a!
Phaf to the weapon of Aghoral to the weapon of Vimadeva!

Phat to the weapon of Sadyojata! Phaf to the weapon of the
heart ! Phaf to the great weapon ! Phaf to the weapon of Garudn
(vulture vehicle of lord Vi?9u)! Phat to the weapon of the
demons! Phaf to the weapon of the Danavas (demons, progeny
of Danu) ! Phaf to the weapon of the man-lion form (of Vi§nu) !
Phat to the weapon of Tva§tr (a celestial god) ! Phaf to all the
weapons! nah phapl vak phapl pah phat ! phafiphat ! mak phat !
phafl kraiphat\ (region) bhukphafl (region) bhuvah phapl (region)
svahphat ! (region) mahab phap ! (region) janah phap ! (region)
tapah phap ! Phap all worlds ! Phap all nether worlds ! Phap all
principles ! Phap all life forces ! PhapzW nerves ! Phap all causes !
Phap all the Gods ! hrirh phap ! irirh phap ! hrUih phap ! srum phap !
arhphap Marhphap !P/uz/ to indifrerence( for worldly pleasures) \Phap
to the weapon of illusion ! Phap to the weapon of desire ! Phap to
the weapon of the guardian of the field ! Phap to the weapon, the
sound hurh ! Phap to the weapon of the Sun ! PhaP to the weapon
of the Moon ! Phap to the weapon of lord of obstacles ! Gaurh
gmoii phapl Khrom Khraurh phapl Hrorh hraurh phap ! Cause to roam
about (2) phapl Bum (2) phapl Cover (2) phapl Uproot (2)
phap I Threaten (2) phap ! Revive (2 ) phap ! Drive away (2) phapl
Destroy all misfortunes phap !
2-3. The repetition (of the above) even once would destroy
all the impediments. One would destroy all the portents by re¬
peating hundred times and would be victorious in the battle
etc. One would accomplish even that one could not accomplish
by doing oblation with ghee and guggulu (fragrant gum-resin).
One would have all ( kinds of) peace by reading this weapon of
( lord) Pasupati (lord of flock of beings) .
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYTHREE
The mantra of the weapons of Aghora and the six constituents
The Lord said:
1-2. Death, diseases and other things are controlled by (the
repetition of) the mantra **Ofh hrurh harhsa**. One has to bring

Agni PurSsta
into effect appeasement and nourishment by doing a lakh of
oblations with durva (grass) . O Six>faced one^ ! Appeasement
of portents, (un-natural flowering of) the trees and those relat¬
ing to gods, sky and the earth (could be done) with (the repe¬
tition of) ^tpranava {orh) or mdya^ {mantra). ^^Orh ! obeisance !
O Ganges ! Kali ! Kali (one having dark complexion) !
Mahakali ! Mahakali (the great dark-complexioned one) ! One
who eats flesh and blood ! One having red and blackface ! Bring
the men under control ! Oblation ! Orh !
3-5a. After having repeated (the mantra) one lakh times
and offering oblations one- tenth (of that number) one would
become the accomplisher of all tasks. One would subjugate
Sakra (Indra, the chief of the celestials). One need not say
about (its influence on) the mortals. This mantra is capable of
making (the votary) invisible, captivating and paralysing
(others) . It brings the enemies under control and confuses the
intellectual faculties of the enemies. This mystic learning is the
Kamadhenu (wish-yielding divine cow) when repeated seven
times.
5b-6. 1 shall describe the foremost formula which would
captivate enemies, thieves and others. One should remember
(this formula) revered by (lord) Hara ( Siva) in the case of all
kinds of great apprehensions. After having repeated one lakh
times (one should do) oblation with sesamum which would ac¬
complish (the task). Listen (tome) ! (I shall describe the for¬
mula of) deliverance: Orh\ The plough-bearer ! The tridentbearer ! Gome ! Protect me with the truths of (gods) Brahma,
Vi$9u and Rudra ! Oblations to Lord of speech !
7-9. (Goddess) Siva (consort of Siva) is known as Durga
because (She) saves (people) from adversity. Orh ! Fierce bear¬
er of the skull ! Gnash the teeth ! Gnash ! Destroy (2) Mysterious
one ! Phat Hrirh ! The rice grains should be consecrated with this
excellent formula after repeating thirty times and given to
thieves. (It would establish their) innocence if the chewed cud
ejected (by them) is white. Orh\ One having glowing eyes! One
shining with dark-brown matted hair ! One who drives away !
1. denotes Kum&ra, son of lord 8iva and Parvat!.
2. the letters i, i, u, r, ), ), kha, ma, ya, kfa, hruih, kUih

One who frightens the three worlds ! Cut (2) ! Roam about
Cook (2) ! Thus Rudra, who accomplishes, makes known ! I
shall bring back the person possessed by spirit even if he has
gone to the heaven, region of the gods or sporting in the sum¬
mit! Accept (2) the offering! am giving! Ol)lations! After hav¬
ing offered the victim to the guardian of the ground and ( the
performance of the rite) of locating the planets, (the enemy)
would be subjugated. The enemies would get destroyed. The
enemy forces would be routed in the battle.
10-13. One would nullify three kinds of poisons by the
location of tlie harhsabija.^ After having made equal proportion
of agurUi sandal, kusfhaf saffron, tidgakeSaray nakha and devadaru
and mixing with honey, one should fumigate the clothes etc. of
an idol. This would bring good result in discussion, charms,
adorning women and quarrels. (The same fumigation) is con¬
secrated with mdydmantra^ in the case of selection of a t)ride and
for fortune. A person who looks at a person after wearing
a mark on the forehead with the yellow pigment (got from a
cow) , ndgapuspa, saffron and arsenic ( and uttering the syllable)
hriifi would subjugate him.
14-17. Pulverised iaidvari drunk with milk would help
(a man) to get a male child. Pulverised ndgakeSara hoWtd with
ghee would also help (a man) to get a male child. Similarly one
would get a male child by drinking the seeds of paldia. 0th ! O
Camunda ! Rise up ! Make (this person) yawn (2) ! Charm (2) !
Subjugate this person (2) ! Oblation ! This is the twentysixth
formula that is accomplished. After having (made an image)
of the lady (to be subjugated) with the earth (got) from
the banks of a river and writing the name on an arka leaf
with the juice of the unmatta (plant) and having urinated, (the
formula) should be repeated. Then the lady would be subju¬
gated.
0th, kfufh, sah, vasaf. This formula (known as) the great
conqueror of death gives nourishment when repeated and used
for doing the oblation.
1. The letters ma,ya, ra, sa and ha
2. containing the letter hrlth etc.

Agm Purd^
Oihy harhsafiy hrurhy hrfiihy say hra^ saurhy skaih consisting of
eight syllables (is known as) a formula that revives the dead and
brings victory in battle.
1 8-2 1 . The formulae beginning with liana and others confer
virtues, pleasures etc. (Lord) Isana (§iva) is the lord of all
fonnulae, lord of all beings. He is the lord of Brahma. May that
Brahman, (lord) l§iva always be benevolent to me ! 0i^ I know
(the lord) Tatpuru^. I meditate on (lord) Mahadeva (the
great god) . Hence that Rudra incite us. Orh obeisance to those
who are not fierce, to those who are fierce, to those who are
most fierce and to all the manifestations of Rudras. Orh obeis¬
ance to Vamadeva ! Obeisance to the seniormost ! Obeisance to
the most excellent ! Obeisance to Rudra ! Obeisance to Kala
(time) ! Obeisance to Kalavikarana ! Obeisance to Balavikarana!
Obeisance to the strong one ! Obeisance to one who controls
strength ! Obeisance to one who controls all the beings ! Obeis¬
ance to one who disturbs the mind ! Orh I resort to (lord) Sadyojata! Obeisance to Sadyojata !
On the lord of the beings (2)! On the lord of eternal being !
Be manifest in me. Obeisance to the god proceeded from the
eternal being.
I shall describe the six formulae which are accessories to the
five Brahman (formulae) . Orh ! Obeisance to the Supreme ! to
the grantor of desires ! to the Supreme lord ! to the Iwd of
conununion ! to the lord produced out of communion !
to the doer of all things I Do (2) ! True (2) ! Lord of beings
(2) ! One manifest from the eternal beings 1 Vamadeva!
Doer of all things ! Destroyer of sins ! Always benevolent ! One
who is pleased ! Obeisance to you ! Oblations.
(The fonnula of) the heart, which yields all things, consists
of seventy letters. Orh ! Siva ! Obeisance to Siva ! Siva ! Orh !
Oblations to the glowing (energy) in the heart is ( the fonnula
for) the tuft. Orh ! One who is verily of the nature of bo^ievolence ! One possessing great splendour ! Omniscient I O Lord !
Turn round ! One who is most fierce! One having a dark cumour ! Obeisance ! One having a great armour ! Bind (2) the
heart by the command of §iva! Whirl round (2) ! Pulverise I
One who holds the subtle thunderbolt ! One who has the strong

noose ! One whose strong body bears the bow and thunderbolt !
You enter my body and paralyse all the evil forces (2) ! Hurh I
The armour consists of one hundred and five letters. 0th !
To the Vigour (of the lord) ! Orh ! Make the eyes quiver (2) I
One having subtle form(2) ! Pierce (2) ! Pierce intensely (2) !
Cover (2) I Vomit (2)! Kill (2) ! Hurht phap (is the) weapon
of Aghora.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFOUR
Appeasing rile for lord Siva
The Lord said:
1-3. I shall describe the appreasing rite for ^iva which is
preceded by the collection of formulae of Aghora. It is
the lord of seven crores (of formulae) . It is fierce. It is
capable of destroying sins such as killing a brahmin etc. It is
the abode of both excellent as well as ordinary achievements.
It destroys portents pertaining to the celestial region, sky and
earth. It devours poisons, spirits and goblins. It confers all the
desires. It is an expiation destroying a host of sins. It destroys
misfortune and difficulties.
4-7. After having located Ekavira, the five faces should
always be contemplated. (The face should be contemplated
as) white in ( the rites of) appeasement and nourishment, red
in (the rites of) subjugation, yellow in (the rites of) paralysing,
smoky in (the rites of) ucedpana (a kind of charm for expulsion)
and black in (the rites of) attracting (a person). One should
worship the thirty- two letters for confounding (an enemy). The
formula should be repeated thirty lakh times and the oblation
should be done one-tenth (of that number) . Gum resin mixed
with amjtd would accomplish all things. There is no other
formula superior to the Aghora formula that would give enjoy¬
ment and emancipation. (By this repetition) one who is not a
religious student would become a religious student and one who
has not had his ablution after completing studies would have
that.

Agni PwrS^
8. The weapon of Aghora and Aghora are the two excellent
formulae. One who repeats (the formulae) or does oblation
(with them) or worships would rout the army of the enemy in
the battle.
9-1 3. I shall describe (the rite of) appeasement of Rudra
which is beneficial and which accomplishes all the desires. For
the sake of progeny, for removing the malignant influences
of the planets, for removing poison and curing diseases, for
controlling famine and epidemics, for removing (the effect of)
bad dreams, for gaining army and kingdom, for the destruction
of enemies (it should be performed). When trees bear
flowers untimely and for controlling all spirits (the formula
should be used). (The word) obeisance should be used for
worship, ending with oblation for making the oblation, the
syllable vasat for strengthening and vausaf for nourishment. In
the place of Va’ letter two times, the union of that class (of
names) is made.
Orfi ! Obeisance to Rudra and to you and to the bull.
(Obeisance) to one who does not leave, to unborn one, to the
prime entity, to the worshipful, to I^ana and to one possessing
valour. (The following) five (are worshipped) in the north.
(Obeisance) to the omnipresent, to the dreadful one, to one
having distorted features, one who does not have any change
in the form.
(Worship is made) for the sake of removal in (the principle
of) kala and water in the south-western direction.
Obeisance to Ekapingala, to Svetapingala (and) to Krsnapingala. Obeisance to ^ladhupingala. (Obeisance) to Madhupingala in self-restraint. (Obeisance) to Ansinta, to Ardra, to
Su§ka (dry) and to Payogaria in the principle of kdla (time).
To the dreadful one, to the most dreadful one in the two
principles of mqyd (illusion) . To the thousand-headed one, to the
thousand-mouthed one, to the thousand-handed and footed one
and to the thousand lidga in the principle of learning. One
should locate on the right petal from thousand-eyed. To Ekajat&,
Dvija|:a, Vija(a, to the form of Svdhd, to thdorm of Svadkd, to the
form of vasaf, to the six Rudras. O Guha ! these are situated
in the leaf of fire in the principle of ISa. To the lord of goblins,
to the lord of beings, to the lord of Uma and to the lord of

time. The six arc to be worshipped in the eastern petals in the
principle called Sadaiiva. To Uma, bearing a dreadful form,
Orh ! do (2) , Ruhini (2) ! You arc Rudra, God of the celestials,
Vi^akha ! Kill (2),burn (2), cook (2), churn (2), iuru (2),
aru (2), and 5uri< (2). Remember the appeasement of Rudra.
O Krsnapihgala ! Obeisance to the lord of the universe, the
lord of the untimely goblins. (Goddess) Uma and (god)
Mahesvara should be worshipped in the pericarp in the princi¬
ple of Siva. Orh to one pervading the sky, to the form of the
sky, to omnipresent Siva, to the endless, to one without anyone
to govern, one who is not resorted, to Siva. These nine terms
are said to pervade the sky in the principle of Siva. Obeisance
to the eternal one ! to the one seated on the yc^ic altar ! to the
eternal ! to the person having contemplation as food !
Orh obeisance to Siva ! Lord of all (beings) ! One having I^ana
as the head ! One having Tatpurusa and others as the five
faces ! O Guha ! The five chambers on the eastern petal in
the principle of sat should be worhipped ! To one having
Aghora as the heart ! To one having Vamadeva as the secret
organ ! To one embodied as Sadyojata ! Oih obeisance ! To one
extremely secret ! To one who conceals ! To one who does not
have death ! To one who presides over death ! To one of the
fonn of radiance ! in the leaf (presided over) by Fire, in the
principle of oblation ! in the principle of knowledge ! in the
south ! To the supreme lord ! To the sentient and insentient !
To the sky-pervading one ! The splendour of the prime splend¬
our ! in the principle of illusion in the south-west ! in the
principle of time in the west! Orh, dkr, dhr, ndndt vdrh, varh !
Deathless one ! Born of death ! Benevolent one I The supreme
soul ! Great god ! Master of good feelings ! Great splendour !
Presiding deity oiyoga ! Release, release, churn, churn ! Orh !
O Sarva (everything) (2) ! Orh Bhava (The source) (2) !
One who bestows happiness on all beings ! In the son of Wind
(god) and in the man of restraint in the north ! One who is
manifest in the presence of all ! One who is above Brahm^
Visnu and Rudra ! One who is not worshipped ! One who is
not worshipped ! One who is not extolled I The witness
(2) ! CJome ! Come I O Sun ! O Fire (2) ! O Knowledge
(2) ! Sound 1 Subtle one (2) I Benevolent one (2) ! Giver of

Agni Piord^
all things (2) ! 0th I Obeisance to 8iva. Oih obeisance to Siva.
Orh r Obeisance. One should worship, offer oblation and repeat
(the above formula) in the prSkfta principle in the north-east.
It would remedy all afflictions due to planets, diseases and
incantations and accomplish all things.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYFIVE
The benefits of wearing the rosary beads and the counting
of the formulae with them
The Lord said :
1-3. One should wear a garland of rosary beads even or
uneven (in number) and firm. One may wear beads having
single face, three or five faces or as available. Beads having two,
four or six faces, unbroken and having sharp thorns are com¬
mendable. One should wear the four-foced (bead) on the right
hand and the tuft etc. (By this) one not observing celibacy
would became a celibate, and a person not observing religious
ablution would get the vow fulfilled. Otherwise one should
wear a golden ring after having worshipped with the formula of
8iva.
4-7a (They are divided into four) classes (gocaras) : Siva,
Sikhdf Jyoti and Sdoitra, Gocara means the family. A person who
has been initiated is to be known from that. The Prdjdpatya,
Makipdla, Kapota and Granthika (belong) to the Siva (class of
beads) . The Kupilas, Vetdlast Padmas and Harhsas (belong) to the
class (p£ beads'). The Dfirtarof^ros, Bakos, Kdkos and
Gopdlas belong to (the class of beads) known as Jyotu The
Kupikas, Sdraphas, Gupikds and Dar^dins (belong) to the family of
Sdvitru Thus there are four varieties in each one of these
(classes) .
7b- 13. I shall describe the constituents of the formulae by
which the formula would yield perfection. The formula should
be written on the ground omitting the knpa and saridh (class of
letten) . The component letters of the formula should besepara-

ted (one by one) and the nasal sound should be added separa¬
tely. (The letters) in the name of the votary should be separated.
The letters (in the name) of the votary should be added at the
beginning and end of the formula. (These letters) from the
name (of the votary) should be reckoned as (successful),
s&dhya (capable of being accomplished), susiddha (successful
easily) and ari (hostile) . A formula having the siddha (letters)
at the beginning and end would give hundred percent results
immediately. (A formula having) susiddha (letters) at the be¬
ginning and end should be deemed (to have the same result) as
the siddha (letters). (A votary) should avoid at a distance the
ari (letters) at the beginning and end. The siddha and susiddha
(formulae) should be used for (rites of) same nature and
the ari and s&dhya (should also be used) similarly. The
presence of thousands of hostile (letters) in the middle would
not be a defect in a formula having siddha (letters) at the be¬
ginning and end.
14- 17a. In the well-known formulae such as maya^^ prasada^
and pratyiva^y there are no divisions. The formula presided over
by Brahma (is known) as Brahmavidya. Those known as
vaift^va (pertaining to Visnu) are sacred to Vi?nu. The formulae
of Rudra are called Viras. Those pertaining to Indra are
dear to Iilvara. Those presided over by the serpents would make
the serpents motionless. Those relating to the Yaksas (a kind
of semi-divine beings) are fond of ornaments. Those sacred to the
Gandharvas are excessively (fond of) music etc. Those relating
to the demons are dreadful. (The formulae) of the goblins are
covered by filth. One should examine a formula and then
impart (it).
17b-20a. (There are) formulae beginning with one letter
and ending with phaf upto those having fifty letters. The formula
(known as) consists of twenty letters. That (known as)
Rudra consists of twentytwo (letters). The formulae having
more than that number upto three hundred (letters) are known
as vrddha (expanded). The letters beginning with a and ending
2. the syllables AofA, haur^.
3. the syllable ofh.

Affii Purd^
with ka represent the white and dark fortnights. Among the
ten vowels omitting the anusvdra (nasal sound) and visarga
(aspirated sound) the shorter (vowels) represent the phases of
the white fortnight and the longer ones those of the dark
fortnight.
20b-21. (The incantations) for peace etc. (should be
practised ) when (the Sun) has risen. Those for subjugation
(should be done) when (the Sun) is on the move. The incant¬
ation for creating dissension (should be practised) when (the
Sun) has completed the revolution at the twilight periods and
those for stupefaction (done) at sunset. The spells for peace
(should be practised) when (the wind) flows through the Ida
(one of the arteries) and those for attracting (a person) (should
be done) when (the wind flows) through the piAgald (one of the
arteries) .
22-23. (Charms) for destruction and driving away (and
such other results) (should be practised) at the time of the
equinox. The incantations are thus of five kinds. The principle
of earth (remains) on the lower part of the lip, lustre above,
water in between, ether on the sides, wind outside and the
great lord pervading everywhere. One has to practise the spell
for paralysing in the earth (principle) , appeasement in water,
subjugation etc. in ( the principle of) light, ( spell) for driving
away (a man) in (the principle of) wind and the auspicious
moment in (the principle of) ether.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWETYSIX
Description of the mode of worshipping Goddess Court for
gaining enjoyment, emancipation etc.
The Lord said :
1 . I shall describe the (mode of) worship of Uma (cousori
of l§iva)for fortune and conferring enjoyment and emancipation.
(1 shall also describe) the meditation of the formula, the

mystic diagram, the mudrS^ and the oblation which are the
means (for the same) .
2-6a. After having drawn Citrabhanu (Bhairava form of
8iva), 8iva and Kala together with Great Energy, Ida (one
of the arteries) is drawn together with the lord and the modi¬
fication. The second (circle) should have the door and words
which please (goddess) Gauri (synonym of Uma). The princi¬
pal formula of (goddess) Gauri should be made to end with
fourth case (dative). 0th, hrirh^ sah, saurh obeisance to Gauri ( is
the formula). Six inches should be endowed with the three
letters appropriate to the group. The seat (should be spread out)
with pranava (syllable orh) and the image (of the goddess) with
( the formula of) the heart. The syllables of water, time and
Siva in the formula should be raised. The life (syllable) should
be endowed with long vowels and (location on) the six parts
of the body (should be made) . (The consecration of) the seat
should be made with the pranava and the consecration of the
image with the formula of the heart.
6b-7. O Child ! I'hus I have described to you (according
to) the Yamala. I shall explaing to you (according to) the
Ekaviranow. The basic syllable consisting of those of (lord) Siva
and the goddess devoid (of the syllables) of heart are spread
out endowed with the order of creation with (the syllables of)
vahni,^ mdya^ and krSanu.^
8- 10a. (The goddess) Gduri should be worshipped in (an
image made of) gold, silver, wood or stone. In the alternative
(the goddess may be worshipped) in Her unmanifest form in
five balls at the centre and the (four) angular points. (The
goddesses) Lalita, Subhaga, Gauri and Ksobhani (should be
worshipped) in order beginning with the south-east. (The
goddesses) Varna, Jyestha, Kriya and Jfiana should be worship¬
ped in the circle beginning with the east. The unmanifest form
of (lord) Siva (should be worshipped) on the left side together
with the pedestal.
1. Holding the fingers interlocked in a particular position r^resenting
different things.
2. the syllable f.
4. the syllables (M, ra and rarh.

Agni PurS^
lOb-13. ( In the worship of the manifest form of the goddess)
(the goddess should be worshipped) as manifest with two eyes,
the syllable otfi (containing the three letters), pure and being
present with (lord) Sankara (Siva). Two lotus seats (should be
provided). (She may be endowed) with two arms or four arms.
She may be riding a lion or wolf or have eight or eighteen hands.
(She may be wearing) a garland and rosary beads. (She may
wear) a bunch of lotuses on the neck. She may be holding an
arrow or bow with the right hand and a book, betel*leaf, club,
offering protection and a (waterpot) with the left hand.
One should place in each one of these (hands) Ganesa, mirror
and an arrow.
14-19. In the alternative (the goddess) should be made in
Her manifest and unmanifest form. The deity is invoked on the
pedestal by (showing) thcpadma mudra (posture of the hands for¬
med as a lotus). It is said thsit liAga mudrd (posture representing
the liAga shape) is for (invoking) (lord) Siva. For (invoking)
both, the dodkani TTiudra (invocation posture) (is to be used).
The posture for invoking the goddess isyoni (female generative
organ) . The mystic diagram (for the worship should be) a squ¬
are. A lotus having three petals occupying the central four
chambers should be made within that square. A triangle in two
squares in the middle and a half crescent in double that space
(should be made) in order. The entrance should be double that
as well as double that of the approach to the door. (There should
be) three doors in each one of the three directions. In the alter¬
native (the goddess) may be worshipped on a. bhadraka (lotus
diagram) or on the ground after having established (the goddess)
and worshipped Her with the five things got from a cow and the
five sweet things. (A votaq^) should offer red flowers and offer
hundred oblations with the five sweet things and clarified butter
facing the north. Then the final oblation (should be made).
(The votary) would accomplish all the desired things. After
having offered a victim, three or eight girls should be fed. The
offering made to the goddess should be given to the devotees of
l§iva and should not be taken by oneself.
20-22a. (By this worship) one desirous of getting a daughter
would get a daughter, a person not having a son would get a
son, an unfortunate woman (would get) fortune and the king

(would get) a kingdom and victory in battle. By (repeating the
formula of the goddess) eight lakh times, a votary (would get)
efficacy of speech and the gods would come under his control.
(The votary) should not eat without offering (to the goddess).
One should worship with the left hand especially on the eighth,
fourteentli and the third (lunar days) .
22b-26. I shall describe the worship of (lord) Mytyufijaya
(the conqueror of death; a synonym of Siva) . (The god) should
be worshipped inside a pitcher. The (the syllable orh)
should be used for the oblation. The lustre of the god would be
had by this (method). The basic formula (should be) ending
with (The votary) should show the (posture
of the fingers representing a pitcher) . Oblations should be made
with milk, durvd (grass), clarified butter, amrM, sweet
porridge and cake. The formula should be repeated ten thousand
times. (The god should be contemplated as) having four faces
and four arms, holding pitchers in two hands and offering boons
and protection by two (others). (The god) should be (mentally)
bathed with the kumbhamudra. One who partakes the auspicious
herb sanctified with the formula would have healthy life, fortune
and long life. When contemplated, He would destroy untimely
death and when worshipped (would confer) wonderful results.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYSEVEN
The greatness of establishing a liAga
and worship with the accessories
The Lord said:
1-5. The austerities are completed after having worshipped
Satya and others, the presiding deities of austere observances.
Arista, the lord of the thread (of a rosary) is capable of nullify¬
ing misfortune. (A string) having golden and gem (beads) (con¬
fers) fortune. (A string) (containing beads made of) great conches
is for causing death. (A rosary) (containing) conch-shells is
for a charm (while) that one (having) pearl beads increases

Agni Purd^a
progeny. (A rosary having) crystal (beads) confers fortune. (A
rosary having) rudrdksa confers emancipation. A mdrakfa of the
size of a dhatri fruit is excellent. The mental repetition (may be
done) with the central bead or without the central bead in the
string. The repetition should be done using the ring finger and the
thumb. While doing so one should not cross the central bead.
When the rosary has fallen down by mistake, one should repeat
(the formula) two hundred times.
6-7a. A bell possesses (the sounds of) all the instruments.
Hence sounding it confers wealth. The linga (the emblem deno¬
ting lord l§iva) and the abode (of the deity) should be cleansed
with cow-dung, cow*s urine, earth from the ant-hill, ashes and
water.
7b- 10a. O Skanda ! The formula ^Obeisance to (lord)
Siva* is capable of accomplishing all things. These five syllables
are commended in the Vedas. The six syllables^ are commended
in the world. Lord Sambhu (Siva) is present at the end of ^Orh'
like the seed of a (holy) fig tree as a seal. It is known that
'Obeisance to Siva’ is the designation ofisanaand others in order.
One would acquire the collection of formulae by repeating the six
syllables. *Orfi obeisance to Siva’ is the excellent formula.
1 Ob-1 2. (The votary) should worship the liAga with this (for¬
mula) since (lord) Siva dwells in the linga for the sake of con¬
ferring His favour on the people and since He is the conferer of
virtues, desires, wealth and emancipation. A person who does
not worship the Hiiga does not become a fit person to get virtues
etc. One would get enjoyment and emancipation by worshipping
the lihga. Hence one should worship (Him) so long as he lives.
One should never eat without worshipping Him. It is better
to discard one’s life (than not to worship Him) .
13. (One would become) Rudra by worshipping Rudra,
Vi^^u by worshipping Visnu, Surya by worshipping Surya and
the goddess etc. by worshipping the goddess.
14. One would acquire a crore times more benefits by esta¬
blishing the liAga than what one would acquire by doing sacri¬
ficial rites, penances and offering gifts, visiting sacred places
and reading the Vedas.
1. The five syllables with the syllable oth.

15. One who worships the earthen liAga during the three
twilights with bilvay would redeem one hundred and eleven
generations of his family and would attain heaven.
16. A person should build a temple according to his capa¬
city. The small or big (temple) (built) by a poor or a rich person
would have equal benefit.
17. On account of the transitory nature of one's life one
should set apart two parts (of his wealth) for the sake of virtuous
deeds and one part of the wealth for maintaining his life.
18. A person who builds a temple would redeem twentypne
generations of his family and gain wealth. One would get mani¬
fold benefits (by building a temple) with earth, wood, brick and
stone etc.
19. A person who builds a temple of God with eight bricks,
would reach heaven. Even one who builds a temple with dust in
sport would acquire wealth.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYEIGHT
The rules of prosody
Fire-god said :
1-3. I shall describe^ (the rules of) prosody in order as
laid down by Pingala making use of the basic letters. There are
eight (classes), viz. magana, nagana, bhagana^yagatfa^ jagana^
ragana, sagana and taga^a made up of the letters ma, nay bha, ya^
ja, ra, sa and ta. Each one of these ga^as is formed by three
syllabic instances. All the three syllables may be long or short
or the first or middle or final syllable may be long or short. A
syllable is long or short according as the vowel at the end is
long or short. A short vowel becomes long when it is followed
by a nasal sound or (aspirated sound) or a conjunct
1 . The summaries very briefly and does not give a clear defini¬
tion. Hence the translation has been rendered in such a way as to make it
clear.

902 Agni Purd^
consonant or SLjihvdmuliya^ ora upadhmaniya^. Thus the ga^as are
eight according to tradition.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWENTYNINE*
An abridgement of rules of prosody relating lo the Vedic metres
Fire-god said :
1. The Gayatrl and the Goddess are of equal (number of)
letters in the section on metres. It would have fifteen letters.
(The metre called) Prajapati (consists of) eight letters.
2. (The metre) Gayatri (used) in the Tajurveda (consists
of) six letters and that in the Samaveda would have twelve
letters. It would have eighteen letters in the Pgveda, Two more
letters are added in the Samaveda,
3. The fourth quarter in the Fi^fdaznd. all the quarters in
the Prajapati would get lengthened. There would be increase of
one syllable each in the rest. The Asuri would drop one (letter) ,
4. (The metres) U^^ik, Anustubh, Brhati, Pahkti, Tri§ttibh
and Jagati should be known as gradually (increasing). All
these Gayatris (are known as) Brahma.
5. If groups of three (of the above) are added each one
would be the name (of the metres) of the Figveda and Tajurveda,
They should be written in a square of sixty-four chambers.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTY**
An abridgement of the rules of metres
Fire-god said :
1. When a quarter does not have the sufficient letters it
has to be filled with iya etc. The Gayatzis are known to have
1. A term api^ed to the visarga before k and kh and also to r, / and the
gutturals.
2. The visarga before the letters p and ph,
fThis chapter sums up second chapter of Fidgala.
**Thi8 chapter sums up the third chapter of Pihgala.

eight in a quarter. The Jagati (would have) twelve in a quarter.
Virat is said to have ten.
2-5a. The Tri^^ubh has eleven letters in a quarter. There
are also others having Ekapada^ (one foot) etc. (Gayatra
metre) consists of four feet, six letters in each foot. In some
places it has seven letters. The Pratisfha (gayatri ) has three feet
(having eight, seven and six letters respectively) . Vardham&na
consists of three feet having six, eight and eight letters respec¬
tively. (The Pratiftha gayatri) has three feet having six, eight
and seven letters. The NagJgayatri (consists of) three feet hav¬
ing nine, nine and six (syllables) respectively. Varahi (would
have) six, nine and nine (letters) . The third one (Virat gayatri)
having two feet (would have) twelve and eight (syllables) and
that having three feet (would have) same syllables as Tristubh
(ie., eleven syllables each).
5b. The Usnik metre is described in the Vedas (as having)
eight syllables in two feet (and twelve syllables in the third
foot).
6-7a. (The variety of) U$nik (known as) Kakub (would
have) three feet (consisting of) eight, twelve and eight letters.
Pura-u$nik would have three feet having twelve, eight and
eight letters, the Paro-u^ik would be the next (having eight,
eight and twelve syllables) . A metre with four feet (having seven
syllables is also Usnik) .
7b-8a. (The metre) with eight letters in each one of the
four feet would be Anus^up. It may have three feet also some¬
times. It may have eight, twelve and twelve letters. If the
middle and end (of a Jagati is a Gayatra it is also Anustup).
8b-ll. Bjrhati would be one foot Jagati and three feet
Gayatri. (If the first Jagata foot is) third (and others Gayatri)
it isPathya (Brhati). (If the first Jagata foot is) second (and
others Gayatri) it is Nyankusarini (Brhati). The same is known
as Skandho-gri\d according to Krau^tuki. The same is known as
Urobfhati according to Y^ka. (If the Jagati foot is) at the
end (and the rest are Gayatra) it is Upari$^d-brhati. (If the
same Jagati foot is) at the beginning (and the rest are Gayatra)
it is Purastad-brhati. In some (texts) there would be four feet
1. one foot, two feet etc.

Agni Purina
with nine syllables each (also known as Brhatl). In some places
(it would have eight letters. Mahabrhat! is constituted of three
Jagati feet. The same is Satobrhati according to Bhapdila^
12. If the first two of the four feet (are Jagati and the
other two Gayatri) it is Pahkti. (Another variety of Pahkti) is
Satabpahkti.^ Even if it is in reverse order (it isSatahpahkti)^.
(If the first two feet are Jagati) it is Prastara-pahkti. (If the
Jagati occurs) in the last two feet it is Astara-pahkti.
1 3. The Ak9arapahkti consists of four feet having five
letters in each half of each foot. Padapahkti consists of five feet
( having five letters in each) . ( If the first foot has) four letters,
(the second) six letters and the last three (five letters) (it is
also Padapahkti) .
14. It would be Jagati-pahkti if i t has six (Gayatri) feet
(and Pathya-pahkti) if it has five feet. It is said to be Jyoti$-
mati Jagati if it has one foot (Gayatri and the other three)
Tri$tubh.
15. The Purastad-Jyotih (tristup) consists of (Gayatri) in
the first (the remaining three being Tristup) . The MadhyaJyotih consists of (Gayatri) in the middle (and Tristup preced¬
ing and succeeding). Upari^^jjyotih (consists of three Trispips
and a Gayatri) at the end.
16. It is known as iSahkumati (gayatri) (if it has one foot
having five letters and three having six letters). Kakudmatl
(consists of) six (letters in one foot and the usual number in
other feet). (The metre) would be (known as) Pipilikamadhyama if it has ( eight letters in the first and third and three in
the middle) in the three feet.
17. If the case is otherwise (i.e. it has few letters in the
first and the third and many in the middle) it is (known as)
Yavamadhya. It is known as Nicft if (a Gayatri having twentyfour letters) has one letter less. If the same (Gayatri) has two
letters less it would be Virat.
18*22. If (the Gayatri) has two additional letters it would
be Svara^. In case of doubt (in the case of metre having twenty1. The Chandak Sdtra III. 36 reads as
2. having first and third as Jagati.
3. i.e., having first and third feet G&yatrl and the rest Jagati.

six letters whether it is Gayatri Svaraf or U$nik Svarat), it
should be decided on the basis of the first foot. The deities of
the metres are : Fire-god, Sun, Soma, Bfhaspati (preceptor of
the celestials), Varuna (lord of ocean and morality). Moon,
and Vilvedevas. The musical notes saija^ rsabhUf gandhdra,
madhyarnat paficamaj dhaivata^ nisada (should duly be associated
with the metres). (The metres beginning with Gayatri are)
duly white, variegated, tawny, black, blue, red and white. The
compositions arc of the colour of gorocand (yellow pigment got
from a cow). The metre called Jyotih is black (coloured). The
goiras (of the metres beginning with the Gayatri) arc said to be
Agnivesya, Kasyapa, Gautama, Angirasa, Bhargava, Kausika
and Vasiftha.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYONE
Metres of different kinds*
Fire-god said :
1 . (The metre) Utkrti consists of one hundred and four
letters. One should drop four letters (step by step) (and get
other metres). They would respectively be metres abki, sarh^ vi,
dfli and pra etc. (prefixed) to Krti separately.
2. Then (there would be metres) such as Krti, Atidhrti,
Dhrti, Atyasti, A$(i, Atisakvarl, Sakvari, Atijagati and Jagatl.
3-4. The metres described hereafter are classical. The
Vedic metres beginning with Tri§fup (in the Vedas) (would
be noticed in the same way in the classical). Tri^tup, Pankti,
Brhati, Anu$tup, U^^ik and Gayatri are said (to be the metres) .
Suprati^^ha (twenty letters), Prati^tha (sixteen letters),
Madhya (twelve letters), Atyukta (eight letters) and Ukta
(four letters) : thus each one has lesser (number of) letters.
5. The fourth part (of a Gayatri having twentyfour
letters) would be a foot. The Ga^acchandas^ is described now.
''‘This chi^tw sums up the fourth chapter of Pihgala.

Agni FwrltQja
The gari,as are made up of four syllables. They may be a gwru
(long syllable) at the beginning, middle or end or two long
syllables (or four short syllables) .
6. Four syllabic instants and five ganas (groups) are said to
be the characteristics of the Arya (metre) . When there are
seven and a half gav^’m one half (of a verse) it is Arya. The
other half also (would be similar). (In the Arya the odd) are
not jagana (having long syllable in the middle).
7. The sixth (garia) would be 2ijagarM. (The sixth) may be
having all short syllables. When it has all short syllables the
foot begins with the second word. (When it is long syllable in
the middle or all short syllables) and the seventh (is all short)
(the foot begins with) the first (letter). If in the second (half),
the fifth {gana be all short) (the foot begins with the first letter
of the first half) .
8. If in the second half the sixth {ga^a) (be either long in
the middle or all short) , the short vowel (is introduced) . The
variety of Arya is known as Pathya if it has three ganas (in a
foot) in the last half and first.
9. Vipula (is the next variety) (having no pause in the
three ganas in the last or first half or both) . Capala is that where
the second and the fourth {ganas) are long in the middle, (the
first is long at the end, the third is two long syllables, the fifth
long at the beginning and the rest as usual) . Mukhapurvika
has the characteristics of Capala in the first half.
10. In the Jaghanacapala, (there are the characteristics of
Capala) in the second half. Mahacapala (has]the characteristics
of Capala) in both (the halves) . Giti is that where the first half
is similar.
1 1 . Upa^ti is that where the second half is similar. Udg^ti
is said to have the order reversed. Aryagiti (has) eight gai^ in
the (first) half. The metres regulated by prosodial instants (are
described) now.
12. Vaitaliya (metre) has seven (syllabic instants) in the
first and the second quarter and sixteen lakdras (one mdtrd
syllables) in the second and fourth and there should be ra, la and

at the end of both the foot. (If the Vaitallya) has an addi¬
tional long syllable (it is known as) Aupacchandasaka^.
13-15. The Patalika^ has bhagana (and two long syllables)
at the end in addition to the above (characteristics). (The
lakdra) that has not been described so far (in the above should
not be mixed) with the next. The second and third foot in the
above should not be employed separately. Pracyavrtti is shown
(now). When in the second and fourth feet, the first lak&ra gets
mixed up, it is (Pracyavrtti) . If the first lakdra gets mixed up
with the third in the first and the third feet, it is Udicyavrtti.
If the above characteristics are found together in the same it is
Pravrttaka. When all the feet (in the Vaitaliya) have the
characteristics of the first and third (letters), it would be
Garuhasin!. When all the four feet possess the characteristics of
the second and fourth (letters) , it would be Aparantika.
16. It is said to be Matrasamaka when there are sixteen
lakaras {oVitm&trd^yWzkiit) ending in (At the end one of
the two is made guru and the ninth is a lakdra) When there
are twelve lakdras and the ninth (retains its own form in a
quarter) (it is called) Vanavasika.
1 7. (Where in all the four quarters) the fifth and the
eighth (are lakdras and the rest as laid down) (it is) Villoka.
Where the ninth lakdra remains as also the fifth and eighth it is
Gitra. If it gets mixed with the next (i.e. the tenth) it is Upacitra. Padakulaka is the next (metre) .
18-19. (Where there are sixteen lakdras in a quarter it is
known as) Gityarya. (When the two halves of Gityarya) are
reversed (i.e. one half is all short and the other half is all long)
it is Sikha. When the first half is all short (and second half is
all long) it is Jyoti. When the first half is all long (and the
second half is all short) it is Saumya. Culika is said to be hav*
ing (twentynine lakdras in the first half and) thirty one (in the
second half) and a long syllable at the end. The number of
syllables should be deducted from the number of mdtrds so that
the remainder would be g;urus (long) . The number of gurus
1. The Fur&^a reading Gopuecham is obviously incorrect,
2. The Chandassatra reads Ap&talika.
3. The text in the Puiatjia is corrupt.

908 Agni Purdr^
(long) should be subtracted from the total number of mStrds so
that the remaining would be laghu (short)
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTWO*
The metres of un-equal characteristics in the four quarters
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the equal, half equal and unequal
(metres), the three (divisions) of the classical metres. (The
equal metres have the same characteristics in all the four
quarters, the half-equal in two quarters and the unequal have
different characteristics in all the four). The number of half¬
equal metres are arrived at by multiplying the number of
equal metres with the same number.
2. (The number of) imequal metres (is got by multiplying
the number of half-equal metres with the same number) . (The
number of pure half-equal metres is got by) deducting (the
number of the equal metres) from the number (of half equal
metres). (The metre is known as) Samwi where it ends with a
long and short syllable. ThePramani (metre) ends with a short
and long syllable. The Vitanaka is different from the above
(two).
3. It would be Vaktra metre (by adding four syllables) at
the beginning of a quarter (of an Anu$tup). (In it after) the
first (syllable) there should not be sagatia and nagar^^ (and repha
in the second and fourth quarters). (One may use) some other
ga^as except the above. The yagam should come after the fourth
(syllable of a quarter) . In the Pathyavaktra (metre), jaga^a
(comes after the fourth syllable) in the second and fourth quar¬
ters.
4. According to others, it is Pathya metre when it has the
1 . The Purapa reading is corrupt here.
*This chapter corresponds to Pihgala ch. V. Sutras 1-31.
2. See ch. 328. vv 1-3 for the gaoas.

characteristics contrary to the above. It is Gapala, if there is
nagana after the fourth letter in the first and third quarters. It is
Vipula, when yagana is everywhere in the second and fourth
quarters and the seventh syllable is short. According to Saitava
(acarya)\ the seventh syllable should be short in all the
quarters.
5. If there is bhagana or nagana or tagana (instead oiyagaiia
in the first and third quarters after the fourth syllable), it is
Vipula. Many varieties of the Cakra class have been described.
When four letters are added to each one of the quarters, the
metre is Padacatururdhvam.
6. The metre is Apida, if there arc two long syllables at
the end ( of each one of the quarters) . If two long syllables
occur at the beginning (of each one of the quarters), it is Pratyapida.*
7-8. In the Apida, when the first {pada) is interchanged
(with the second) it is Maiijarl, (when interchanged with the
third) it is Laval!^ and (when interchanged with the fourth) it
is Amrtadhara. Udgata is described now.^ Ithas (ten syllables) —
sa{gana)y ja{gana)iSa{gan^a) and la{ghu) (in the first quarter) (ten
(syllables) — na{gana)tSa {gam) , ja{gana) and^fl (long syllable)
(in the second quarter) (eleven syllables) — bha {ga^a), na
(gai^),ja (gana) and la (short syllable) (in the third quarter)
(thirteen syllables) — sa (gar^), ja (garia), sa {gana)t ja
{gana) and ga (long syllable) . When (in Udgata), the third
(quarter) has (ten syllables) — ra {ga^a), na (gana), bha {gana)
and ga (long syllable) it is Saurabha. Lalita (consists of) two
na {gat^as) and two sa {ganas) (in the third quarter) (in Ud¬
gata) .
9. Upasthitapracupita^ has may sa^ja and bha {ganas) and
two gas (in the first quarter) , say na^ ja and ra {gai^) and ga
(in the second quarter), two noySa {ganas) (in the third) and
three naSy ja and two^a {gf^aas) (in the fourth) .
1. The Pura^iic reading is corrupt.
2. The text wrongly reads gapddika instead otgavddau.
3. The text wrongly reads Lavapi.
4. The text reads wrong.
5. Hie text is corrupt.

Agni Purdifa
10. In Upasthitapracupita, when there are two nos, sa, two
nos, na again and two sas in the third quarter, it is Vardhamsuia.
iSuddhaviradar^abha^ is said to have ta^ja, and ra {ga^) (in
the third quarter) (in the Upasthitapracupita) . Then I shall
describe the half-equal metres.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYTHREE*
Description of metres having equal characteristics in the alternate
quarters
Fire^god said:
1. The metre Upacitraka (consists of) three la, and two
gas (in the first quarter), three bhas and two gas (in the second)
(and the third and the fourth like the first and second). Drutamadhya is said to have three bhas and two gas (in the first
quarter), na, two jor and (in the second quarter) (and the
third and fourth like the first and second quarters) .
2. Vegavat! has three sas and ga (in the first quarter) , three
bhas and two gas (in the second) . Bhadraviraf has ta, jas, ra and
gas (in the first quarter), and ma, sa, ja and two gas (in the
second quarter).
3. (When the first quarter) has ja, ja, ra and and (the
second quarter) has bha, ra, na and two gas it is Ketumati. Akhyaniki has two tas,ja and two gas (in the first quarter) and 7a, ta,
ja and two gas (in the second quarter).
4. ViparitakhyanikI hasja, and twogor (in the first
quarter) and ta, ta, ja and two ^ar (in the second quarter).
Harinapluta^ has three sas, la and ga (in the first quarter), na,
bha, bhaBXid ra (in the second quarter).
5-6. Aparavaktra’ consists of two nos, ra, la and ga (in the
1. The text is corrupt.
*This chapter corresponds to Pihgala ch. V, sutras 32-45.
2. The Fur&^a wrongly gives Harii;iavallabhfi.
3. The Purina reads Aparikramam.

first quarter) and na, ja, ja and ra (in the second quarter).
(Pu?pitagra^ has two naSy ra andya (in the first quarter) and
ra and ga (in the second quarter). Yavamati* has ra,
ja, ra and ja (in the first quarter) andja, ra^ja and ra (in the
second quarter). Sikha consists of twentyeight (short letters) and
a long syllable at the end (in the first quarter) and thirty letters
and a long syllable at the end in the second quarter. (The third
and fourth quarters are also similar.) (The metre) Khanja has
got the characteristics reversed. Metres of similar characteristics
(in the four quarters) are described now.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFOUR*
Description of metres having similar characteristics in all the
four quarters:
Fire-god said:
1. Yati (caesura) is said to be the break or pause (at the
end of a quarter). (The metre) Tanumadhya (has) ta and ya
(in a quarter) . Kumaralalita^ has jUy two sas and ga (in a quar¬
ter) (the pause occurring at the end of every three and four syl¬
lables) . Gitrapada is known to have two bkas and two gas (in a
quarter) .
2. Vidyunmala has two mas and two gas (in a quarter) .
(The pause occurs after every four syllables.) Manavakakriditaka would be had with pkay ta, la and ga. (The pause occurs
after every four syllables.) Halamukhi has ray na and (in a
quarter). (The pause occurs after three and six syllables.)
3. Bhujahgasisusuta has two and ma (in a quarter).
(The pause occurs after seventh and second syllables.) Haxhsaruta* consists of may na and two gas (in a quarter). Suddhaviraf
1. The Purina reads Pufpita.
2. The Parana reads Panamati.
•This corresponds toPihgala chs. VI, VII and VIII, Sdtras 1-19.
3. The Parana is corrupt.
4. The 'text is very corrupt.

912 AfffiiPurd^
has ma, sa^ ja and ga in every quarter. (The pause occurs at
the end of a quarter.)
4. Papava has ma, and (in every quarter) . (The
pause occurs after every five syllables.) Mayurasarini has
ra, ja, ra and ga (in every quarter) . (The pause occurs at the
end of a quarter.) Matta has ma, bha, sa and ga (in a quarter).
(The pause occurs after fourth and sixth syllables.) Upasthita^
has ta, jOf ja and ga (in a quarter). (The pause occurs after
every second and eighth syllables.)
5. Rukmavat! has bha, ma^ sa and ga (in a quarter). (The
pause occurs at the end of a quarter.) Indravajra has two iaSy
ja and two gas (in a quarter). (The pause comes at the end of
a quarter.) Upendravajra consists of ja, <a, ja and two gas,
(The pause occurs at the end of a quarter.) Mixed varieties are
formed by (Indravajra and Upendravajra) coming alterna¬
tively at the beginning and end.
6-7. Dodhaka has three bhas and two gas. Salini con¬
sists of ma, ta, ta and two gas. The pause occurs after every
four and seven syllables. Vatormi consists of ma, bha, ta and tw^o
gas. (The pause occurs after) every fourth and seventh syllables.
Bhramaravilasita has ma, bha, na, la and ga. (The pause occurs)
after fourth and seventh syllables. Rathoddhata has ra, na, ra, la
and ga,
8. Svagata has ra, na, bha and two gas. Vfnta has two nos,
sa and two gas. Syeni consists of ra, ja, ra, la and ga. Ramya^
has ja, ra, ja and two gas.
9. (The metres belonging to) thejagatp (class are now
described). Vanisastha consists of ja, fa, ja, and ra. Indravamsa
has two tas, ja and ra. Tofaka is said to have four sas.
10-11. Drutavilambita would be with na, 6Aa, 6Aa, and ra.
Pu^a has two nas, ma andya. (The pause occurs after) the eighth
and fourth syllables. Jaloddhatagati consists of ja, sa,ja and ja.
(The pause occurs) after every sixth syllable. (The metre) Tata
is said to have two nas, ma and ra. Kusumavicitra has na,ya, na
andya. Gaiical^;ika^ would have na, na ra and ro.
1. The reading in the text is wrong.
2. Pingalacchandat VI. 32 reads ViUsinL
3. having twelve syllables in a quarter.
4. The Puriina reads Calambiki.

12. BhujaAgapray&ta has four ya (gactor). Sragvi^ has
four ra {gatfos) . Pramit&k^ara has sa^ ja and two sas. K&ntotplda has bha, mat sa and ma.
13. Vaisvadev! consists of two mar and two^or. (The pause
occurs after the fifth and seventh^ syllables. ) Navamalinl con¬
sists of na, ja, bha and^’a in each quarter. The Atijagati (metres)
are described now.
14. Praharsi^^ has ma, rm, Ja, ra and ga. The pause is after
the third and tenth (syllables). Rucira hasja, ^Aa, ra, Ja and ga.
It has pause after the fourth and ninth (syllables) .
15-16. Mattamayura consists of ma, to, j>a, ra and ga. The
pause is after the fourth and ninth (syllables) . Gauri has three
nor, sa and ga. Asambadha has ma, to, na, sa andga. It has pause
after the fifth and ninth syllables. Aparajita would have two
nor, ra, ra, la and ga. (It has pause after every seven syllables.)
17. Praharanakalita^ (has two nor, 6/ta, na, la and ga).
Vasantatiiaka contains to, bka, two Jar and two gar. It is Siriihonnata (according to) the sage (Kaiyapa). It is Uddharsin!
according to Saitava.
18-20. Gandravarta hasfournor and ra. The same is (known
as) Mala, if it has the pause after sixth and ninth letters. The
same would be Manigunanikara (if it has pause after the eighth
and seventh syllables) . Malini has two nar, ma and two j'or. The
pause is after the eighth and seventh (syllables) . R^abhagajavilasita* has bha, ra, three nos and ga. The pause is after seventh
and ninth (syllables). I§ikharim (hasja, ma^na, sa, bha, la and
ga). P^th^d consists of Ja, ra,Ja, ra, ja, /a andga. It has pause
after the eighth and ninth syllables. Thus they have been des¬
cribed by Pingala before.
21. It would be Vam^apatrapatita, (if a quarter has) bha,
ra, na, bha, na, la and ga. The pause occurs after the tenth (and
seventh syllables) . Harini has na, ra, ma, ra, sa, la and ga. It has
pause after e^'ery sixth, fourth and seventh (syllables).
22-23. Mandakranta has ma, bha, na, ta, ta and two gar. It
1. The Purina wongly reads ai^a denoting six.
2. The Purai^ic text is corrupt.
3. The Puritta has not defined this metre.
4. The text is corrupt.

Agni Purd^
has pause after the fourth, sixth and seventh (syllables) . Kusumitalatavellita (has) ma, ta,na and three j'or. It has pause after
the fifth, sixth and seventh syllables. (The following is based on
the Vedic metre) Atidhrti. Sardulavikridita consists of ma, sa,
ja, sa, two tas and ga. The pause comes after the twelfth and
seventh (syllables).
24. (The following lueires are based on the Vedic metre)
Krti. Suvadana has ma, ra, bha, na, j>a, bha, la and ga. The pause
comes after the seventh, seventh and sixth (syllables) . (The
metre) Vrtta has ga and la in order.
25. (The following metre is based on the Vedic metre Prakrtl.)
Sragdhara consists of ma, ra, bha, na and three j'a^. The pause
comes after seven, seven, seven syllables. Bhadraka^ has bha, ra,
na, ra, na, ra, na and ga. (The pause occurs after) the tenth and
twelfth (syllables) .
26. (The following are based on the Vedic metre Vik^ti. )
Asvalalita consists of na, ja, bha, ja, bha,ja, bha, la and ga. (The
pause occurs after) the eleventh (and twelfth syllables) . Mattakrida has two maj, ta, four naf, ./a andga. (The pause comes
after) the eighth and fifteenth (syllables) .
27. (The following is based on the Vedic metre Sahkftl.)
Tanvi has bha, ta, na, ma, two bhas, na and yd. (The pause comes
after) the fifth, seventh and twelfth (syllables) . (The following
is based on the Vedic metre Abhikrti.) Krauficapada consists of
bha, ma, sa, bha, four nos and ga. (The pause comes after) the
fifth, fifth, eighth (and seventh syllables).
28-30. (The following metres are based on the Vedic metre
Utkrti.) Bhujangavijrmbhita^hastwo mas, ta,na, ra, sa,la andga.
The pause comes after the eighth, twelfth and seventh syllables.
(The metre) called Apavahaka^ similarly has ma, six nos, sa and
two gas. The pause occurs after the ninth, sixth, sixth (and fifth
syllables). (The Dandakas are now described.) Da^d^a has
two nos and seven ras (in a quarter). (The first variety of Da^-
daka) is Ca^d^vr^fiprapataka^. (It has twentyseven syllables in
1. The Parana reads Samudraka.
2. The text is corrupt here.
3. The text reads UpahSra.
4. The text reads Capdavr^dpri^hiitaka.

a quarter) . Other varieties (of Da^^aka) such as Vyala, Jimuta
etc., would be had by adding one ra (each time) (to the
original Dandaka).
The remaining varieties are known as Pracita. The tabular
representation (of long and short vowels) of Gatha (etc.) are
described (now).
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYFIVE*
The tabular representation of long and short vowels of
different metres
Fire-god said :
1 . That which has not been described in the treatises on
metrics is known as Gatha. All syllables in a quarter would
be long. The next one is made one {^mdtrd) less and the rest the
same as the previous.
2. If the mark in the middle of (the metre) to be known is
equal, the first letter would be short. If it is unequal it is long.
If should then be made as half unequal. If it is the reverse the
first letter would be short. When two are desired one will be
reduced.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSIX
Description of phonetics
Fire-god said :
1 . I shall describe the phonetics. The letters are either
sixtythree or sixtyfour. The vowels are twentyone. The conson¬
ants are twentyfive.
*The Purflaa summarises the first sutra aud the concluding sQtras 24*34
of Pihgala ch. VIII. The verses arc very cryptic. Verses 3 and 4 have not
been translated.

AgniPurd^
2-3. (The letters) ya and others (the semi-vowels and
sibilants) are known to be eight. The twin sounds are four in
number — such as the nasal sound, visarga^ ka, pa. The letter t is
known as (produced) by touching light. It is a protracted
sound.
4. (The origin of the letters is described now.) The soul
together with the internal organs and those in the abdomen and
throat contacts the intellect and joins the mind with a desire to
speak.
5. The mind impels the bodily lire, which urges the air to
move. The air moving with the chest produces the sound (called)
mandra.
6. The Gayatra metre at the time of morning ablution is
recited in that (sound) . (The air) moving in the throat gives
rise to the (sound) madhyama that which is associated with
Tri^pibh for the midday ablution.
7-8. The air that reaches the head produces the (sound)
t&rH fit for reciting Jagati for the third (evening) ablution.
The same wind moving upwards strikes against the head, reaches
the mouth and produces the letters. These are divided into five
(groups) on the basis of the articulation, period (of utterance),
place (of articulation) , efforts (to utter) and the sense conveyed.
9. Chest, throat, head, root of the tongue, teeth, nose,
upper lip and palate are the eight places (of articulation) of the
letters.
10. The articulation of the sibilants (/, ^, r and h) are of
eight kinds such as innate nature, expansion, ia, sa, ra^
jikoamUla (the visarga before k and kh) and upadhmaniya (the
visarga before p and pk).
1 1. The letters u and the like are excellent for combining
compositions of metrical nature. The vowels at the end should
be known to be of similar nature. Whatever else remain are the
explicit sibilants.
12-13. A man incurs sin by pronoimcing( letters) from wrong
places (of articulation) , by inauspicious and defective articul¬
ation. Similarly a person incurs merits. A person who employs
good sounds, well articulated, according to the treatises and
acquired from auspicious sources with a dean mouth shines in
the (world of) Brahma.

14. A person should not use harsh and indistinct letters,
nasals, labials excessively with stammering and split tongue.
15. The letters should be uttered in such a way that they
are not indistinct and are not mutilated. A person rejoices in
the world of Brahma by employing the letters properly.
16. The sounds are (divided into] three classes (such as)
ud&tta (accentuated), anuddtta (grave accent) and svarita (in¬
termediate) . They are distinguished as short, long and protrac¬
ted on the basis of the period (of their pronunciation).
17-18. The letters a and kid- arc from the throat, i and cu arc
from the palate, u and pu are the labials, the letters r, /u, ra and
are the cerebrals, and /, /u, la and sa are the dentals. The
sound hvah is said to be from the root of the tongue. Learned
men remember vah as labio-dental. (The sounds) e and ai are
gutturo-palatials. O and au are remembered to belong to the
gutturo-labials.
19. The gutturals a, a, /, e etc. would have half a mdtrd
value. (The letters) which share the places of articulation are
known to be not capable of being combined.
20. The vowels (are known to be) produced not by touch
and the letters etc. by partial touch. These are known to be
consonants not produced by touch. The other consonants are
produced by touch. I shall explain the important among them.
(The letters) arh and ah are nasals. (The letters) ha, jha and fa
are known to have the bellowing sound.
21. The letters j'a etc. possess partial sound. Kha, pha etc.
are aspirated. The cara is known to have little aspiration. This
is said to be long.
1 . The letters ku, eu, fu, tu, pu stand for the four letters in the reflective
group.

AgniPuriti^a
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYSEVEN
Description of the characteristics of a kavya
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the embellishments of poetry and drama
and the like. The constituents of speech are sound, word, letters
and sentence.
2. Whereas the three are obtained in the sentences of the
treatises (^astra) and epics, word is predominant in the treatises
and the meaning is dominant in the epics.
3-5a. K&vya is different from these two because the power
of denotation is dominant (there). It is difficult to be born as a
man in this world and (acquiring) knowledge is more difficult.
Being a poet is still difficult. Poetic genius, originality of ideas
and power of discrimination are still more difficult. The entire
idstra sought by people who are not learned does not materia¬
lise.
5b>6. The collection of letters falls into groups such as
primary letters, secondary, the aspirated and the fourth. Words
(are divided into two) on the basis of distinction as nouns and
verbs. Sentence in brief is a series of words possessing a delight¬
ful sense.
7. Kdrya is that where literary embellishments are displayed
and which possesses literary merits and is free from blemishes.
The sources of (poetry) are the Vedas and the world. A k&vya
not originated from the above sources could be understood from
the import of the words.
8. Saihskrta (language) is for the gods and others. There are
three varieties of Prakrta for men. Kavya etc. are known to be
of three kinds — uprose, poetry and mixed.
9. Prose is (defined as) unmetrical combination of words.
It is divided into three: Curnaka, Utkalika and Gandhivrtta.
10. What is known as Curnaka has short compounds and
does not have very soft words. (The same) with long compounds
would be Utkalika.
1 1. Gandhivftta would have medium arrangement of words
and absence of very difficult compounds. (It possesses) sem¬
blance of metrical form.

12. The prose k&vya is said to be divided into five — ^Akhyayika, Katha, Khandakatha, Parikatha and Kath^ika.
13-1 5a. It is known to be Akhyayika where there is an
eulogistic account of the ancestors of the author, a detailed des¬
cription of the abduction of maidens, fight, separation and
other calamities. It should be replete with riti (diction), vrtti
(style) and (power of words). Its story is divided into
Ucchvasas (chapters) . It should contain Curnaka type of prose
at the end. It may (employ) Vaktra or Aparavaktra (metre) .
15b- 17. It is designated as Katha where the poet briefly
praises his ancestors in metrical composition, where there is
another episode while introducing the main theme. There would
not be any division. Sometimes there would be (divisions
called) lambakas, Kha^d^katha is contained in Katha in
(verses in four lines). Parikatha (is a combination
of the characteristics of the two (Katha and Akhyayika) .
18-19. The hero is known to be a minister, merchant or a
brahmin. Pathos should be known (to be the sentiment) of the
two. Love in separation is of four kinds. The first one is not
obtained (here) . It follows the story. Parikatha is known so
because of its mixed characteristics of Katha and Akhya¬
yika.
20. Kathwika (is defined as beginning with) the (senti¬
ment of) terror embodying sentiment of love and (sentiment
of) wonder at the end. It is accomplished with good sense and is
free from bombastic (expressions) .
21 -23a. Padya is (a metrical composition) of four lines.
It is divided into two — ^Vrtta andjati. Vrtta beginning with
Uktha and ending with Utkfti is regulated by the number of
letters. Jati is that where the syllabic instants are counted ac¬
cording to Ka^yapa. According to Piiigala Vfttas (are
divided) into three — equal (quarters) , half-equal and unequal.
It is the ship of knowledge for those desirous of crossing the
deep ocean of Katya,
23b-27. The family of poetry (consists of) Mahakivya,
Kalapa, Paryabandha, Vilena, Kulaka, Muktaka, and Kofa.
A Mahakavya is divided into sargas (cantos) and is begun with
Sanskrit and those of similar nature are not avoided. The equi¬
valent (Prakfta) does not become a blemish. The theme has its

Affd FurOxfu
origin from historical incidents or other real incidents. It may
describe council of states, sending of emissaries and marching
(of soldiers) in battle-array. It should not be very elaborate. It
should be composed in equal (jcmc) (metres) such as Sakvari,
At^agati, Ati^akvari, Trii^pibh, Pufpitagra and Vaktra. Mukta
describes different incidents not having short cantos.
28-29a. (One canto may be composed) in the Atiiakvari
and Afti (metres), another in mixed metres, whereas some other
canto (maybe composed) in the Matra. The last canto (may
be employed) for praiseworthy (matter) . This optional rule is
very much condemned. Hence good people do not respect it
especially.
29b-32. (Poetry) should be adorned with description of
cities, seas, mountains, seasons, (the rise of) the moon and sun,
hermitag^es, trees, gardens, sports in the water, drinking bouts
and amorous dalliances, sending of female emissaries, the
accounts of unchaste women, darkness, pleasant breeze and
delineation of other vibhdaas (condition that produces a state of
mind). It should contain all styles, power of words, bhdvas
(states of mind) , dictions, sentiments, qualities and embellish¬
ments. That is why (it is called) a Mahakavya and its com¬
poser a great poet.
33. The sentiment is its very life even though verbal in¬
genuity may be predominant here. (It gains) a body from the
sentiments in the eloquent expressions being accomplished with
special efforts.
34-36. The fruit of the all-pervading fourfold object of
human existence has been explained through the medium of
the hero. Kalapa is composed in the same metre throughout
suid is soft on account of the Kai^iki vftti (style) . Here the
sentiment is incipient love and sojourn abroad. It is Vile^aka
when it contains (mention of) attainment etc. and (is composed)
in Sanskrit or any other (language). Kulaka would have many
couplets. It (is also known as) chained. Muktaka consists of
single verses and is capable of gaining the admiration of good
pet^le.
37-38. Koiais full of elegant verses of great poets. It is

mi-lOa
divided into (sections called) Vrajyas^ pleasing to the learned
men. Where there is power comparable to splendour and in
which there is a difference of the metre in a canto, (it is known
as) the mixed. It is known to be (divided into) two — Vapu and
Prakirnaka. Prakir^aka can be heard (read) and represen¬
ted on the stage byall kinds of expressions.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYEIGHT
Description of the different types of drama
Fire~god said :
l-4a. (Drama consists of) twenty seven types — ^Nat:aka,
Prakarana, pima, Ihamrga, Samavakara, Prahasana, Vyayoga,
Bhana, Vithi, Ahka, Tro^aka, Natika, Saffaka, iSilpaka, Karna,
Durmallika, Prasthana, Bhai^ika, Bhani, Gofthl, Halil ^ka,
Kavya, Siigadita, Natyarasaka, R^aka, Ullapyaka and Prehkhana.
4b-7a. The general and particular (are) the two courses for
the characteristics (of a drama) . The general (relates) to all
topics. The other one exists in certain (topics). After the preli¬
minary function (relating to the drama) is finished, the two
(come into operation). The general (relates) to both place and
time, sentiments, emotions, excitants and ensuants, gesticula¬
tions, act and position because they pervade all through. The
particular is to be employed as the occasion (arises) and the
general is described first.
7b- 10a. Drama is said to be the means of attaining the three¬
fold ends of life. The preliminary function is its instrument and
course of action in the proper way. There are thirty two compo¬
nents beginning with benediction. Salutation to gods, praise of
preceptors, and the blessii^ps etc. of cow, brahmins, kii^fs and
others are sung. The atage-directmr (is introduced) after the bene¬
diction. This is set in (^) the dramas.
1. Ihe text wrongly reads Bralim&.

Agni PurdJfa
10b- 11 a. (The poet) should indicate the following five — the
successive order of the teachers,the praise of the lineage, the
power of the poet, the relation and the purpose of the kSsya.
1 lb- 17a. It should be known by learned men as the Prologue
(Amukha) in which an actress or a jester or an attendant con¬
verses with the stage-director using charming expressions befitt¬
ing the purpose with mutual objections or doubts relating to the
subject matter. It is also (known as) Prastavana. Pravrttaka,
Kathodghata and Prayogati^aya are the three divisions of Amu¬
kha arising in the elements of the germ (of the plot) . It is known
as Pravrttaka where the stage-director describes the timely
entrance of a character with reference to the time that has
commenced. It is said to be Kathodghata (opening of the
story) in which the characters enter taking up the remark or the
sense of a remark of the stage-director. It is said to be Prayogatisaya (superseding of a performance) in which the stagedirector describes a particular contrivance in the midst of the
proceedings and a character enters thereafter.
17b- 18. The incident is said to be the body of the dramas
and others. ^Established* and ‘Fancied* are known to be its two
kinds. The ‘Established’ is found in the scriptures and the
‘Fancied* is the creation of the poet.
19-20. The Arthaprakrtis (the leading sources in a drama)
are five — the germ, drop, episode, an intervening episode and
denouement. The endeavour is also of five kinds — ^the beginning,
effort, prospect of attainment, certainty of attainment and
attainment of fruit in order.
21. The opening, progression, development, pause and
conclusion are also the five junctures in order.
22. That which is described only a little spreads in many
ways and which ends with the fruit is said to be the germ.
23. That is said to be the opening in which there is the
germination of the germ giving rise to various matters and
sentiments conforming to the body of the poetic composition.
24-25. The composition of the desired theme, continuity of
the narrative, interest in the representation, concealment of
that which should be concealed, narration as a wonderful thing
and making explicit the thing that is to be made explicit—
(These are the objects of the components of the juncture) . The

poetic composition (bereft of the divisions of the juncture) is
not excellent in the same way as a crippled person.
26-27. Even a little incident does not occur without (ref¬
erence to) the place and time. Hence the place is described
(now) because of the employment of these two (in a drama).
Bharata is among the countries and the three yugas beginning
with the Krtayuga with reference to time. There is no rise of
happiness or grief without these two for beings anywhere. And
contextual narration of creation and others while (describing)
creation does not become a defect.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THIRTYNINE
Description of the sentiments, emotions, hero etc.
Fire-god said :
1-2. The Supreme Brahman, who is imperishable, eternal,
unborn and mighty is said to be the single consciousness, efful¬
gence and Supreme Being in philosophy. Bliss is natural to him.
Sometimes it is manifested. The manifestation of this is called
consciousness, charm and sentiment.
3. Its first modification is known as self-consciousness.
Conceit (is produced) then and the three worlds get exhausted
in that.
4. Pleasure (proceeds) from conceit and this attains
gratification on account of (contact with) the transitory (feel¬
ings) etc. in general and is declared as the (sentiment of)
love.
5-9a. Comic (sentiment) and others which are verily its
other varieties, whose characteristics are exhibited by their
respective special permanent moods by being expanded by the
qualities such as goodness, have their origin from the Supreme
Soul. The erotic (sentiment) is produced from attachment. The
(sentiment of) wrath is born from fierceness. The heroic (senti¬
ment) is born from haughtiness, (The sentiment of) disgust is
said to be originated from revulsion. The comic (sentiment) is

Agni PuribSM
produced from the erotic (sentiment) . The sentiment of pathos
(is) from fury. (The sentiment of) wonder arises from heroism.
(The sentiment of) fright would be from disgust. Among the
sentiments of love, humour, pathos, fury, heroism, fright, dis¬
gust, wonder and tranquility, four sentiments are self-developed
(as described above) .
9b-ll. The goddess of speech does not shine without senti¬
ment like the goddess of wealth without renunciation. The poet
alone is the creator in the boundless course of poetry. The uni¬
verse changes in the way (he) likes. If the poet is impassioned
in his poetry, the world becomes verily full of sentiment. If the
poet is detached, indeed it becomes manifested as devoid of
sentiment.
12- 13a. There is no (poetic) sentiment devoid of emotion.
There is no emotion devoid of sentiment. (The poets) bring
into being the sentiments and the sentiments are being produced
by these (emotions) , (namely), the eight permanent emotions
beginning with love, stupor and the like and the transient
emotions.
13b- 15. Love is said to be the feeling of happiness in
respect of (the object) agreeable to the mind. Laughter is said
to be the expansion of the mind through mirth etc. (People)
describe fear as mental affliction (arising) from seeing a
picture etc. Disgust is censure of things which bring misfortune.
Wonder is the expansion of the mind (arising) from seeing things
pre-eminent.
16-22. The eight (transient emotions) such as stupor (are)
from goodness, passion and ignorance. Stupor is a resistance of
effort (paralysed state) brought about by excessive fear or love.
Perspiration is water from the body originating from internal
agitation accompanied by fatigue and attachment. The internal
horripilation (is) the heaving of the body (caused) by joy etc.
Broken speech originates from joy etc. and hoarse voice (is
caused) by fear etc. Grief is said to be the distress of the mind
(caused) by the destruction of the desired (thing) etc. Anger is
the awakening of fierceness resembling contradiction. Enthu¬
siasm is said to be the sense of gaining the desired goal. Trem¬
bling is declared as the stupefaction arising from the agitation
of the mind. Change of colour is the reverse of splendour arising

from grief etc. Tear is known as the water from the eyes produ¬
ced by sorrow, happiness etc. Loss of consciousness is the cessation
of (the working) of the sense-organs due to fasting etc. The
depression of the mind arising from indifference (to worldly
things) is said to be despair. Debility (is) physical langour from
mental suffering and the like from the body.
23. Indifference arises from dependence on doubt. Envy is
jealousy. Intoodcation (is) the infatuation of the mind arising
from the use of wine etc.
24. Weariness (is) exhaustion arising from the inner
body caused by excess of work. Aversion of the mind towards
acts such as love etc. is said to be indolence.
25. Miserable state is due to deviation from goodness.
Thought is contemplation of objects. Perplexion is said to be not
finding the mode of doing (a thing) .
26. Recollection would be the reflection of an enjoyed
thing. Opinion (is) ascertainment of purpose brought about by
knowledge of reality.
27. Bashfulness (is) certain shrinking of the mind arising
from passion and the like. Fickleness would be unsteadiness. Joy
is the pleasure of the mind.
28. Excitement is the distress of the soul caused by the
hope of remedy. The loss of intellect in those to be done is said
to be stupidity.
29. Equanimity is the elevation in v^ealth on the attain¬
ment of the desired end. Pride is contempt for others and
attitude of supremacy of the self.
30. Impediment caused by fate and the like in respect of
the desired object is despondency. An unsteady condition caused
by desire when the desired end has not been gained is longing.
31. Absent-mindedness (is) immobile condition causing
benumbing of the senses and the mind. Terror (is) repeated
surprise in the mind (caused) by opposition and the like in
war.
32. Intolerance (is) non-pacification of anger. Awakening
(is) the rise of consciousness. Dissimulation is the concealment
coming under the range of gesture and appearance.
33. Harshness of vehement verbal attack arising from
anger is^luiown to be fierceness. Conjecture is examination

926 Agni PurSo^
and determination. Disease (is) the impediment of the mind and
body.
34. Madness (is) incoherent utterances and the like caused
by passion and the like. Tranquility (is) the cessation of
passion of the mind by means of the knowledge of reality and the
like.
35-38. The emotions and sentiments should be employed
by poets in poetry and the like in which (the emotions of) love
and the like are developed. (The means) by which they are
developed is known as excitant. It is of two kinds — support¬
ing and enhancing. The supportive excitant is that on which the
group of emotions such as love subsists. It is produced through
(the medium of) the hero and the like. The hero is known to be
of four types — brave and noble-minded, brave and haughty,
brave and sportive and brave and tranquil. (The hero is also
classified as) faithful, gallant, sly and saucy (on the basis of his
relationship with one heroine or more).
39-40. Comrade (Et^hamarda), Companion (Vita) and
Jester (Vidu§aka) are the three minor heroes who help the hero
in love as pleasure companions. The comrade is without
resource. The companion is beautiful and belongs to the same
country. The jester is the provider of mirth. The heroes and
heroines (are of) eight (types) (as described in verse 37).
41. According to Kau^ika, (the heroine maybe) one’s own
or belonging to another or remarried, and general but not
remarried. Thus there are many types.
42. The enhancing excitants are those which excite the
feelings in the subsisting excitants by (means of) different kinds
of refinement.
43. The sixtyfour (fine) arts are divided into two accord¬
ing as they begin with action or music. Jugglery, memory, and
perhaps jester and the aids to jester (are included) in these.
44-45. The ensuant is known to be only the exertion of the
mind, speech, intellect and the body arising from recollection,
desire, hatred and effort of the learned and caused by the ex¬
cited and accomplished emotions of the supportive excitant.
Moreover this is experienced and certainly arises (after love
etc.) and hence defined here.

46. The exertion of mind is said to be characterised by the
occupation of the mind. This is also known to be twofold as
relating to men or women.
47. Those relating to men are eight— beauty, vivacity,
grace, steadiness, equanimity, gallantry, magnanimity and
dignity.
48. Beauty (prevails) in contempt for inferiors and emu¬
lation of superiors. (It is) heroism. (It is) the cause of dexterity
and the like. Beauty occurs in mental virtue in the same way as
a house becomes beautiful.
49-50. The excitants of women are said to be (of) twelve
(kinds) — (primary indication of) emotion, its manifestation (a
little), its decided manifestation, brilliance, loveliness, lustre,
sweetness, heroism, boldness, generosity, firmness and gravity.
The primary indication of emotion arises from a little of joy
and the little manifestation is the sportive indication of emo¬
tion.
51-54. The exertion of speech would be the appropriateness
of speech. It is indeed (of) twelve (kinds) : Conversation, exces¬
sive utterance, sorrowful speech, repeated speech, question and
answer, evasion, sending a message, expounding, pointing out
truth, description of something else, instruction and dissimulat¬
ing (speech) . This process is for the understanding. It is said to
be the exertion of good intellect. It has three divisions, namely,
diction, mode, and perseverence.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTY
Description of diction and mode
Fire^godsaid:
1. Diction (is essential) for a good knowledge of speech, it
is of four kinds — PaJicali, Gaudadefiya, Vaidarbhi and La(aja
(respectively belonging to the regions P^cala, Gauda, Vidarbha
and Lata).

Agni Purd^a
2>4. The Paficali is endowed with metaphorical expression.
(It is) soft (and has) shorter compounds. The Gaudiya is a
loose composition having long compounds and not having many
metaphorical expressions. The Vaidarbhi is not a very soft com¬
position. It is devoid of metaphorical expressions and is free from
compounds. The Latlya (is) a clear composition not having
too many compounds. This is also devoid of much metapho¬
rical expressions.
5. The mode is uneven in the actions (of a drama). It has
been established as fourfold — Bharatl, Arabhatl, Kausik! and
Satvati.
6. The diction Bharad is said to be known so because it
was formulated by Bharata. It is predominantly verbal, (con¬
sists) generally (of actions) of men but also of women and has
expressions in Prakrta.
7-9. Bharati has four components: Vi thi, Prahasana and
Prastavana of the drama and the like. The sub-divisions of
Vithi are thirteen :Udghataka,Lapita^, the second, Asatpralapa,
Vakireni®, Nalika, Vipana, Vyahara, Trimata, Ghala, Avaskandita®, Ganda, Mrdava and Aficita*, the thirteenth.
10. Prahasana is the speech ridiculing the ascetics and
the like. Arabhati is known to be abounding in trickery,
witchcraft, war and the like. (It is of the varieties) Sanksiptaka,
Avapata and Vastutthapana.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYONE
Description of the actions and movements of the limbs
Fire~god said:
1. The exertion of the body is regarded as the particular
gesture relating to the limbs and subordinate limbs and as their
action. The former generally relates to women.
1. The amended reading is Avalagita.
2. The amended reading is VSgvcoI.
3. The amended reading is Avasyandita.
4. The printed text wrongly reads ucita.

2-5a. It is (divided) into twelve^— sportiveness, playful
gesture, cessation (of care in dress etc.), amorous play or move«
ment, amorous agitation consisting of laughter, weeping, etc.,
involuntary expression of affection towards the lover, repulse of
lover’s caresses, indifference towards a beloved object {bibboka),
that which arises from tenderness {lalita) , affected by passion or
emotion, pleasure-giving pastime and amorous sport. Sportive¬
ness (is) the imitation of the gesture of the beloved person in a
hidden abode. Playful gesture is said by good people as exhibiting
some peculiarities a little. KilakiTicita is the combination of
laughter, weeping and the like. Bibboka is some kind of perturb¬
ation. arises from tenderness.
5b-6a. The head, hand, chest, side, loin and foot (are)
successively (known) as the limbs and the creeper-like (tender)
eyebrows and the like as the minor limbs.
6b-7a. (There cannot be) the use of the limbs and minor
limbs without the exertion born of effort. It is straight and in¬
direct sometimes.
7b-9a. The head is known (to move) in thirteen ways —
trembling, shaking, gentle shaking (JAu/a) , violent shaking {yidhuta)t excessive movement {parivdhita) , agitated, tossed, graceful,
contracted, turned round, raised upwards, bent downwards and
rolling.
9b, The movement of the eyebrow should be known as
sevenfold (such as) lowering, knitting etc.
10. The glance (is said) to be threefold as being related to
the sentiment, the permanent (feeling) and the transitory (feel¬
ing). It is divided into thirtysix kinds, among which eight arise
from sentiments.
1 1 . The function of the pupil is ninefold — amoving, rolling
and the like. (The actions of) the nose are known to be six.
(Those of) respiration are said to be nine.
12. The actions of the lower lip are of six kinds. The actions
of the chin are of seven kinds. Those of the face beginning with
perturbation are of six kinds. (The actions of) the neck are
known as of nine kinds*
1. The text explains only five among these.

Agn PurUa^
13- 19a. The hand is employed as unfolded and folded by
the character. One banner, three banners, scissor-edge, halfmoon, openingup, parrot-beak, fist, pinnacle, wood-apple, clubedged (?), needle-pointed, lotus bud, snake-hood, deer-head,
k&Agulaka, alapadmat round pillow, bee, swan-mouth, swan-wing,
pincers, blossom, spider and cock are the twentyfour of the un¬
folded hands. Those of the folded hands are thirteen — slightly
folded or open pigeon, crab, svastika. kafakavardhamana\ asakga^t
nifadha^ swing, flower-casket, crocodile, elephant tusk, bahistO’
mbhc? and vardhamdna.
19b-20. The chest may be of five kinds, such as a little curv¬
ed and straight* etc. The belly is threefold — ^not very slender,
slendei^ and full. The actions of the sides are five. The actions
of the shank are also five. The action of the feet in dance and
the like in a drama is known to be manifold.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYTWO
Definition of dramatic representation
Fire-god said:
1-2. Dreunatic representation should be known by learned
men as carrying forward the sense (of the drama) . It arises in
four ways resting on internal feeling, speech, limbs and bringing
out (the feeling). Stupor and the like are the internal (feeling).
The speech is the beginning of speech. That relating to the
limbs is the exertion of the body. The internal feeling is the
operation of the exertion of the intellect,
3. The employment of sentiment and the like arising from
1. The text reads kataka and vardhamina. Cf. FSIK. 8-10 reading these
two as one.
2. utsaAga (lap). Cf. ^fS IX.
3. Cf. J/S IX. given as mtMttha (disscniuiatioo of internal feeling).
4. The text wrongly reads narima. Cf. .V5 IX.
5. The text reads for khalla in J\fS X.

conceit are being described now. Independence of all kinds (of
gesticulation) is meaningless without this.
4. The erotic (sentiment) is said to be twofold, namely,
love in union and love in separation. Both these are again two¬
fold, namely, concealed and manifest.
5. The erotic (sentiment) known as love in separation is
fourfold — incipient love, jealous anger, sojourn abroad and
pathos.
6. The other kind is different from these in four ways and
has the characteristic of increased enjoyment. But it does not
surpass the former.
7. It arises in men and women. Love accomplishes it. All
internal emotions except the change of colour and loss of con¬
sciousness ( are) in it.
8-9a. The erotic (sentiment) thrives (aided) by piety,
wealth, pleasure and emancipation on particular supportive
(excitants) and (becomes) uninterrupted by their peculiarities.
The erotic (sentiment) should be known as twofold consisting
(of the mode) of speech and the act of decoration.
9b-l la. The comic (sentiment) is said to be fourfold^ — smita,
smile in which the teeth are not visible, hasita, in which the tips
of the teeth are slightly visible and the eyes are dilated, vihasita^
that is sonorous, upahasita^ that is crooked^, apahaHta^, that is
with sound and atihasita, that is without sound.
11b- 12. The sentiment known as pathos is of three kinds —
arising from violation of virtue and originating from loss of
wealth. While sorrow is the permanent (emotion) , pleasure is
considered the dominant (emotion) of the former two (senti¬
ments of erotic and comic) .
13. The sentiment of wrath is threefold — by means of limbs,
dress and speech. Its accomplishing factors are anger, perspira¬
tion, horripilation and trembling.
14. The heroic (sentiment) is threefold — heroic in libera1. The pttrd^ mentions only four divisions but defines six as in JVi$ VI.
2. Tlie purdffa wrrongly reads jihoa instead otjihma.
3. Wrongly printed as pdpakasita.

932 Agni Purlb^
lity, heroic in virtue and heroic in battle. Enthusiasm is said to
be the cause of its accomplishment.
15. The sentiment called terror which arises at the com¬
mencement (of an action) , follows the heroic (sentiment) only.
Fear is its accomplishing factor.
16-1 7a. (The sentiment of) disgust is said to be twofold —
agitating and distressing. The agitating (type) would arise on
account of stink^ and the like and the distressing (type) by
means of blood and the like. Aversion gives rise to it and the
s&ttvika element recedes in it.
17b- 19a. The elements which add beauty to poetic compo¬
sitions are said to be the embellishments. These embellishments
are threefold — (tending to embellish) word, meaning and both.
Rhetoricians declare those which are capable of embellishing
word by means of proficiency and the like as embellisments of
word.
19b-21 . The nine, namely, chayd^ mudra, ukti, yukti^ gumphand^
uSkovSkya^ anuprdsa, citra and duskara should be known as the
embellishments of words because of the absence of commixture.
There, ehSyd (reflection) is the imitation of the utterance of
others. It is again fourfold — imitation of popular saying, clever
speech, childish utterance and intoxicated raving^ (matta) .
22. The proverb {dbhdtiMka) is a popular saying and they
are common to all. That which follows the proverb is said to be
the lokokticehdyd by the wisemen.
23. The clever are the cultured. Expert knowledge of fine
arts is culture. That which delineates it is said to be the Cheko^
ktichdyd by poets.
24. All understand childish speech as the utterance of the
ignorant. The imitation of the childish speech hence merely
imitates this kind of speech.
25. The vulgar speech of the intoxicated is similarly (com¬
posed of) confused letters. That which is similar to this is called
mattoktickdyd which even surpasses the intoxicated speech.
26. That which exhibits the power of the poet in its parti¬
cular purpose (is called) mudrd because it affords pleasure. This
is also (known as) repose in our opinion.
”n Text wron^y reads pbUi instead of p&ti.
2. The textual reading is wrong.

27. That is said to be ukti (expression) in which some reason¬
able sense pleases the heart of good people because of some
precept relating to the affairs of the world.
28. Ukti (expression) is sixfold — injunction and prohibition,
restricted and unrestricted, and alternative and exclusive.
29-30. Combination is termed so by the wisemen because of
its being made for connecting the two, word and sense, which
are mutually unconnected. It is sixfold — inflected word, meaning
of inflected word, sentence, meaning of sentence, context and
amplification.
3 1 . Stringing is the practice of composition within the scope
of a word, meaning and their order. It is threefold based on
imitation of word, succession of meaning and regular arrange¬
ment.
32-33. Vakovakya is a sentence containing question and ans¬
wer. It is twofold on the basis of the classification as straight
speech and crooked speech. The first of these is natural speech.
It would be of two kinds according as it is preceded by a question
or not. But, crooked speech is intonation or occurs by indirect
speech. Hence ii is twofold.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYTHREE
Definition of the embellishment of words
Fire- god said'.
1-2. Alliteration is the repetition of letters in (inflected)
word and sentence. The class of letters of repetition is twofold —
single letter and many letters. Five kinds of mode are produced
from the repetition of a single letter — sweet, soft, mature, graceful
and harsh.
3-4. The consonant letters of the sweet {madhur&vftti) shoviid
occur below the last letters of the (respective) consonant classes:
the letters ra and m should be separated by short vowels, coupled
with letter na and should be joined with hard aspirates and
sibilants. The varga-var^as (letters A'S, ca^ pa, ta and pa) should

934 Agni Purd^a
not be repeated in more than five ways. They are not to be
followed by short syllables.
5. The soft one abounds in (the use of) ra^ and la. In the
mature one,(theletters)^<7, ^<iand (other) consonants are joined
with (the letter) ra at the head. But neither the cerebral nor the
fifth (letters of the consonants are joined) .
6- 10a. The remaining (letters) would be present in the
graceful one. The harsh one is said to be that in which the sibil¬
ants are joined with the very same letters. There is abundant
repetition of vowels excepting the letter a. The anusvdra and uis~
sarga are also constant in harshness. The sibilants are combined
with ra. (The letters) a and ha are also abundantly joined for
harshness. (They are also joined with) the semi-vowels, na and
ma^. Otherwise, if the conjunct is a hindrance, a hard consonant
(is used) as the first letter for harshness. But the fifth one is not
favoured. The harsh one is employed in censure and imitation
of words.
1 Ob-1 la. Kartfafi^ Kauntali, Kamti, Vdmanasikd^, Dravani*
and Mddhavi^ (are) respectively (characterised) by the semivo¬
wels and sibilants.
1 lb- 17. That which has repetition of many letters conveying
difiereni meanings is yamaka. It is of two kinds — contiguous and
non-contiguous. The contiguous one (has the letters) in close
succession. The non-continguous one (has the letters repeated)
with intervals. These two become fourfold on account of two
kinds of differences in the position (of the letters) and the (met¬
rical) foot. (The first kind is) of seven varieties according (as
yamaka occurs) in one, two and three at the beginning, beginn¬
ing of the foot, in the middle and at the end (of the metrical
feet) . The other kind occurs in six ways when the commence¬
ment of one, two or three metrical feet is similar in each successive
foot with reference to each preceding one. The third (variety)
1. The printed text reads va.
2. The reading antasthdbhimuimdblffdUca in the printed tett has been
changed to antasthdbhir$umdbkydfUa.
3. The correct reading seems to be VdnavdsikS.
4. Obviously wrong reading for Drdvi^f*
5. Obviously wrong reading for Mdihurl.

is threefold (according a&yamaka) occurs at the beginning, in
the middle and at the end of (the metrical) foot. Other
are many. The prominent ten are : pddantqyamakaf kdnciyamaka,
saifisargqyanudca\ yikrdntqyamaka, padadiyamaka, dmreiita, catuwyaiasita and maliyamaka.
18. The repetition of a word is twofold according as it is
independent or dependent on others. Thus men know the repe¬
tition of words which have different purposes.
19. The compounded (repetition) arises from the compou¬
nding of two repeated words. The imcompounded (repetition)
arises from the absence of compounding between the two words
from dissolving the compounds in one part of the metrical foot.
20. The repetition of a sentence is said to be possible in
this way. Alliteration is thus the foremost among the embellish¬
ments by virtue of its fitness though being short in the middle.
2 1 . That alliteration, where the similarity of sound is enjoy¬
ed by means of any vrtti (mode), having uninterrupted sequence
of words, is charming.
22-23a. Citra (picturesque Kdiya) is said to be a composi¬
tion of words exciting curiosity in a learned assembly. It
is of seven different varieties — PraSna, Prakelikd, Gupta, Cyuta,
Datta, Cyuta and Datta combined and Samasyd arising from
union of different meanings.
23b-24. That is Praina (query) in which a reply is given
having similar arrangement of letters. It is twofold according to
the difference of reply to the question asked by one or two. The
query asked by one, again, is indeed twofold according as it is
compounded or uncompounded.
25-26a. Prakelikd (riddle) consists of words having even
two meanings concealed. It has two kinds — ^verbal and meaning¬
ful. The meaningful arises from the comprehension of meaning
and the verbal from the knowledge of word. Prahelikd is said to
be of six kinds.
26b-27a. That is Gupta (concealed) in which even a part
of a sentence remains concealed and the resultant meaning for
which there is expectancy by that part is not whollytrue.lt (is)
also (called) Guiha (covert).
1. Obviously wrong reading for samudgayamaka.

Agni PurO^
27b-28. Where there is the appearance of a different sense
by means of dropping a part of a sentence etc. and there is ex¬
pectancy raised by that part, it is known as Cyuta (dropped) . It
is fourfold arising from the dropping of the vowel, consonant,
bindu (anusvara) and visarga.
29. That is said to be Dalta (added) in which a second
sense is suggested, even though a part of the sentence is given.
Its varieties are considered to be the same as in the previous by
means of vowels and the like.
30. It is said to be Cyutadatta (dropped and added ) in
which there arises a different sense even when another letter is
inserted in the place of the removed syllable.
31. That is Sama^d (union) in which one verse involves
good puns and is composed of various verse fragments. (It
arises) from the blending of the composition of others and of
onc*s own.
32-33a. Duskara (difficult) is that (which is) constructed
with very great difficulty, indicating poet’s ability and producing
great delight in clever persons in spite of tastelessness. It is three¬
fold from niyama (restraint), uidarbha^ (variation) and bandha
(structure) .
33b-34a. JSfiyama (restraint) is considered to be the fulfil¬
ment of promise of the poet, who is delighted for his composi¬
tion. It is threefold according as it (is regulated) by position,
vowel and consonant.
34b-35a. Vikalpa (variation) is so called from the reverse
and natural order (of letters) . The reverse and natural order
arises from word as well as sense.
35b-37a. The skillful composition (of different kinds) of
the forms of various well-known objects by means of arrange¬
ment of letters repeated in many ways is said to be bandha
(structure). It is (divided into) eight (varieties) —GowSfriitJ,
Ardhabhramana^ Sarvatobhadra^ Ambujay Cakray Cakrabjaka, Danda
and Muraja.
37b-39a. {Gomutrikd) would have similar alternate syll¬
ables in each metrical foot in each half (of a verse). Gowfi1. Obviously vikdpa. See verse 34b.

trikd (zigzagging like the cow’s urine) is twofold — the first
kind is said to be Aivapada (horse foot) by others. The last
kind ofGomfi/rtA;^ is also called Dhenu (cow) and Jdlabandha
(net structure) . An arrangement of these is made by two halves
and by half metrical feet.
39b-47. That is indeed Sarvatohhadra (good in every
direction) where (i) the letters (are arranged) one below the
other in successive order, (ii) the letters are arranged one
below the other up to the fourth feet, and (iii) (the letters are
arranged) from the fourth foot onwards the half foot in the re¬
verse order. It is threefold — Sarasiruha (lotus), Catuspatra
(four-petalled) and Vighna^ both of which are four-petalled.
The uppermost (letters) of the first foot are the letters of the
three feet. They occur indeed at the end of all feet. The last
two letters of the preceding foot are at the beginning of the
succeeding foot in the reverse order. The last two letters of the
last foot (are in the same order) at the l^eginning of the first
foot. This would be in (the lotus of) four petals. But there
would be three letters in the lotus of eighc petals. On the other
hand, it is alternate, if it is a single letter, in (the lotus of)
sixteen petals. A series of letters in the form of the petals should
be drawn above the pericarp in the lotus of four petals and
then made to enter the pericarp. One letter should be written
in the pericarp and letters two at a time in the cardinal and
intermediate (points) in the lotus of eight petals. The entrance
and exit (of letters) should be made in the cardinal (points) .
The insertion of similar syllables (is done) in the middle of dis¬
similar letters occurring in the rows of petals on all sides in the
lotus of sixteen petals.
48-52. Cakra (wheel) is twofold— consisting of four spokes
and six spokes. The first one among these has the first and fifth
letters in the quarter of the first half as similar. The fourth and
eighth letters of the odd and even foot are in order in its nor¬
thern, eastern, southern and western^ spokes. The four halves
of the (two) feet should be in the nave. Its first letter should
be taken as far as the last spoke, the remaining two feet (being)
1. The text is wrong. It has been corrected as ta^odakpr&gavdkpratyaga-

Agtti Purd^
in the circumference. It is said to be the Bfhat-cakra (big
wheel) , if the third letter at the end of the fourth foot and the
first two letters are similar, if the tenth letters of the three feet
are similar, if there are six letters at its beginning and end and
if (a letter) is separated by two letters in the last foot.
53-54. (The two) feet are written one by one gradually in
the two front spokes. But the tenth letter should be drawn in
the nave and the fourth foot in the circumference. The first, last
and tenth letters of the verse are similar. The first and the last
(letters) of the two even feet (are also similar). The first,
fourth and fifth letters of the first and fourth feet are similar.
55-58. If the third ( foot) is produced by reversing the
second and the petals are arranged, it is \hcDa^4^ (staff). (It
is known as) Cakrdbjaka (lotus-wheel), if the second and
seventh (letters) are similar in the first petal of a composition,
(if) the succeeding two petals are similar by the two second
(letters in each) , (if) the second, sixth, fourth and fifth letters
are similar in the two halves, (if) the first and the last feet, the
seventh letters of the extreme halves are also similar. Then one
should arrange the fourth and fifth similar (letters) in order.
Similarly the two fourth (similar letters) of the krama feet at
the end of the petals should be arranged.^
59-61. The first and the last of the two halves are similar
in Muraja (drum) . The letter occurs in the half-foot according
to the natural or reverse (order) . Muraja (drum) shape is ob¬
tained thus. The last is set in such a way that the fourth becomes
the first*
62. The second (variety of) Cakra (circle) is accomplished
with Sdrdulavikri^ita.^ The Gomutrikd {bandha) (is composed)
in all the metres. But other bandhas (are set) in Anustubh?.
63. If the names of the poet and the poetic composition are
not found in these, friends become delighted and enemies also
do not feel depressed.
64-65. The arrow, bow, sky, sword, club, lance, meeting
1. This line is not intelligible.
*Venes 60-61 are cryptic and the idea conveyed is not clear.
2. Metre cemsisting of me, saja^ sa, <a, ta {gagm) and ga.
3. Consisting of eight syllables.

place of two, three or four^ roads, thunderbolt, mace,
goad, chariotwheel, food of the elephant, pond and knife are
(the different) (patterns in which verses are composed).
Others {handhas) should be known by the wisemen similarly.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYFOUR
Description of the embellishment of sense
Fire-god said :
l-2a. The embellishment of sense is said to be the beautify¬
ing of senses. Even the beauty of words is not charming without
that. The goddess of speech is just like a widow without the
embellishment of sense.
2b-3a. It is of eight kinds — svari^m (natural form), sddrfyam
( similarity) , (fancy), atiSaya (exaggeration),
(imagination), virodha (contradiction), hetu (cause) and samam
(evenness).
3b-4. The very nature of things is said to be the natural
form. It is said to be twofold such as, innate and adventitious.
The innate (is) natural and the adventitious is occasional.
5. Similarity is (the presence of) common attributes. It is
indeed fourfold ; Upamd (simile), Rupakam (metaphor),
Sahokti (description of the common action of two different
objects as coexisting) emd Arthdntaranydsa (corroboration).
6-9a. It is named &sUpama (simile), in which, there exists
a standard of comparison and a subject of comparison. The
courseof affairs proceeds by taking even a slight identity and
the separate entity exists although possessir^ internal similitude.
It is of two kinds — by compounding or not compounding the
counter-parts (of comparison). The compounded (arises) from
the compounding of the correlated expression and the latter is
otherwise. The compounded is threefold — by (the compound
1. The reading seenu to have sense instead of in the
text.

Agni Purib^a
ing of) the word indicative of simile, (of) the word ( expres¬
sive) of the subject of comparison and (of) both of these.
The last one is of three kinds.
9b. Eighteen kinds of simile are distinguished.
10. ’The Dhartna (attribute) and Vaslu (object) is
that where the common attribute is expressed or implied,
(depending) on the prominence of dhartna (attribute) or
vaslu (object) .
11-12. Where the two (objects) having the (common)
attribute are compared reciprocally, it would be Parasparopamd (mutual simile). When their (comparison) is reversal of
what is well known, it would h^Viparitopamd (reversed simile).
Niyamopnmd (restrictive simile) is that in which (the resem¬
blance) is restricted (to one excluding others). Aniyamopamd
( unrestrictive simile) would be from (the resemblance found)
in others as well.
13-14. Samuccayopamd (cumulative simile) consists of
the mention of multitude of other attributes. When difference
is indicated in spite of similarity of many attributes, it is (known
as) Vyatirekopamd (simile of contrast), because distinction is
spoken of. It is the Bahupamd (multiple simile) in which there
is comparison with many similar (objects).
1 5. When the attributes are different for each standard of
comparison it is indeed Mdlopamd (garland of simile). If
comparison is made by modifying the standard of comparison,
(it is known as) Vikriyopamd (simile of modification) .
16. That is well known as The AdbhuU^amd (hypothetical
simile) in which comparison is made by the poet by superim¬
posing something non-existent in all the three worlds on the
standard of comparison.
17. It is Mohopamd (illusive simile) in which, the subject
of comparison is declared as identical with the standard of
comparison, after imposing the standard of comparison on the
subject of comparison. (It has) a mistaken statement.
18. SarhSayopamd (simile by doubt) (arises) from the
uncertainty of the real nature of both the entities having com¬
mon attributes. JTiicayopamd (determinative simile) (arises)
from determining the subject of comparison after having doubt¬
ed it.

19. Vakyarthopamd (simile of the sense of tlie sentence)
arises from a comparison of verily the meaning of the sentences.
Asddliara^opamd (absolute simile), (which is) extraordinary,
(occurs) when there is a comparison of a thing with itself.
20. When a subject of comparison is (a standard of com¬
parison) of another it is considered as Anya^opamd (simile of
another). It is (known as) Gamanopama^ (simile of succession)
when the subject of comparison of a thing becomes the stand¬
ard of comparison of another in regular succession.
21. Upama (simile) is again known to be of five kinds :
praise, censure, fancied, similar and little similar.
22-23a. It is known by the name RUpaka (metaphor), in
which the subject of comparison is identified with the standard
of comparison after the perception of thesimilarity of attributes.
Or, Rupaka is indeed Ipavia itself in which the difference
(between the standard and subject of comparison) is concealed.
23b. Sahokti (connected description) (arises) from the
description (of objects) having similai- attributes as being
simultaneous.
24a. Arthdnlaranydsa (corroboration) arises when there is
a posterior similarity (of a preceding statement to the succeeding
one) .
24b-25a. It is said to be Utpreksd (poetic fancy) where
the condition of a sentient being or otherwise, which occurs
in one way, is conceived (as occurring) differently.
25b-26a. It is named as Atiiayokti (hyperbole) wherein the
attribute of an object, that has passed beyond ordinary limits,
is described. It is twofold on the basis of possibility and im¬
possibility.
26b-27a. That is said to be Visesokti (special utterance)
where the imperfection in the quality, genus, action and the
like (of an object) arc perceived just for the purpose of showing
(its) speciality.
27b-28a. That is Vibhdvand (presumption) where a differ¬
ent cause or naturalness is presumed excluding a well known
cause.
1. The printed text wrongly reads Gagmopamd.

Agni PurdM
281>29a. It is said to be Virodha (contradiction) where
there is realisation, by adjustment, of congruity between two
incongruous things, with a previous contradiction.
29b-32. Hetu (cause) is that which accomplishes the
object desired to be accomplished. It is produced in two (ways)
such as kSraka (efficient) and jfiapaka (indicative). The
efficient cause occurs before and (the other) after the production
of an effect. These two kinds known as the precedent and an¬
tecedent arise from the controlling relation of cause and effect
or identity. There is difference in the indicative one such as the
perception of a flooding river. The rule of inseparable connec¬
tion arises from the perception of inseparable connection.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYFIVE
The embellishments of sound and sense
Fire-god said l
1. An embellishment of both sound and sense adorns the
two simultaneously just as a necklace laid in one place (adorns
both) the breast and neck of a woman.
2. Six varieties of it are explicitly in existence, namely,
PraSastiy Kdntiy Aucitjfa, SaAksepa, T&vadarthatd and Abhivyakti.
3-4a. PraSasti (eulogy) (is) skillful speech (employed)
for the act of melting the subtle (heart) as if it is subservient. It
is of two kinds on account of the distinction as Premokti and
Stuti. A friendly speech and a panegyric are the synonyms of
Premokti and Stuti (respectively) .
4b-5a. Kdnti (loveliness) (is) the fitness of the expressed
(sense) and the expressive ( word) agreeable to all the minds.
(In tliat) the diction is befitting the theme and the mode to the
sentiment.
5b. The propriety arises from strong and soft compositions.
6. SaAksepa (brevity) (is) tlie comprehension of many
meanings by means of few expressive words. TSoadarthatd

(correspondence) is neither deficiency nor excess of the word
and the theme respectively.
7-9a. Abhit^akti (manifestation) (is) explicitness. It has
also two (sub) divisions, Sruti and Ak^epa. Sruti (direct hear¬
ing) is the word that gives up its own meaning. It is of two
kinds — Naimitiiki (occasional) and Pdribhdfiki (technical).
Technicality is convention. Hence arises the Technical. (The
two) are again each divided as Mukhyd (primary) and Aup’
aedriki (metaphorical) .
9b-10a. That is Metaphorical by which a word whose
function deviates from its own primary sense expresses, for
certain reason, a sense which is not primary.
10b- 12a. It is Indicatory and Qualitative by association
with indication and qualities (respectively). Indication is said
to be the apprehension (of a secondary sense) always associated
with the expressed sense. Indication is regarded as fivefold
arising from connection with the primary sense, proximity,
cohesion, contrariety and association through action.
12b-13. The Qjiialitative (is) endless in view of the endless¬
ness of qualities in accordance with the desire of the speaker.
It is known here as Samddhi (transference) in which the
attribute of one object is transferred to another by a person
complying with worldly limits.
14-16. Thait Ak^epa (interdiction), on account of which
the vital essence not available from direct hearing (of the
word) becomes manifest. It is also (known as) Dkvani (sug¬
gestion) , since it is impliedby suggestion by means of word and
sense, where the (suggested) sense (appears) by subordinating^
its own (expressed sense). That is said to be Aksepa (interdi¬
ction) where there is an apparent denial of the desired sense in
order to convey something special.^ Again, this (is known as)
Aprastutastotra* (indirect praise) where there is a praise of
another object deviating from the object on hand.
1 7. Because of brevity of expression that is termed by the
vfise a,s Samdsokti (brevity of speech), where another object
1 . The reading is taken as upasarjimam instead of updrjanam.
2. The reading should be viftfa instead of viUfo.
3. The textual reading atra sMam stotram is obviously incorrect.

944 PurStfa
having common characteristics is suggested, when one object is
described.
18. Apahnuti (concealment) (consists of) conveying
another sense by concealing something. That is Paryayokta
(periphrasis) which is stated in a different way. Hence Dhvani
(suggestion) is, indeed, the name of any one of these.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYSIX
Investigation into poetic excellences
Fire-god said :
1, Peotry, even though embellished, does not produce
pleasure, if it is devoid ol gun as (excellences) . A necklace would
only bel)urdcnsome to women, if their bodies are not beauti¬
ful.
2. It cannot lie ’said that excellence would only be the
absence of defect.^ Excellences such as $lesa (coalescence) and
the like and defects scuh as Gudhdrtha (obscurity of sense) and
the like have been distinguished from one another.
3, An excellence is that which confers great charm to
poetry. It exists in two forms such as general and particular.
4. That which is common to all* is considered to be the
general. The general (excellence) is threefold relating to word,
sense and both.
5-6a. The excellence (of word) is that which relates to the
word, the body of the poetry®. The excellences of the word arc
sevenfold, namely, Sle^a (coalescence), (smoothness),
Gdmbhirya (depth), Saukumarya (softness), Uddrata (rich¬
ness of expression) , Sati (purity) and Taugiki (derivative).
6b. That is said to be Coalescence in which there is a
closely coalesced arrangement of words.
1. The reading dofo bhdva has been corrected as dofibhiva.
2. Probably the Ritis.
3. The reading kSxofaiarfram is better than kdtgHuh fartrtah.

7. Smoothness is declared as that in which a letter that is
already combined in the words by means of (substitution such
as) gwia^ ddeia and the like is never euphonically combined.
8. The wise name it as Depth which is a composition
chiselled by special characteristics and which contains elevated
words; others (name) the same as Suiabdatii (grammatical
correctness) .
9. Softness consists of words mostly of unharsh letters.
Elevatedness consists of elevated words and is endowed with
praiseworthy epithets.
10. Splendidness (0/ar) ( is) abundance of compounds. It
is the life of prose etc.^ From the Highest Being to a clump of
grass, manliness (comes) by ojas alone.
11-12. That is said to be the Excellence of Sense* which
brings out the excellence of a described object by whichsoever
word. There aresix varieties of it, viz., Mddhurya (tranquility),
Sarhvidhana (contrivance), Komalatvarh (softness), Uddratd
(elegance), Praudhi (maturity) and Sdmayikatva (being
conventional) .
13. The gravity of appearance even in anger (and) deep
state of composure is Tranquility. Contrivance (consists of) the
effort for the accomplishment of an expected object.
14. An arrangement of words free from rigidity appearing
after setting aside laxity (of structure) is (known as) Softness.
15. The excessive gracefulness of intention which indicates
the characteristic of the disposition of being aimed at explicitly
is the Elegance of Gu^a.
16. That is declared Maturity in which there are mature
reasonings impregnated with logical reasonings bringing about
accomplishment of what is intended.
17. The apprehension of the sense in the demonstrated
conclusion* of something independent or dependent (is known
as) *Being Conventional*.
1. The text wrongly reads as padya.
2. arthaga^ seems to be better than the reading ortho gupa,
3. The reading rdddhdntab sampyo matab seems to be better than bShySoiab
samajfogatab of the printed text.

Agni PwB^
18-1 9a. That which embellishes both word and sense is
known by the name *the Excellence of Both*. Prasada (lucidity),
Saubhdgya (loveliness), Tathdsaftkkpa (relative enumeration),
Praiastatd (praiseworthiness), Paka (ripeness) and Rdga
(tint) are its six (varieties) divulged in their manifoldness by
the wise.
19b-20. Lucidity is glorified as consisting of words posses¬
sing very well-known sense. That which, when expressed, sug¬
gests some eminent attribute, is declared by the wise as Saubhdgya (loveliness) or Uddratva (elegance).
21 -22a. Tathdsnfikhya (is) Relative Enumeration extended
to similar things. Praiseworthiness is the description of even a
terrible object by means of a word not terrible, when there is an
occasion.
22b-23. A certain high maturity is said to be Ripeness. It
is of four kinds, viz., as the ripeness of grape and that of co¬
conut water etc. That is indeed the ripeness of grape in which
there is sweetness both at the beginning and the end.
24-25. It is glorified as Tint which is a special characteris¬
tic for the purpose of poetic composition. It excels even the
natural grace (when) put to constant practice. It is again of
three varieties ; yellow, saffron and indigo. That which is with¬
in the range of its own characteristics is to be recognised as
the particular ( Excellence ) .
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYSEVEN
Investigation into poetic blemishes
Fire-god said:
1 . Blemish causes distaste in the refined men. It is sevenfold
as applied to one, two and three of the speaker, the denoter euid
the denoted.
2-3. The speaker is certainly the poet therein. He is also
known to be fourfold: suspicious, insolent, ignorant and learned.
The denoter is that which affects the meaning on the ground

(for employment) and technicality. Its subdivisions are two:
word and sentence. The characteristics of both have been
stated.
4. Grammatical incorrectness and reconditeness are the
only two defects of word. Wisemcn know grammatical incorrect¬
ness as repugnance to the science of word.
5-6a. Reconditeness is said to be the non-cmpIoymcnt by
tlie well-versed. It is fivefold: Chdndasatva (Vedic usage),
Ai'ispasfatva (lack of clarity), Kastatva (unpleasantness),
Asdnuiyikatva (not being eonventional) and Gr&myatva (vul¬
garity) .
6b-9. Chdndasatva is that which is not found in the
spoken language. Lack of clarity arises from lack of understand¬
ing. Obscurity of meaning, Perversion of meaning and Ambi¬
guity are varieties of Lack of clarity. It is known as obscurity of
meaning in which the sense is understood with dilBculty. Per¬
version of meaning again is wrong perception of the meaning of
a word other than that intended. Non-conformity to established
meaning and Incapability (of expressing the intended meaning)
approach this only. Amlnguity is said to be the doubtful nature
of the expressed (meaning) .
10-1 la. Without causing distress to good people, faultiness
attaches to unpleasantness which comprises difficult pronuncia¬
tion. Not Jjeing conventional consists of deviation from conven¬
tion. The sages named it j\eyd.
1 lb-12. Vulgarity is the damaging apprehension of a low
meaning. It is threefold: arising from the expression of an in¬
tended vulgar sense, recollection (of the same) and from close
resemblance (of an expression) with the word expressive (of that
sense).
13. Defect of meaning is twofold: general and paiticular.
The blemish that relates to many is said to be the general.
14. The general (impurities) are five, namely, Kriydbhramia (dropping of the verb) , Kdrakabhrarfiia (dropping of the
case-endings), Visandhi (lack of euphonic combination), Pan^
aruktatd (tautology) and Vyastasambandhatd (confused conn¬
ection).
15. The dropping of the verb is the absence of the verb.
Dropping~of the case-endings again is the absence of cases begin-

948 Agtti Purina
ning with the subject. Lack of euphonic combination is the defi¬
ciency of the same.
16. It is twofold: deficient euphonic combination or repu¬
gnant. The repugnance of euphonic combination (arises) from
difficulty in reading or from the appearance of a different
sense.
1 7-1 8. The continued repetition of an expression is Tauto¬
logy. It is also twofold; repetition of sense and repetition of
word. The repetition of sense is also twofold: by making use of
a chosen word and by means of a different word. In the repeti¬
tion of a word, a word is repeated and not the sense.
19-21. The confused connection (is) improper connection
that arises from the intervention (of a word) . It is, indeed, three¬
fold-arising from the implication of a different connection, from
the occurrence of a different connection and in the absence of
both of them, from internal intervention. Each one of these is,
again, twofold by means of the intervention of a word or a sen¬
tence. Of the word and the sentence, the meaning^ is what is
expressed, because it is intended to be conveyed. The expressed
is divided into two, viz. already-developed or yet-to-bc-developed.
22-23. The incapability of the cause is the state of causing
obstacle to the intended. (It occurs in the following forms) :
inconclusiveness, contrariety, absence of invariable concomit¬
ance, being liable for a valid opposite argument, union of imtimely reason, non-existence in the subject, non-existence in simi¬
lar instance and existence in contrary instance.
24. The eleven kinds of meaninglessness do not become
painful to those who are competent in poetry. They do not be¬
come defects in difficult compositions.
25. Obscurity of meaning does not make the knowers of
defects in difficult compositions feel distress. Vulgarity does not
annoy by being admitted by people (in general) and in techni¬
cal works.
26. There is no blemish in the dropping of the verb because
(the ellipsis) of the verb could be supplied. The dropping of
1. The correct reading is vd^fomottho.

the case (becomes possible) when the case is supplied by means
of implication.
27. Non-occiurrence of euphonic combination does not affect
in the (case of a) pragrhya^ (vowel). Absence of disagreeable
euphonic combination that arises from difficulty in reading does
not become unpleasant in harsh utterances and the like.
28-29a. The repetition of a word and confused connection
are good in alliteration. It is not a defect in understanding the
sense. It is also not tarnished by (the defects) such as the inver¬
sion of order and the like of the case ending, number and gender.
There is no distress for the wise in these.
29b. There is difference in number between the standard
of comparison and the object of comparison there.
30-33. The right practice of the poets is glorified as the
(poetic) convention, where there is (comparison) of many with
one and many with many, which is good. It is twofold: general
and particular, similar to excellence. That which is well known
from the absence of dispute among famous knowersof established
truth is considered as the general convention of poets. According
as all the knowers of truth or only a few agree faultlessly, the
general is twofold. The other (namely, the particular) , arises
from defective doctrine, such as the error of some people.
34>35a. Some sage has the knowledge of reasoning. Some
Oias) transitory (consciousness) of the created beings. Some
(has) self-manifestation^ of knowledge. Similarly, there is gross¬
ness of known objects and uncertainty of words for the Arhats
(Jains).
35b-36a. The Saivas (devotees of Siva) , Vaisriavas (devo¬
tees of Visnu), Sauras (devotees of Sun god), who know the
established truth, opine that Brahman is the cause of the world.
(The cause is associated) with Pradhana (Primordial) for the
Sahkhyas.’
36b-40. It is said to be the particular, in this world of
speech, that people moving together and perceiving mutually,
1. That which is not governed by the rules of sandhi or euphony and is
permitted to be written and pronounced separately.
2. The reading soaprakdSald seems to be better.
3. Tbe^followers of the S&Akhya fdiilosqihy, promulgated by Sage Kapila.

AgniPurd^
fasten upon. This being divided, is also known as twofold, accord¬
ing as being accepted as unreal and being non-accepted as real.
That which gets affected by the means of knowledge such as
perception and the like, is known as the unreal. That is to be
accepted by the poet as the manifestation of knowledge. That
alone which accomplishes an action with purpose, is ( taken to
be) the highest truth, out of ignorance. Brahman alone is the
real, the highest truth, from knowledge. ( Lord) Vifpu is the
cause of creation and the like. He is embodied of words and
embellishments. Knowledge is Para (superior) and Apara (in¬
ferior) . One is released from birth by knowing it.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYEIGHT
List of mono-iyllabic words
Fire-god said:
1-2. I shall describe the mono-syllabic (words) ending with
the letters (of the alphabet). (The letter) “a” (denotes) (lord)
Vi^nu and negation. *A* (means) Brahma, a sentence as well as
a boundary. *A\ when used as an interjection would also be (an
expression of) anger and affliction. *1* (signifies) (God of) love.
(denotes) Rati ( the wife of God of love) and LaksmX (God¬
dess of wealth and consort of Lord Vi$nu) . *U* (signifies) (lord)
Siva (and) *0*, the demons and others.
3. */?* (denotes) a word and (the deity) Aditi (the
mother of Aditya) . (The letters) / and T (respectively) (denote)
Diti (the mother of the demons) and Guha (son of Siva and
Parvad). *E* (denotes) the goddess and *ai* would mean Yogixd
(female attendant of the Goddess). ‘0* (signifies) Brahma and
*au*, Maheivara (Lord Siva).
4-5. ‘Art’ (denotes) the God of love and/a^’ a commenda¬
ble thing. *Ka* (stands for) Brahma and others (and) *ku* con¬
temptible thing. (The letter) ‘AAart* signifies void, the senses
and a sword. A Gandharva and (lord) Vinayaka (lord of obs¬
tacles) (are denoted by the letter) ‘^ort*. ‘Gs’ (signifies) a song

and the singer. *Gha* stands for a bell» a small bell and the like
and beating. (The letter) signifies desire and Bhairava (a
terrible form of lord Siva).
6. ‘Ctf* (stands for) the wicked (and) stainless. ‘CAtf* (in¬
dicates) division and conquering. *JaifC (denotes) a song
and commendable. (The letter) (signifies) strength and
singing.
7. *73^* (denotes) the orb of Moon, (lord) 8iva and tying.
*P<2* is regarded (as signifying) Rudra, sound and fear. *^ha*
(denotes) a drum and sound.
8. ‘.y^a* (means) extraction and ascertainment. ‘Ta* (signi¬
fies) a thief and the inside of the tail. ‘TAa* (denotes) eating,
*dah\ cutting, sustaining and ornamentation.
9. ^Dhafi* (signifies) Brahma and the dhuitura (flower). *Na*
(stands for) a collection and correct course of action. *Pa* is
known (to denote) a garden. Pha* is regained (as signifying) a
squall.
10. *Pha* (stands for) phUtkdra (blowing with the mouth)
and fruitlessness. *Bi* (denotes) a bird and *bharfi\ the asterism.
‘Afa, would (mean) Gkddess of wealth, measure and mother.
*Ta* (stands for) a sacrifice, traveller and a brave person.
11. (The letter) (denotes) Fire (god), strength and
Indra. (The letter) ‘/a* is said (to denote) the creator. *Vi*
(signifies) separation and *Va\ Varuna. (means) lying
down and *Iarh\ happiness.
12. * $ah* (denotes) excellence and *safi\ the past. * So* (means)
LaksmI (the goddess of fortune) and *sarfi* is regarded (as
representing) locks of hair. *Ha* (denotes)sustenance and Rudra
(a form of iSiva). (stands for) the warrior class and
regarded as the alphabet (imperishable) .
13. (The letter) kfo (denotes) (lord) Nrsixhha, Hari and the
guardians of the land (and entrance). A sacred formula of one
syllable (should be deemed as) the deity (itself whom it repre¬
sents) and it confers enjoyment and emancipation.
14. The formula (running as) *kfaum obeisance to Hayaliras^’ confers all knowledge. The letter and the other letters
1. 41ie hofse-keaded form anitmed by Lord Vi^u to rescue the Vidoi.

952 Affti Purd^a
(described above are also) formulae. (They are known as)
mdtfkSmantras and are excellent.
15-16. These (deities of the mdtfkdmantras) and the nine
Durgas — Bhagavat!, Katyayani, KausikI, Candika, Pracanda,
Suranayika, Ugra, Parvatl andDurga. Orh, we may know (the
Goddess) Caiidika, let us meditate on the goddess and may
(Goddess) Durga lead our mind to that. Then the worship should
be done in the proper way together with the six accessories. The
gai^ta should be an aspirate.
17-18. Then (the goddesses) Ajita, Aparajita, Jaya, Vijaya,
Katyayani, Bhadrakali, Mahgala, Siddhi and Revati and the
accomplished (deities) Va^ukas should be worshipped. The nine
guardian deities Hetuka, Kapalika, Ekapada and Bhimarupa
(should be worshipped) in the middle.
19-20. Hrirhl O Durga ! (2) Protector! Oblations for the
sake of perfection of the formula. Then (goddess) Gauri,
Dharma and others and the female energies (such as) Skanda
should be worshipped. Prajfl&, J hana, Kriya, Vaca, Vagl^i,
Jvalinl, Kamini, Kamamala, the energies of Indra and others
should be worshipped.
21 -23a. *'0fh ga;* oblations” (is) the basic formula. *'Garh,
obeisance to Ganapati (lord of the GatfasY* (is) the accessory
formula. The six accessory (worship should be done). They are
Rakta^ukla (red and white), Dantak^a (having axis like tusk),
ParaiSutka(a (powerful axe), Samodaka (having the sweet ball
cake), GandhMi (fragrance etc.), and Gandholkaya (to the
person having a fragrant stick) in order. The elephant (god) ,
the great lord of the Gairias (attendants) and having a magnifi¬
cent incense stick should be worshipped. Oblation to Ku^mto the single-tusked one, to the destroyer of the three cities,
to the black-teethed one, to one whose dreadful laughter startles
(all) , to one having elongated nose and face, to one having the
lotus in the tusk, to Megholka, to DhQmolka, to one having
curved trunk, to the lord of obstacles, to the fierce and dreadful
one, to one having the gait of the elephant of Indra, one having
the serpoit-lord ( Vksuki) as a necklace, to one bearing the cres¬
cent moon, and the lord of the Ganas (attendants). After having
worshif^ed with these formulae ending with oblations and with

(the performance of) the oblations with sesamum, one would
get wealth.
23b-24a. The formulae may, in the alternative, consist of the
letters beginning with ka and with the subtle syllable and ending
with obeisance separately having two ras and two faces and two
eyes.
24b. I shall describe now the grammar that was imparted
by Skanda to Katyayana.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FORTYNINE
The pratydhdras and fundamental rules in grammar
Skanda said :
1. O Katyayana ! I shall describe the essence of grammar
tliat is of the form of perfected words for imparting to the begin¬
ners.
2. Pratyaharas'^ etc. are the notations facilitating the func¬
tion of the treatise, Aiun rlk, eon, aiauc, hayavaraf, Ian, Hamahaifanam
jkabhah, gha^hadhaf, jabaga^adal, khaphachafhathacafataD, kapay,
lafasar, hal are {the {ourtetn) pratydharas. In the enumeration,
the consonant at the end is indicatory. The vowel would be
(read with) the nasal. The first letter being taking together
with the indicative letter at the end, would become the denota¬
tive of the letters which occur in between such as cp, eh, at, yah,
chao, jharh, bhas, ok, ik, a^, ip, yan, with the letter p<z coming after¬
wards. (Similarly we have) afA,yath, Radi, ac,ic, aic, ay, may,^hay,
khay,jax},jhao,khav, cav, lav, al,hal, val,jhal, al,hal,val, ral, jhal
and al the pratyShdras.
1. Several letters or affixes are comprehended as one syllable by means
of combining the first letter of an aphorism with its final indicatory letter or
if several aphorisms are comprehended, the final letter of the last mwnhgr is
combinol with the first such as ap etc. denoting aiun etc.

Affn Purdfa
C3HAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY
The forms of completed euphonic combinations
Skanebi said :
1-5. I shall describe the forms of finished combinations^ (of
vowels and consonants) . First ( I shall describe) the combination
of vowels.
1. Hie text gives only the combined fonns. The individual words have
also been given here for easy c(»ii»chensiaii.

(The following do not undergo any change) :

Affu PwrdJ$a
(The following may occur in two forms) :
(The following is an instance of change) :
ka];L + atrayodha^ = ko*trayodha^
(The visarga is dropped in the following cases)
12-13. kaU uttama^
dev&h -f ete
bhoh + iha
sodar^i yanti
bhago + vraja <
ka uttamal;^
deva ete
bho iha
sodara yanti
bhago vraja
(In the following the visarga becomes repha (r) :
supu^+8uduli-(-ratri|]i « supub suduratrib
viyub 4" yati ■■ v&yuryati
punab + nahi jnmarnahi
punab eti — punareti

(The tfisarga is dropped in the following cases) :
sah 4* yati+iha sa yatiha
e§ah + yati c§a yati
kah + ii^varah » ka Isvarail^
jyotib + rupam — jyotirupam
('Fhe following are examples of other kinds of union) :
tava -f~ chatram — tavacchatram
mlecchadhih-f-chidrarh-f' » mlecchadhi&chidramaca -f-chidat chidat
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED ANDFIFTYONE
Perfected forms of infection in the nouns
Skanda said :
1-3. O Katyayana ! I shall describe to you the finished
forms of inflections. There arc two kinds of inflections — st^
(substantives) and tin (verbs). The substantives have seven
cases. (The inflections) su, au,jas (constitute) the first (case)
(Nominative). Arh^ au. ias (are the inflections of) the second
(case) (Accusative). T&t hkydtfi, this (are the terminations of)
the third (case) (Instrumental), bhydrh, bhyas (constitute)
the fourth (case) (Dative). .Von, bhydrfi, bhyas arc (the inflec¬
tions of) the fifth (case) (Ablative), ^^as, os, dm (arc the termi¬
nations for) the sixth (case) (Genitive). ^^1, os, sup (are for)
the seventh (case) (Locative). These would be added after the
uninflected substantives.
4. The substantives are twofold-~cnding in vowels and
ending in consonants. Each one of this would again be three¬
fold : masculine, feminine and neuter.
5-7. The models of these are given. Those which are not
mentioned here (follow those) on account of their strength.
(Those ending in vowels are to be declined as the following
examples). Vfksati (tree)^, Sarva^ (sill)* Purva^i (former),
Prathama^ (first), Dvitiyakah (second), Trtiyal> (third),
Khani^apa (protector of a group), Vahnili (fire), Sakhk
(friend), Pati^i (husband), Ahaipatfo (Sun), Papi^ (clever),
Grama^i (chief of the village) , Indra(the lord of the celestials) ,
n The text gives only the ziominative singular fonns of the substantives
in this cfaarpter.

958 Agni Ptsrlb^a
Khalapu^ (one who sweqss), Mitrabhuti (being a friend),
Svabhuhi (an epithet of Brahmi), SuSr!^ (good fortune),
Sudhlh (a wiseman), Pita (father) , Bhrata (brother), Na (a
man), Karta (doer), Kro$(u (a jackal), Naptr (grandson),
Sur5 (intoxicating drink), R& (Rai means wealth), Gau^
(cow), Dyauh (heaven), Glauh (Moon) (are) examples for
the masculine (nouns) ending in vowels.
8* 12a. (Examples for substantives ending with the conso¬
nants) : Suvak (good expression or speech) , Tvak (skin), Pr^at
(a drop of water or any other liquid), Samr^f (a paramount
sovereign), Janmabhak (one who has obtained birth), Surat
(a good sovereign), Apah (water), Marut (Wind), Bhavan
(becoming), Dipyan (shining), Bhavan (you) (polite form),
Maghavan ( Indra) (prosperous), Piban (drinking), Bhagavan
(fortunate, hence denotes the lord), Aghavan (a sinner),
Arvan (a horse), Vahnimat (possessing fire), Sarvavit (knower
of all things), Suprt (a good army), Susima (good boundary),
Kundl (Kupdln denotes Siva, holding a bowl). Raja (king),
Sva (horse), Yuva (youth), Maghava (Indra), Pusa (Sun),
Sukarma (doer of good deeds) , Yajva (sacrificer) , Suvarma
(good armour) , Sudharmana (council of gods, court-hall of
Indra), Aryama (Sun), Vrtraha (Indra, killer of Vrtra), Pantha^ (path), Sukakud (good summit) etc. and Pafica (five),
Pra^an (one who is tranquil), Sutan (one who spreads well),
Pafica (five) etc., Sugauh (good cow). Surah (one who is
wealthy) and Supuh (good city), Candramahi (Moon), Suvacah (good speech), Sreyan (excellent), Vidvan (learned), and
U^anas (the preceptor of the demons), Pecivan (one who has
cooked) , Gauh (cow) , Anadvan (an ox), Godhun (one who
milks a cow) , Mitradruh (one who is treacherous to a friend),
Svalit (one who licks like a dog).
12b-19. (Substantives) in the feminine (are):Jaya (wife),
Jara (old age), Bala (young girl), Edaka (a ewe),Vrddha (old
woman), K^atriya (a woman of the Kfatriya class), Bahuraja
(land having many rulers) , Bahudama (having many garlands)
and B&lika (an young girl), M5ya (illusion), Kaumudagandha
(smelling like a lily), Sarvk (all), PCirvi (the preceding one)
and Any& (someone else), Dvitiyfi (second one), T|'tiy& (third
one), Buddhi (intellect), Stil (woman), $rl (Lak;mi, goddess

of \vrealth), Nadi (river), Sudhi^ (wise), Bhavant! (one who
becomes), Divyantl (one who shines) , Bhat! (one who appears),
Bhluid (one who shines), and Y^ti (one who goes), Srhvati
(one who hears), Tudad (tormenting), Kartii (doer), Tudanti
(tormenting), Kurvati (one who is doing), Mahi (earth), Rudhanti (one who is obstructing), Kridati (one who is playing),
Dimt!(onewho is restrained), P5layand (one who is protectii^),
and Sur&n!(a celestial woman), Gaur! (having white complexion,
denotes consort of Siva), Putravatl (one who is having a son),
Nauh (ship or boat), Vadhuh (bride), Devata (deity) and
Bhu^ (earth). Tisra (three) and Dve (two) (both denoting
feminine) , Kati (how many), Var^abhuh (a female frog) , Svasi
(sister), Mata (mother). Vara (excellent) , Gauh (cow), Naul[^
(ship or boat), Vak (speech), Tvak (skin), PriicI (east), Avad
(south), Tirafei (the female of an animal or bird), SamicI (a
doe), Udid (north), Sarat (autumn), Vidyut (lightning), Sarit
(river), Yosit (lady in separation), Agnivit (knower of fire),
Sampat (wealth), Dr?at (stone), Ya (who), E^a (this), Vedavit
(knower of the Veda), Sariivit (knowledge), Bahvi (many),
Rajfli (queen), Tvaya (by you), Maya (be me), Sima (boun«
dary), Paftca (five) etc., Raji (line or row), Dhuh (shaking),
Pu|^ (purifying) , Diia (direction), Gir5 (speech), Gatasrab (feur),
Vidu^l (learned person) , Ka (who), lyaih (this), Dik (direction),
Drk (look), TadfH (that kind) . These are chief among (the
substantives belonging to) the feminine gender. (I shall describe)
the chief among (the substantives belonging to) the neuter.
20-'22a. Ku^d^ (a bowl or pit), Sarvam (all), Somapaih
Dadhi (curd), Vari (water), Khalapu (that which sweeps),
Madhu (honey), Trapu (tin), Bhartr, Atibhartr, Payah (milk),
Purah (city), Prak (east), Pratyak (7) (backwards), Tiry^
(across), Udak (above or nothward), Jagat (world), Jagrat
(awakening state), Sakrt (excrement) , Susampat (good wealth),
Suda^di (good stick), Ahab (day), Kim (what), Idaih (this),
Sa( (six),Sarpib (clarified butter), Sreyab (fortune) , Gatvari
(four) , Adab (that thing) . Others are similar to these.
22^28a. (The infiections of) the first case (Nominative)
etc. would come after these uninflected forms. A form of a word
which is neither a verbal root (dfULtu), nor an affix {pratya^a) is
a nomin^ base {pritipadika). The first case firom the nominal

m
Agni PwO^a
base is employed to denote the subject. The first case (is also
employed) in addressing when the agent and the object are
mentioned. That which is done (by the agent) is the object
{karma). Second case (Accusative) is used in the object. That by
which something is done is the instrument {kara^) . One who
does is the agent {karta) . When the object is not specified to be
the agent through the verbal affix or suffixes of the krt and taddhita type, the third case (Instrumental) is used in (denoting)
the instrument and the agent. The fourth case is employed in
sampraddna (to be given). It is said to be sampraddna in which
the desire to give is indicated. Apdddna, is that from which some¬
thing moves away or taken away. The fifth case (Ablative) is
used (to denote) apdddna. The sixth case (Genitive) (is used to
denote) one’s ownership. The term adkikarana is used in the
sense of the base (ddkdra). The seventh case (Locative) (is used)
therein.
28b-29a. Singular is used to denote a single thing. Dual
comes in the sense of two things. Plural would occur in the
(sense of) many. I shall describe the finished forms (now).
29b-32a. (The following are examples for the Nominative):
Vfksa^ (tree), Suryahi (Sun), Ambuvahab (cloud), Arkah
(Sun) . The following are the examples for^the Vocative) : He
Ravi (O Sun!), He Dvij&tayas (O twiceborns 1), Viprau
(O Brahmins !) . (Then the example for the Accusative) :Gaj^
( the elephants) . (Then the examples for the Instrumental):
Mahendrena (by Mahendra, the lord of the celestials), Yamabhyam (by two Yamas — by the twins), Analaib krtam (done
by Anala, fire plural) . Ramaya (for Rama) , Munivaryabhyam
(for the two excellent sages), Kebhyab (for whom, plural) (are
examples for the Dative) . Dharmat (from Dharma), Harau
ratib^ (?), Sarabhyaih (from the two arrows), Pustakebhyab
^from the books) (are illustrations for the Ablative). Arthasya (of
the sense), I^varayoh (of the two lords), Gatib b^anaih (the fate
of children) (are for the Genitive). Sajjane pritib (pleased in good
people), Haxh8ayob(in the two haihsas), Kamale$u (in the lotuses)
(are examples for the Locative) . In the same way, the words
1. The reading ia obvioudy wrong.

Kama (God of love), Mahela (the great lord) and other (words)
should be known like (the word) Vrk§a (tree).
32b>36a. Sarve (all), Visvc (all or entire or whole) , Sarvasmai (for all) , Sarvasmat (from all) and Katara (who or which
of two) are regarded (as similar). Sarve$^ (of all), Svam (one’s
self), Viivasmin (in the whole). The other forms are like (the
word) Vrksa (tree). Similarly Ubhaya (both), Katara (who or
which of the two), Katama (who or which of many), Anyatara
( one of two) etc. (should be known). Purve (all the former),
Purvah (all the former, feminine) , Purvasmai (for the former) ,
Purvasmat (from the former), Purve (in the former), Purvasmin
(in the former) . The other forms are like that of Sarva. Para
(superior), Avara (inferior) as well as Dak^i^a (south), Uttara
(north) , Antara (in between), Aparah (others), Adharah (below)
(are to be known) in the same way. Nemali (parts), Prathami^;i
(the first ones), Prathame (in the first one) are like the word
Arka (Sun). In the same way (we whould have) Caramah (last),
Alpa (little), Ardha (half) and theNema (part) and others.
36b-’41a. Dvitiyasmai (or) Dvitiyaya (for the second),
Dvitiyasmat (or) Dvitiyakat (from the second), Dvitlyasmin
(or) Dvitlye (in the second) and Tftiya (third) like (the word)
Arka (Sun). Somapah (a drinker of Soma) and Somapau (two
drinkers of Soma) should be known. Go to Somapah (drinkers
of Soma) (or) Somapam (a drinker of Soma). Kilalapau (two
drinkers of a heavenly drink similar to nectar) and Somapah
(drinker of Soma), Somapah (drinkers of Soma),Somape dada(give
to a drinker of Soma), Somapabhyam(to two drinkers of Soma ,
Somapabhy ah (to many drinkers of Soma), Somapah (drinker
of Soma), Somapau (two drinkers of Soma) (belong to) a group.
(The words) such as Kilalapah (drinkers of a celestial drink)
would be similar. Kavih (poet), Agnih (hre) and Arayah (ene¬
mies) , He kave ! (O poet !) , Kavim (the poet, accusative), AgnI
(two fires, accusative). Tan Harin (those Hari-s), Satyakini
hrtam (taken by Satyaki) , Ravibhyaih (by two Suns), Ravibhih
(by the Suns), Dehi vahnaye yah samagatah (Give to Fire who
has come), Agneh (of fire), Agnyoh (of two fires), Agidnadi
(of many fires), Kavau (in the poet), Kavyoh (in the two poets)
and Kavifu (in many poets) (are eramples for words ending in
*s*). Similarly Susrtih (good path) , Abhrantih (not an error) ^

962 AffuPuriti^
Suklrti^ (good fame) and Sudhrti^ (firmness) (are to be decdined).
41b-43a. (Some more examples for words ending in *i*):
Sakhi (a friend), Sakh&yau ( two Iriends) , Sakhayab (many
friends). *He sakhe ! vraja satpatiih* (O Friend I go to a good
master), Sakhayam (the friend), Sakhayau (the two friends),
Sakhin (the friends) (are accusative forms). Sakhyagatab
(gone with the friend). Dada sakhye ( give to the fi'iend) . Sakh>
yub (firoma friend), Sakhyub (of the friend), Sakhyob (of the
two friends). That rest (are formed like) the forms of Kavi
(poet) . Patya (by the master) , Patye (for the master), Patyub
(from the master) , Patyub (of the master) , Patyob (of the two
masters) are like (the word) Agni (fire).
43b. Dvau (two), Dvau (the two), Dvabhyam (by the
two), Dvabhyto (for the tvro)^ Dvayob (from the two) and
Dvayob (of the two) are in the sense of dual.
Trayab (three), Trin (the three), Tribhib (by the three),
Tribhyab (for the three) , Traya^aih (of the three) and Tri^u
(in the three) (are) in order. Kati (how many) and KatT (how
many) . The other plural forms are like Kavi (poet) (in the
plural) .
45. (The word Ni, leader is declined as follows): Nib (a
leader) , Niyau (two leaders) and Niyab (many leaders). He nib
(O leader 1) , Niyam (one leader) , Niyau (two leaders), Niyab
(many leaders). Niya (by a leader), Nibhy^ (by two leaders),
Nibhib (by many leaders). Niye (for a leader), Nibhyab (for
many leaders). Niy^ (of many leaders), Niyi (in a leader) and
Niyob (in two leaders).
46-48a. Sufrib (good fortune), Sudhib (good intellect) etc.
Grkmai^ (a leader), pujayeddharizh (should worship Hari).
Gr&mapyau (the two chiefs), Grama^jiyab (the many chiefs),
Gramapyam (the chief, accusative), Graxnapya (by the chief) ,
Gr&ma^ibhib (by many chie&), Gr&manyab (of a chief), Gram*
a^y&m (in a chief). Words beginning with Sen&id (leader of an
army) are similarly (declined). Subhub (good land) and Sabhuvan (two good landb). Svayambhuvab (self-bom), Svayambhuvaxh
(self-bora, accusative), Svayambhuva (by the self-bora), Svayambhuvi(inthe self-torn). Pratibhuvab (bail or surety) etc.
(should be formed) similarly.

48b-49. Khalapub (that which sweeps), Khalapvau (the two
which sweep), Sre^^hau (that are excellent), Khalapvam (that
which sweeps, accusative), and Khalapvi (in a sweeper) . (The
words) beginning with Sarapuh would be in the same way.
Kros^ha (a jackal) and Kro^fhara^ (many jackals), Kro?(hun
(the jackals, accusative plural), Kro^thuna or Kro9(hr4 (by a
jackal), Kro$(hun^ (of the jackals), Kros^hari (in a jackal)
are said to be (formed) thus.
50*52a. Pit^ (father) , Pitarau (two fothers) , Pitarab (many
fathers) , He pitab (O Father !) , Pitarau subhau (O Auspi¬
cious fathers!) , Pitf^n (the fathers, accusative) , Pitub (from the
father), Pitub (of the father), Pitrob (of the two fathers),
Pitlnam (of many fathers) , Pitari (in the father) are
formed) thus. In the same way Bhrata (a brother), Jto&tr
(son-in-law) and others (words) (are formed) . Then
or Nrnam (of the men) . Karta (doer) , Kartarau (two doers) ,
Kartrn (many doers, accusative) , Kartrnam (of many doers)
and Kartari (in a doer) are thus (formed) . Udgata (a singer
of Vehic hymn) , Svasa (sister) , Naptr (grandson) are known to
be like (the word) Pitr (father) .
52b. Surab (good fortune) , Surayau (dual) , Surayab (plu¬
ral), Surayaih (accusative), and Surayi (locative).
53. Gaub (a cow), Gavau (two cows). Gam (accusa¬
tive), Gab (accusative, plural), Gava (instrumental), Gob
(genitive) , Gavob (genitive, dual), Gavaih (genitive, plural)
and Gavi (in a cow). In the same way Dyaub (heaven) and
Glaub (Moon)and the chief masculine words ending in vowels.
54-57a. Suvak (good speech) , Suv&ci (nominative dual),
Suvaca (instrumental), Suvagbhyam (instrumental, dual), Suv^su (locative, plural) . Similarly the directions beginning with
(east). Prah (east), Pr^ci (nominative neuter dual), Pridicaih
( to the east) bho vraja (you go) . Pragbhyam (instrumental,
dual), Pragbhib (instrumental, plural), ^acaxh (genitive),
Praci (locative, singular), Prahsu and Prahk^u (locative, plu¬
ral). In the same way Udah or Udid (north), Samyan (well) ,
Pratyak (western) , Samici (a doe) , Tiryah (that which moves
horizontally), Tirasca^, Sadhryah (a companion, especially
1. Seems to be Tireid, denoting a female ofany animal.

Afftt PitrSffa
husband) , Vifvadryan (all-pervading) are known to be like the
former. Adadryan, AdamuyaA, Amumuyan (all meaning going
to that) etc. are similar. Adadryofic (one who has gone to that
direction) and Amudricah (one who has gone to that direction)
and Adadry&bhyAih are as before.
57b-59a. Tattvatrt (desirous of truth) (nominative) , Tattvatf^u (dual) , Tattvatf nbhyaiii (with men desirous of Truth)
sam^atab (one has come together) ,Tattvatrsi (in one desirous of
truth) , Tattvatf^u (among those desirous of truth) . In the same
way Ka$);ha (wood) y Tada (?) etc. (are formed). Bhisak (a
physician), Bhi^agbhyaih (by two physicians) , Bhi^aji (locative) .
(The words) such as Jannabhak (are) then (similarly declined) .
Marut (wind) , Marudbhyam (by two winds) , Maruti (in the
wind) . In the same way (we have) Satrujit (conqueror of an
enemy) etc.
59b-61. Bhavan (you, polite form), Bhavantau (dual),
Bhavataih (of you, plural) , Bhavan (vocative) , Bhavati (in you) .
Mahan (great) , Mahantau (dual) , Mahataih (of great people) ,
Bhagavat (fortunate) etc. In the same way Maghavan (Indra) ,
Maghavantau (dual) . Agnicit (one who has kept the sacred fire) ,
Agniciti (locative) , Agnicitsu (locative, plural) . In the same
way Anyat (another) , Vedavit (one who knows the scriptures) ,
Tattvavit (knower of truth) etc. (We will have) Vedavidam
(in locative singular) . In the same way Anyat (some other per¬
son) . One who knows all is Sarvavit.
62-64. (The word Rajan is declined thus) : Raj& (king) ,
Rajanau (dual) , Rajftab (genitive) , Rajfii orRajani (locative) ,
Rajan (vocative) . Yajva (a performer of a sacrifice) , Yajvanafi
(plural) are similar. Kari (an elephant) , Da^dl (one who holds
a stick) , Dandinau (dual), Panthab (p&th) , Panthanau (dual),
Pathab (plural) , Pathibhyaih (instrumental, dual) and Pathi
(locative) (will be) similar. Mantha (that which churns) , l^bhuk?ab (nominative plural) (^bhuksab means Indra) and Pathya
(wholesome food) etc. (should be known) . Pafica (five) , Pafica
(accusative) , Paftcabhib (instrumental; . Pratan (one who spr¬
eads well) , Prat&nau (dual) , Pratanbhyaih (instrumental, dual) ,
lie Prat&n (vocative) and Su^armatjtab (vocative, those who
are happy) . (The following is always plural) : Apab (water)
(nominative) , Apab (accu»tive) , Adblub (instrumental) . In

the same way Pras&n (one who is tranquil) and PraiS^i (loca¬
tive) also.
65-67. Kah (who), Kena (by whom) like Sarva (all).
Ke$u (among whom), Ayam (this), Ime (dual), Iman (accusa¬
tive plural), Anena (by this), Abhyaih (instrumental, dual),
Ebhih (instrumental, plural) , Asmai (dative, singular) , Ebhyah
(dative plural), Svaxh (one’s own), .Vsya (genitive), Anayol.i
(genitive, dual), (genitive, plural) and E?u (locative,
plural) would be (formed). Catvaral.i (four), Caturah (accusa¬
tive), Gaturn^ (genitive), Gatur^u (locative). Sugih (good
speech), Sugir^u (locative, plural), Sudyauli (good day), Sudivau
(dual), Sudyubhyam (instrumental dual). Vit (merchant),
Visau (dual), Vi^su (locative, plural). Yadfsah (ablative, singu¬
lar, from which kind of a thing), Yadrgbhyaih (ablative, dual)
Vidbhyaih (dual in the third, fourth and fifth cases). $at (six),
§aj (accusative) l^annaih (genitive plural), $a($u (locative,
plural).
68-70a. Suvacah (eloquent), Suvacasa (instrumental),
Suvacobhyaih (instrumental, dual). He Suvaco (vocative). He
U^anan (IHanas denotes the preceptor of the demons) (voca¬
tive), Usana (instrumental), Uianasi (locative), Purudah^a (a
goose), Ahcha (a stupid person), He Vidvan (O Learned
man !), Vidvan (nominative) Vidu$e namah (obeisance to the
learned, dative), Vidvadbhyaih (instrumental, dative and abla¬
tive, dual), Vidvatsu (locative, plural). Babhuviv^ (one that
has become). (We have) in the same way, Pecivan (one that
cooks), Sreyan (excellent), Sreyaihsau (nominative, dual),
Sreyasah (accusative, plural).
70b-73. The following are the forms of Adas (that) :
Asau, Amu, Am!( nominative, singular,dual and plural), Amum
and Amun (accusative singular and plural) , Amuna, Amibhih
(instrumental singular and plural), Amusmai (dative), Amufmat (ablative), Amu^ya, Amuyoh» Amis^ (genitive singular,
dual and plural) and Amu$min (locative). Similarly (we have)
( the forms of Godhuk, one who milks the cow): A perjon has
come with one who milks the cow. Godhuksu (locative plural) .
Thus (we have) other (forms). Mitradruhali (one who is trea¬
cherous to a friend), Mitradrugbhyaih (dual instrumental),
hfitradsugbhil^ (plural) and Cittadruha^ (inimic to the mind)

PtffJcia
etc. Svali( (one who licks himself) , Svali^bhy^ (instrumental
dual), Svalihi (locative). Anadv^ (nominative of Anaduh, a
bull) , Anadutsu ( locative plural) . These are (the words) ending
in the vowels and consonants in the masculine. I shall describe
(now) those in the feminine.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTWO
Xarration of the finished forms of the substantives in the feminine
Skanda said :
1>2. (The following are the forms of feminine nouns ending
in J) : Rama (Laksmi, consort of Visnu), Rame, Ramab (the
three forms in the nominative) are auspicious. Ramaih, Rame,
Ramab (the three forms in the accusative) , Ramaya, Ramabhy^j Ramabhib (tht three forms in the instrumental) (by
Rama) it was made imperishable. Ramayai, Ramabhyam (are
the singular, dual dative). Ramayabj Ramayob, Ramanaih
(are the three forms in the genitive). Ramay^ and Ram^u
(are the singular and plural forms of the locative) . Kala (fine
arts) is similar.
3*4. (The following are also feminine) : Jara (old age),
Jarasau or Jare, Jarasab or Jarab (are the forms in the nomi¬
native). Jararh or Jarasaih (is the form in the accusative
singular), Jar&su (is the locative plural). Similarly (we have)
Sarva and Sarve (all) (in the nominative sii^lar and dual).
Sarvasya (instrumental), give Sarvasyai (dative) (to all).
Sarvasyab (ablative), Sarvasyab (and) Sarvayob (genitive
singular and dual) . The other forms are like that of Rama.
(The following are always plural) : Dve (two in the
nominative) , Dve (in the accusative) and Tisrab (three in the
nominative) and Tisr^am (in the genitive).
5-8. (The following are examples of substantives of the
feminine ending in ‘t’) : Buddhib (intellect) (nominative),
Buddhyk (instrumental), Buddhaya (dative) and Buddheb (abla-

tive and genitive) . (The vocative form of Mati, mind, is) He
mate. (The word Muni) will have (the forms) like that of Kavi
(poet) ; Muninaih (genitive) (of the sages). (The fbllowii^ are
the forms of the substantives of the feminine ending in f) :
Nadib, Nadyau (singular and dual in the nominative). Nadlih,
Nadlh (are the singular and plural in the accusative) . Nady5,
Nadibhi^ (are the singular and plural in the instrumental).
Nadyai (is dative singular). Nady^ and Nadi^u (are the
locative singular and plural). Similarly (we have the forms of)
Kum^ (a young girl), Jrmbhanl (yawn) etc. Srlb (fortune) ,
Sriyau, Sriyab (are the three forms in the nominative). Sriy5
(instrumental), Sriyai and Sriye (dative) (are the other forms).
The following are the forms of the word Stri (woman) : Strixh
and Striyaih (in the nominative singular) and Strib or Striyab
(in the plural), Striya (instrumental), Striyai (dative), Striy^b
and Strinaih (singular and plural in the genitive) and Striyam
(locative singular). (Similarly) Gr^anya (locative singular).
(The forms of words ending in *u* are) : Dhenva (by a cow) and
Dhenave (dative). (The following are examples for those
ending in S) : Jambu (the rose apple), Jambvau (nominative
singular and plural), Jambub (accusative singular). Drink the
fruits of the Jambu (genitive). Var^abhvau (is the nominative
dual of Var^abhu, a female frog) and Punarbhavau (nomin¬
ative dual of Punarbhu, a widow remarried). Mattb (is the
accusative plural of Matr, mother ending in f). Gaub (cow) ,
Naub (boat) (are examples of words ending in 0) .
9-10. (Now we have examples for words ending in con¬
sonants) : Vak (speech) (nominative), Vaca,Vagbhib (instru¬
mental singular and plural) and Vak^u (locative plural) and
Sragbhy^ (instrumental dual) and Sraji, Srajob (locative
singular and dual) (for the word Srak (garland). (The forms
of the word Vidvat, learned, are) VidvadbhySih (dual in the
instrumental, dative and ablative) and Vidvatsu (locative
plural). (The following words ending in t take i — ending) :
Bhavatl (respect form), Bhavanti (one who is becoming),
Divyanti (shining) Bh&ti (shining), Bhanti (appearing), TudantI
(inflicting pain), Tudatl, Rudatl (crying), Rundhad (obstruct¬
ing), the Goddess Grhyati (who is seizing or holding) and
Gorayaad (one that is stealing).

Agni Purlbifa
ll-12a. (The following are other examples of nouns ending
in 0 : Dr^at (stone) , Drsadbhyam (instrumental, dative and
ablative dual), Dpadi (locative) are the special models. Samit
(twig), Samidbhyam (instrumental, dative and ablative dual),
Samidhi (locative) (are other examples). (The following are
examples for words ending in n): Sima (boundary) (nomi¬
native), SImni or Simani (locative). Damanibhyath (instru¬
mental etc. from the word Daman meaning a line or streak) .
Kakudbhy^ (from Kakud, summit). Ka (who) (is a pronoun),
lyam (this) (demonstrative pronoun) and Asu (locative plural,
in them) .
12b-13. (The forms of the word Gib, speech, arc as follows) :
Girbhyarh (dual in instrumental, dative and ablative) , Gira
(instrumental) and Gir§u (locative plural) . (The following are
also feminine nouns) : Subhuh (good land) , Supuh (good city),
Pura (through a city) , Puri (in a city) . (The following are the
forms of dyo, heaven) : Dyaub, Dyubhyaih (dual, instrumental
ctc.),Divi (locative) , Dyusu (plural). Tadrsya (by that kind)
(instrumental) . That kind of direction etc. Yadriyaih (in
which kind), Yadr^i (which kind) are similar. Suvacobhy^
(with good words) , Suvacabsu (locative) . Asau (that, nomi¬
native), Amum (accusative) , Amub (plural) ,Amubhib (instru¬
mental plural) , Amuya (instrumental singular) and Amuyob
(genitive and locative dual) (are the forms of Adas in the
feminine) .
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYTHREE
The finished forms of substantives in the neuter
Skanda said :
1 . (The forms) in the neuter (are as follows) : Kiih, Ke,
K&ni (the three forms in nominative, meaning what) . Kim,
Ke, Kani (are the forms in the accusative) . Then (the word)
Jalaxh (water) . Sarvaxh (all) (nominative) , Sarve (nominative,
dual), Purva and other (words), Simapaih (protecting the
boundary) (accusative) , Simapkni (accusative, plural) .

2. (The words ending in *V are as follows) : Gr^ai^i,
Gramanini, Gr^a^i and Gramanini (are the forms in the
nominative of Gramani, leader) . \"ari, Variiil, Varini (in the
nominative) , Varinaiii^ (in the genitive plural) and Vari^ii
(locative singular) are thus (the forms of Vari, water) .
3. (The word Suci, pure, has two forms in the dative) :
Sucaye and Sucine dehi (give) . Similarly (the word Mrdu,
soft, has two forms in the instrumental) : Mfdune and Mpdave.
(The word Trapu, tin has the forms) : Trapu (nominative) ,
Trapuni (locative singular) and Trapunarh (genitive plural) .
Khalapuni (nominative plural) and Khalapvi (locative singular,
(forms of Khalapu, a sweeper) .
4. Kartra (instrumental) , Kartrne or Kartre (dative) (are
the forms of Kartr, doer) . Atiri (nominative) and Atirinaih
(genitive plural) (are the forms Atirih, one who goes beyond) .
Abhini, Abhinini (are nominative forms of the word denoting
performance) . Suvacaihsi (nominative plural) and Suvak^u
(locative plural) (are from Suvak, good speech) .
5. (The relative pronoun) Yad, yat (who) , and pronoun
Ime (that) , Tat (that) (belong to neuter) , Karmani (is the
plural of Karma, work) . Idaih, Ime, Imani (are the forms of
Idam, this) . Idrk (this kind) , Adah, Amuni, Amuni (in the
nominative), Amuna (in the instrumental) andAmifU (in the
locative plural) (are the forms of Adas, that) .
6-9. (The forms of Asmad, I, are) : Ahaih, Avam, Vayarii
(nominative) , Mam, Avaih, Asman (accusative) , Maya, Avabhyaih, Asmabhih (instrumental) done. Mahyaih and Asmabhyam (dative singular and dual) , Mat, Avabhyam, Asmat
(ablative) . Mama, Avayoh and Asmakam (genitive) ayam
putrah (This is my, our son) . Asmasu (locative plural) . (The
forms of Yu$mad, you, are) , : Tvarh, Yuvarh, Yuyaih (nomi¬
native) ijire (praise). Tv&m, Yuvarh, Yusman /'accuative) ,
Tvaya and Yu^mabhih (instrumentral, singular 'and plural) are
stated (to be the forms) . Tubhyam, Yuvabhyam, Yu^mabhyaih
(dative) , Tvat, Yuvabhyam, Yu^mat (ablative) , Tava, Yuvayoh^ Yu^akath (genitive) and Tvayi, Yufmuu (locative,
singular and plural). These are the characteristics of the
1 . OMoudy a mistake for

970 Agni Purd^
language.* (The substantives) ending in vowels and consonants
have been described.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFOUR
The relation between a noun and a verb in a sentence
Skanda said :
1 . I shall describe the karaka ( the relation that exists bet¬
ween a noun and a verb) together with the significance of the
inflection (of nouns). (There) is a village. O Great Arka
(Sun) ! I salute (lord) Vi^^u together with Sri (His consort)
here.
2-4. The agent is said to be fivefold : (1) The agent is
independent. The composers of the sacred knowledge are res¬
pected. (2) The agent gets to that cause when the agent is the
doer. The dull headed breaks up himself. The tree cuts itself.
(3) The agent expressed is good. The agent not expressed is
low. (An example) for the agent not expressed (is) : The dharma
is being expounded to the pupil. Listen to me ! ( I shall des¬
cribe) the seven kinds of objects.
5-8a. (The first one is) the desired object such as **An
ascetic pays respect to (lord) Hari(Vi$nu)'’. (The second one
is) the object that is not desired, such as **A person jumps over
a serpent repeatedly.** **After drinking milk, eat dust** (is an
example) for neither desired nor not desired (object of the third
kind) . ( The fourth one consists of) not being told ( such as)
**The cowherd is milking the cow**. (The next one is) the
object of the agent such as “Let the preceptor send the disciple
to the village**. (An example for the sixth variety, namely),
the object that is expressed, (is) “Worship is made to (lord)
Hari for prosperity’*. “Make an eulogy to ^lord) Hari that
yields all (things) ** (is an example) for the object that Is not
expressed, (the seventh variety of object).
8b-9a. The instrument is said to be two kinds — external
and internal. A person perceives the form by means of the eye

(in an example for the internal). May a person cut that with a
sickle (is an instance of) external.
9b-10. Tht sampradSna (giving) is said to be threefold ; (1)
preraka (sending) a cow to a brahmin, (2) anumantfka (with
consent) (such as) **A person gives a servant for the king**, (3)
anirdkartfka (a thing that could not be refused) (such as) **A
good person may give flowers to the master.**
11. The apsddna (that which is being taken away) is said to
be twofold : (1) caUah (moveable) : (A person) has fallen
from a running horse and oenlaA (immoveable) : That devotee
ofVi^^u comes from a village.
12-14a. The eMkara^ (thejbase) is fourfold : (1 ) uydpaka
(pervading) just as ghee in curd, (2) aupaSlesika (juxtaposition)
is said (to be the existence of) oil in sesamum for the sake of
God, (3) vaifayika (pertaining to an object) is known (to be)
like the monkey may remain on a house (or) a tree, (and) (4)
sdmipyoka (proximate) known (to be) like fish in the water and
a lion in a forest. (A fifth variety) is known as aupacdrika (meta¬
phorical) such as the existence of a hamlet on the (river) Ganges.
14b-l 7. (Now 1 shall describe the use of different inflections
indicating different senses. ) The third or the sixth ( case) is known
(to be used) when (the intention is) not expressed. (Lord) Vi^nu
is worshipped by people, To be gone by him or of him (are
examples). The first case (is used) when the agent is expressed.
(Accusative is used to denote) object : May a person make
obeisance to Hari. The third case (is used to denote) cause
(of an action) ^ : May one live for the sake of another. The
fourth case is expressive of the purpose for which anything is
done* : The water (is) for the three. The fifth case (is indica¬
ted) by means of (the words) pari, upa and dk etc.* in combin¬
ation. Outside the village this God was strong before. (Other
examples)*. *To the east of the village’, Without (lord) Vi^^u
(there is) no emancipation* and ‘different from Hari*.
18. There would be either third of fifth case with (the
2. See Kale, Higher Skt Gr.827.
3. It should be /on, s/o and M. See Pa. II. 3. 10.
4. See Kale, ib. 840

AgiU Purlt^a
words) such as Prthak, Vina etc.^ : different from the vDlage,
without sport (with the word) iri (prosperity) (such as) sriy&
(instrumental) and ^riyah (ablative).
19. There would be second case when combined with
karmapraoacaniyas.^ The warriors are inferior to Arjuna (and)
near the village are said (to be examples).
20. The fourth case is used with ( the particles) namalji
(obeisance), ^v&hd (ablations), svadhd, svasti (well-being) and
vofaf etc.^ : Obeisance to the lord and Farewell to thee. (The
fourth case) of an abstract noun (formed from a root may
be used) to express the sense of the infinitive (of the same
root)
21. (The object governed by an infinitive mood not actu¬
ally used but implied is put in the fourth case such as) (He)
goes for cooking (in order to cook) {pdhaya). The third case
(is U8ed)when accompanied by (the word) saha. The third case
(is also employed) to express the cause or motive^ (or the
object or purpose of an action), (to express) some defect in a
limb* (of the body) or a characteristic attribute^ (indicative of
the existence of a particular state).
22-23a. (The following are illustrations for the use of the
third case) : The father went with the son {saha putreim)\ blind
of one eye (A^d^o ’Ar^^d); He is Hari (apparent) from his club
(gadayd) ; The servant may stay on account of the wealth
(dr/A«nd). The seventh case (is used (to denote) the time (of
action) and becoming. (The following are the examples) :
One would get release (from bondage) when (lord) Vi9i;^u is
propitiated(ptV?<zt/ nate), (He) attained Hari in the spring.
23b-24. (We have the sixth or seventh case in the following
instances) : Master of men (or) master among men, lord of
men, lord of good people, witness of men (or) witness among
2. Prepositions used by themselves and govermng nouns are known as
Komt^eoaem^pas. See Pa. II. 3.8.

men, lord among the cows, born among the cows (or) bom of
the cows, a heir or son of kings.
25. (When the word hetUf cause or object is used in a
sentence, that which is the object and the word heiu are put in
the genitive)^ : (A person) dwells for the sake of food. A word
or object expressing remembrance (is put in the genitive) (such
as): Remembers the mother (matuh)f the guardian always. (The
genitive is used) in the sense of the subject or the object (of the
action denoted by the primary nominal bases) : The splitter of
water, your action. The genitive (is) not used with past parti¬
ciples {niffiiaY
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYFIVE
Different kinds of compounds
Skanda said :
1 . 1 shall describe the six kinds of compounds. They arc
again divided into twentycight kinds. They are twofold being
divided as eternal and non-etemal, those which drop(the suffixes)
and those which do not drop.
2-3a. (The following are examples of) eternal (compounds) :
Kumbhakara^ (a potter), hemakaral;i (goldsmith) etc. Rajfta^
puman or rajapuman (a person with royal authority). This
also is an eternal compound. Ka^Usritab (ka^fena sritah) (joined
with difficulty) (is an example of) dropping (the suffix). Ka^thek^ah etc. (kan^he-f ka'all^) (black-necked) (are examples) for
not dropping (the suffix).
3b-7. Tatpurusa (Determinative compound) is of eight
kinds. The first one is that where the words when compounded
with substantives are placed first. This is the first (variety) of
Tatpurusa. Purvam Kayasya when (the compound is) dissolved

Agni Purd^
(becomes) purvakaya^^ (the upper part of the body), Apara*
kkyab (lower part of the body) , Adharottara-kkyakab (the
lower and higher part of the body) . Ardhazh Kanayab (be¬
comes) Ardhakai;i&^ (half of a grain). Bhik^aturyam* (begging
alms a fourth time)is also of this type(signifying the whole of which
they are parts ) ( optionally placed first) . Apannajivikah* (apanno
jfvikam) is similar (in the second case). Adhar3lrita^( adharaih
airilab — one who has resorted to a lower person). Var^ambhogyab (or) Var^abhogyah (to be enjoyed for a year). (An
instance of compounding) with (nouns in) the third case ; Dhanykrthah (Dhanyena arthab) (wealth obtained by means grain).
(The noun) would be in the fourth case (when compounded
with the word bait) : Vi^xiubalib ( Vi^ctave balib)* Vrkabhitih*
(Vrkkt bhitib) fear from a wolf) (is an example for compound¬
ing with a noun in) the fifth case. (An example for) sixth case
(is) Rajftab puman (an officer of a king) (becoming) Rajapumin. Similarly (we have) Vrk^aphalaih (the fruit of a tree) .
The seventh case (is used in the following): This one (is) Ak^a-
[Saunda*^ (Ak^esu liaundab) (skilled in dice). Ahitab (not bene¬
ficial) (is an example) for Negative Tatpuru$a.
8-12. Karmadharaya (appositioned compound) is seven¬
fold*. Nilotpala {Nilath ca tad utpalarh ca) etc. are known (to be
the examples) for compounding the adjective and the noun it
qualifies). (1) The qualifying word is placed first or (2) the word
that is qualified is placed afterwards. (Words expressive of the
persons or things condemned are placed first) : Vaiyakaranakhasucib (n bad grammarian) (an example for first kind) .
Sito$naxh (cold and hot) and Dvipadaih (two words) (are ex¬
amples for the second) . ( 3) Expressive of standard of compa¬
rison placed as first member : Sankhapa^da^a (white as the
conch) (SaAkhab ivap&ndarab) • (4) The standard of comparison
1. See Po. II. 2. 1. They are not strictly Genitive Tatpuru^a. But called
by some as Prathama Tatpuruia.
4* See Vftrttika under Pa. II. 1. 37.
6. But it is actually six-fold.

placed as the second member : Puru^avyaghraltii (a man like a
tiger) (purufo ^^ghrahiva). (5) Words of respect placed first:
Gupavrddhih dissolved as iti vfddhify ( elongation) . Suhfd
and Subandhu (are examples). (6) The woid sonifying pro¬
minence is placed as the first member {pdda eva padnuah^ p8da~
padmath) . Bahuvrlhi (attributive compound) is sevenfold. (The
following are examples) for the Bahuvrihi having two words :
SrUdhabhavano narap (A man who has stepped into a house) .
13. These brahmins are about ten (ie., nine or eleven).
upadalah(-*da£anam samipe ye santi te) is (an example of
Bahuvrihi having the) numeral as the second member. (Examp¬
les of Bahnvrihi) having both ( the members) as numerals are
such as dvitrd (two or three), dvyekatrajfo (two or one or three)
men.
14. The particle saha (may be compounded) when it be¬
comes the first member. The tree has been pulled out together
with its root (samula) (is an example). Those having the
characteristic of reciprocity : (a battle in which the warriors
fight) seizing each other’s hair, (ke^akeSi) fighting one another
with nail (nakhanakhi) .
15. (ABahuviihicompoundmay be formed) to denote a
direction (in between two directions) : daksinapurvd (the point
of direction in between the south and east) . A Dvigu (having
a number as the first member in a compound) is said to be
twofold. It becomes singular (when denoting an aggregate) ,
^having two peaks* ^having five roots*. It is possible in many
ways.
16. A Dvandva (copulative compound) is twofold
itaretarayoga and samiBdidra (the members are treated separately,
and an aggragete of the things enumerated constituing a complex
(idea). (An example for the first is) Rudravi^i^iu (Rudra and
Vi$nu). (An example for the second is) Bhcrfpataha. (It is
always singular.)
17-18. Avyayibhava (compound consisting of two members,
the first of which is, mostly, an indeclinable) is said to be of two
kinds. An example for one having anoun as the first member (is) :
idkasya mdtrd (very little vegetable) « j^kaprati. An example for
one with the first member as an indediable (is) : upakumbhatfi
(near a pot) and uparathyaih {nc&r a chariot). The compounds are

Agni PurSoa
fourfold on account of the prominence (of one member) — ^that
which has the second member prominent and Dvandva, where
both (the members) are prominent. Avyayibhava has the
first member prominent and Bahuvrihi (in which the im¬
portance lies) externally.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIFTYSIX
The rules governing the formation of taddhita
{secondary nominal bases)
Skanda said :
1-4. I shall describe the three kinds of taddhita', the general
type (will be formed) by using the following affixes)
lac (la)
Hoc (ila)
ie{Sa)
ne (na)
urac (ura)
ra
ya
va
valaci (vald)
ini
fikan (ika)
vin
yuyue (yus)
fi-8* min (aif)
Sloe (ala)
and
amsalab (having muscular shoulders) ;
vatsalab (compassionate) .
phenila (foamy) ; picchila (slippery) .
lomasab (hairy, a monkey) .
pamanah (sulphur)
prajfia (wise) , arcaka (relating to a wor¬
shipper) .
forms dantura (having projecting teeth)
fromdanta (tooth).
madhura (sweet) ; su$ira (for a long
time) .
(by adding va) Ke^va (having beautiful
hair) (is formed) similarly,
hira^yaih (gold)
Malava (name of a country)
rajasvala (menstruous woman)
dhan! (rich) ; kari and hasti (elephant)
dhanika (rich)
payasvi (milky) ; m^yavl (magician)
Dr^ayub (woolen)
vigm! (eloquent)
(vac&la)

dfae — v^aka (eloquent)
ina — phalina(> (fruitful) ;barhi9af^ (a peacock) ;
kek! (a peacock)
kan — vrnd^aka (venerable or beautiful)
Slue — §italu->iitaih na sahate (unable to endure
cold) ;himalu<-himam na sahate(not able
to bear snow)
We would have the form vdtula from vdta (by adding) ulac.
an (is used to denote) progeny (such as) V^i$(ha,Kaurava.
so*sya vasakah — ^Paficalah
tatra v^ah — Mathurah
vetti adhite candravyakaranam — Gandrakah
9-12. KhaH (ka) priyahgunarii k^etram praiyahgavinakam
13. itae (ita) (will be used) for Taraka groups (of words)
(in the sense of that is obtained or posses¬
sed by) such as *thc sky studded with
stars*.
anarh (an) — ku^idodhni (a cow with a full udder) ;
pu^adhanvan (thegod of love) ; sudhanvan (having an excellent bow) .

978 AffiA 'Pwdstfa
14. cuflcup (euHcu) — vittacuflcul;^ would be used in the sense of
one having wealth.
ca^p {cam) — kelacaiuih (renowned for the hair)
rOpa — pa^rupa (in the form of a cloth) .
15-16 iyas — it would be pa^lyan (cleverer)
tarap ( tara) — ak^atara (fairly proficient in dice) ;
pacatitaraih^ (cooking fairly well)
tamap (tama) — afatitamaiii^ (wandering excellently) ;
mrdvitama (much soft).
kalpap {kalpa) — Indrakalpah (equal to Indra) ; ardhakalpakab (equal to half)
deflya or deiya — rajade^iyah (almost a king)
17. jdtiya — Pa^ujatlya (belonging to an intelligent
group)
nUUrac {mdtra) — janumatraih (reaching as far as the knee)
dvayasac — urudvayasa (reaching
(dvayasa) upto the thigh)
dadhmc {dadhna) — urudadhna (reaching upto the thigh)
18. teyap {taya) — pafi^tayab (fivefold)
thak {ika) — dauvarikah (door-keeper)
The general suffixes have been described. (I shall describe
now) the secondary affixes known as indeclinables.
19-20. tasil {kts) — yatafjt is formed (in the sense of) from
which.
tral is said (to form) yatra (where) , tatra (there) , adhund (is
used in the sense of) at that time, and ddn (is used in) iddnldt
(now) . Dd is used (to form) sarvadd (always) together with
sarva, hil (hi) forms tarhi in the sense of that time and ArorAt, at
which time. Ha (is used to form) iha (in the sense of) now.
21 -24a. (Ad/ {thd) — yatha (when) ;
tham {Iha) — katharh (how).
Let one gather in the eastern direction astdt (il) for purva
( iabda) .
May the leaders move in the front (purastat) . (The word)
sadya is said (to be used) (in the sense of) same day. Ut (is
used) for the previous year and PanU for ^the year) preceding
2. Seei»u/.

that PafSxi is also (used in the same sense) . Aifamo (is used in
the sense of) this year derived from the word romoj) . Edyavau
and Paredyavi would (denote) the next day. Adya means
today. Dye is used in combination asPurvedyul^ and Edyult^C^c
previous day) .
24b‘27. Let one dwell in the southern direction. DakfiMt
and Dak^i^^di (in the southern direction) . May one dwell in
thenorthern direction: Uttarat and Uttaradi (in the northern
direction) . May one dwell above: Upari^^at. Ri^^atiand Drdhvakat (above) (have similar meaning). By adding sufiix dc
we have dak^i^a. By adding Ski we have dakfi^i (in the south)
vaset (may one dwell) . Dha in dvidhS denotes two ways. When
dhyamuri is added to eke it becomes ekadhyam (thinking in one
form only) , Likewise dhamuh is added to dvi we have dvaidham
(to forms) ...^
28-30. The particles which are secondary suffixes have been
described. (1 shall describe) the secondary affixes which are
abstract nouns. Pa^or bhavali — pa(utvam (cleverness) (using)
(suffix) tva. Pafutd is said (to be by using; tdlic. By adding iman
to prtku (we have) praihimS (extension) . Saukhyam (happiness)
is said to be from sukha (by adding) jyaH. St^am (theft) (is
fronted) (by adding) yat to stena (a thief; . The state of being a
monkey is ksp^arh, Samjfa (army) and pathya (beneficial) are
said (to be formed by adding) yak (ya), Aivath (relating to a
horse) JeaumSrakark (relating to boyhood) axidyauoarunh (relating
to youth) (arc from) (d) . Aed^aktah relatii^ to the prece¬
ptor) (is) from kon. The offier secondary suffixes are said (to be
formed) in the same way.
1. llifriiest two words ire not dear.

Agm Ptird^
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYSEVEN
The formation of ike primary nominal bases by adding
primary affixes known as w^iddit beginning with affix u
Kwndrasaid :
l-2a. The U^adis (a kind uf primary nominal afRxes) are
spoken as pratyayas (suffixes) added to roots. (The word) Kdru
(denoting) an artisan (is formed by adding the suffix) un. ^he
other examples are) jdyuk (medicine or physician), mdyu^
(meaning) bile, gomdyub (biles in the cow) . These ur^dis are
widely used in the Ayurveda (Indian system of medicine) ter¬
minology.
2b-4a. (The other examples are) dyufy (life) , svida (sweet) ,
hetu (cause) etc. KirhSdmh (means) the beard of a corn. Kfkavdku denotes a cock. Gum is the master. Maru is (a desert) .
Sayu is known as a big serpent. Sam is said to be a weapon (sword) .
(denotes) the thunderbolt. Trapu (means) sisam^, Phalgu
is said (to mean) worthless thing.
41>6. (The following words) are known (to be derived
by adding the corresponding suffixes^ : grdhrab (vulture) (from)
kran, mandiram (an abode) and timirarh (meaning) darkness
(from) kiraCf salilath (meaning) water and bha^dii^ (meaning)
auspicious (from) Hoc. Budhab (meaning) a learned person
(from) koasu, (The word) Sibira (denotes) a concealed position.
Otub (denotes) a cat (from the suffix) tun, (The words) kar^b
(ear) , kdmi (a lustful person) , grharh (house) , bhdb (earth) ,
odstu (the site of a house) nxidjaiodtfkab (the moon) sue known
to be utfddis because they denote (objects) .
7. (The word) anadvSn (a bull) is from (the root) oab (to
bear) with Jiva (life) , arriava (ocesui) and aufadha (herb)
convey genus. (The word) oahni (fire) is (by sulding the suffix)
m, hari^b (mesuiing) a deer (from irum) and kdmi (one who is
lustful) (denotes) a fit person.
8. Sahghdta (a collection) ; varUdd (mixed caste) , sarar^da
(means) sm animsd, erar^da (is a kind of) tree; sdma (chant) .
nirbhara (full) .
1. But In^denotei tin and ifirsm, lead.

9. (The word) spfUtreah would mean (plenty)... (The
words) cira (denoting) a bark garment belongs to the same cate¬
gory. (The word) kdtara (means) timid. But ugra (means) fierce.
Javasa (denotes) grass.
10. Jagat (signifies) the earth and krSdnu, the lustre of the
Sun. Varvara (means') curled and dhurta (a wicked person) . Cafvararii (denotes) a junction of four roads.
1 1 . Civara (is) the dress of a mendicant. Aditya is said to be
Mitra (the Sun). (The word) ptUra (stands for) a son and pitd,
for father. (The words) prddku (denotes) a tiger and a scorpion.
Garta (denotes) a hole. Bharata (means) an actor. These are the
other w}ddis.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYEIGHT
The completed forms of the verbs after adding the
conjugational signs etc.
Kumdra said:
1. I shall describe the terminations (which are added) to
the verbs as well as the substitutes in brief. The verbs occur in
three forms such as bhSve (impersonal) , karmani (passive) and
kartari (active).
2. They are known to be transitive and intransitive in the
two padas (Atmanepada and Parasmaipada) in the Active. In
the same way the substitutes in the transitive and intransitive.
3. Laf is the designation for the present tense. LiA is said
to be in the sense of the potential ( mood) etc. Lof (is) for bene¬
diction and conditional etc. LaA (is the designation) for the past
not relating to the present day.
4. LuA (is the name) for the past (Aorist) and lif for re¬
mote past and Utp for immediate (first) future. LiA (is ased) for
benediction and Irp in the remaining senses. LfA would denote
the (second) future.
5. {LfAt conditional) (is used in the sentences) in which the
Potent^ may be used, when the non-performance of action is

Agni Purda^a
implied. The latter nine (arc) Atmanepada (the result of the
action accruing to one's self) and the former nine (arc) Parasmaipada (the result of the action accruing to another person) .
np. tas and anti (are the terminations of) the praihamapu*
rufa.^
6-7a. Sipy thas and tha (are the terminations of) the madf^amapurufa^ and mipy vas and mas (for) the uttamapurufcP. 7*a, dtdrh
and anta (are) the prathamapurvfa (terminations) in the Atmane¬
pada, tkdSy Sthdrhy dhvarh in the madhyama and t, vaHy maki in the
uttama (in the imperfect) . Bku (to be) etc. are known to be the
roots.
7b-10a. The following are the important roots belonging to
the different conjugations*. (The roots) bhu (to be) , edh (to
prosper) , (to cook), nand (to rejoice), dhvarfis (to perish),
Saths (to praise) (belong to the first conjugation) . Pad (to go)
(fourth) , ad (to eat) (second) , SiA (to lie down, second) , krtd
(to buy) (first) , jaAo/i (Afi to offer in a sacrifice) (third) y jahdti
(hd to abandon, third) , dadhdti (dhd to bear, third) , diiyati (di
to play or to shine, fourth) , svapiii (svap to sleep, second) , nah
(to tie, fourth) , swioti (su, to press out juice, fifth) , vas (to dwell) ,
tud (to strike, wound, sixth) , mriati (mfS to touch, sixth) , muficati
(muHc to lose, sixth) , mdh ( to hold up, seventh) , bhuj (to enjoy,
seventh) , tyaj (to abandon, first) , and tan (to spread, eighth) •
(The roots) man (to think) , karoti (kfy to do) , kndoti (kridy to
play) , vfA (to choose) , gra^ik (to seize) , cor (cuTy to steal) , pd (to
drink and protect) , nl (to carry) and arc (to worship) are the
important in the Sap^ and other modifications.
1 Ob-1 3a. In (the root) bhu (by adding tifiy we would have
sah bhavati (he becomes) , tau bhavatah (they two become) and te
bkavanti (they all become) . (Similarly we have) you become,
you two become and you all become and 1 become, we two be¬
come and we all become. (Similarly in the Atmanepada) , the
1. oorreapooding to the third person.
2. corresponding to the second person.
3. corresponding to the first person.
4. The roots ere divinded into ten conjugations known as bbvddSy edidiy
Juk^adiy diaadit isddH, iudidiy rwAddiy taaddiy hyddt and citrddi.
5. is the designation cf the terminatioa added to die first conjugation.

family prospers, two prosper and (many) prosper. You grow
with intellect, (you two) prosper and you all prosper. We two
grow with intellect. We all prosper with devotion to (lord) Hari.
(He) cooks etc. are as before.
13b- 15. One becomes and one enjoys (are examples) for
the impersonal forms. The passive (is formed by adding) yak.
The desiderative form (of root bkU is) hubhufati. Thus in the
causal (one) meditates on the lord. In the frequentative (we have
the form) bobh&yate (Atmanepada) or bobhoti when yoA is drop¬
ped (is the form) in the Parasmaipada frequentative. Putrlyati
(treats like a son) on account of desire for children and thus
pafapafdyate (utters the sound pafpaf) , ghafayaii (brings about)
(are examples) of the desiderative. He causes the figure to be
adorned (bubhusayaii) (is the form) in the causal.
16. Bhavet (may become) , bhavetarii, bhaveyuh} bhave^
bhavetam, bhaveta, bhaveyarh, bhaveva, bhavema are (the
forms in the three persons in the singular, dual and plural)
in the Potential (mood) (in the Parasmaipada) .
17. Edheta, cdheyMarh, edheran (grow or prosper) with
the mind and prosperity, edhetah, edheyatham, cdhedhvam,
edheya, edhevahi, edhemahi (are the forms of the Potential
moon in the Atmanepada) .
18-1 9a. Let it be. Bhavatfoh, bhavantu, bhavatador bhava,
bhavatair, bhavata, bhavani, bhavava, bhavama (are the forms)
in the Imperative mood. Edhataih (may one prosper) , edheta,
edhantmii (in the third person) , edhai(in the first person singular)
(are the forms of Atmanepada Imperative) . Pacavahai, pac&-
mahai (are the forms of Atmanepada Imperative dual and plural
from pac to cook) .
19b-20. Abhyanandat (felicitated), apacat&ih (cooked),
apacan (they cooked) , apacal^ (you cooked) , abhavataih (you
two became) , abhavata (you all became) , apacaih (1 cooked) ,
apac&va (we two cooked) , apacama (we all cooked) (are the
examples for the past (imperfect) injthe Parasmaipada) . Aidhata,
aidhetarii (third person singular and dual) , aidhadhvam (second
person plural) , aidhe, aidhamahi (first person singular and
plural) are said to be (the forms in the past tense, Atmane¬
pada) . ^

AgniPurdna
21. Abhut, abhutaxh, abhuvan, abhuli and abhuvaih (are
the forms of the root bku to be or become) in the Aorist. Aidhi*
9fa, Aidhif&tam (Men prospered) , aidhi^^hah, aidhifi (are) thus
(the forms of the Aorist Atmanepada) .
22. (The root bhG becomes) babhuva) babhuvatuh* babh>
uvuh, babhuvitha, babhuvathuhi babhuva, (babhuva), babhuviva and babhuvima (are the forms) in the Perfect tense (in the
Parasmaipada) .
23. Pece, pec&te, pecire (cooked) and edhailcakf^e tvaih
(you prospered), edhaftcakrathe, pecidhve, pece, pecimahe
(are the forms in the Perfect in the Atmanepada and Periphras¬
tic perfect).
24-25. In the first future ( the root bhu has the forms) bhaviti, bhavitarau, bliavitarali (will become) Hara and others.
Bhavit&si, bhavit^thah; bhavitasmah vayam (we) (are the
other forms) . Pakt&, paktarau, paktarah (are the forms of the
root pac in the first future third person) . You will cook (paktise) good food. Paktadhve, I will cook (paktahe), paktasmahe
(we will cook) the porridge for lord Hari (are examples for
some of the forms of the root pac in the first future Atmane¬
pada) .
26-30. In the benedictive: May there be (bhuyat) happi¬
ness, Hari and Sankara bhuyastam (be benevolent) , bhuyasub
they, you bhuyab, you two gods bhuyastaiti, you all bhuyasta,
aham bhuyasam (May I be) , bhuyasma (we all may be) always
(happy). Yak^i^^a, edhifly&st&iri, yaksiran, edhi^Iya, yak^Ivahi,
edhiflmahi (are some of the forms of the roots yaj, to sacrifice
and edh to prosper in the Atmanepada) in the Benedictive.
Ayakfyata, ayakfeyatarh, ayak^yanta, ayak^ye, ayak^yeth^
you two, ayak^yadhvam, aidhi^yavahi, aidhisy&mahi we all (are
the forms) in the Conditional mood in the Parasmaipada, Atma¬
nepada. Bhaoifyati would be (the form) in the second future.
Edhifyamahe is similar. In the same way vibhavayi^yanti, bobhavi^yati (frequentative second future) (will become again
and again) . Gha^yet, pa^ayet, putrlyati, kimyati (are other
forms of nominal verbs and frequentatives) .

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTYNINE
The finished forms after adding the krt affixes {primaiy
affixes added to verbs)
Kvmdra said:
1*3. The krts are to be known in all the three forms (such
as) the impersonal, passive and active. Ac, lyuf (to form neuter
abstract nouns by adding na) , ktin {ti) (to form feminine abs¬
tract nouns) , ghah (added to roots ending in consonants) , and
jmc in the impersonal (are the affixes) . (Their examples are) in
the acioinaya (modesty) , (heap, multitude), prakarab
(collection, heap), deuah (lord) , bhadrab (good) , irikarab (conferer of prosperity). The form in lyut (is) Sobhanarh (auspicious) ,
in ktin (ti) (the forms are) vfddhi (increase) , stuti (praise) and
mati (intellect) . (The form) in ghafi is bhdva (feeling or state) ,
inyufi — k&rana (doing action), bhdvand (bringing into exist¬
ence) etc. and in the syllable a — (represented) by cikitsd (re¬
medy) .
4. Then (the affixes) taiya and anlya (forming the words)
kartaryarh, karaniyakarfi (fit to be done) , (the affix )_r^f (to form)
d^arh (ought to be given) and dkyyarft (ought to be meditated) ,
in nyat (to form) kdryath (a work or task) and krtyakdb (work to
be done).
5. Kta and other ( affixes) are to be known in the active,
and some in the impersonal and passive. (A person) has gone
to the village. The village has been reached. The preceptor has
been embraced by you.
6. SatfA (present participle in the Parasmaipada) and sdnae
(present participle in the Atmanepada) are bhavan (becoming)
and edhamdna (being prosperous) . Nvuh and trc (are) added to
all the roots (to form agents such as) {bhdoakab and bkavitd
(feeling or manifestatimi and that which is about to become) .
7. (An example) for ending in kvip (is) Svayambhul^^ (selforiginated) . Kvas (vas) and Kdruic {dna) (are the affixes) (of
the participles) of the perfect (Parasmaipada and Atmane¬
pada). and (in the Parasmaipada) nnd peednab
and iigddadhSnakab (in the Atmanepada) (are the examples) .

Agni Purd^
8. Kumbhakdra (a potter) etc. would be (formed by adding
the affix) a^. The w^ddis are known to be in the past. Vdyub
(wind) , pdyuh (the anus) and kdm (artisan) would be (formed
from them) . These are said to be widely used in the Vedas.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY
Tfu synonyms of group of words denoting the celestial region
and the nether world*
Fire-god said:
1. I shall describe to you ^the synonyms) of heaven etc.
of which lord Hari is the indication. Sva^, svargali, nakalj^,
tridivahi dyau};i> trivi^^apa are synonyms (denoting heaven) .
2-3a. Devas, Vrndarakas and Lekhas (are the names for
the celestials) . Rudra and others (are) the chief of group of gods.
VidyadharaSfApsaras, Yak^as, Rak$as, Gandharvas, Kinnaras,
Pi^cas, Guhyakas, Siddhas and Bhutas had celestial origin.
3b. The enemies of the Devas, Asuras and Daityas (bom of
Diti) (are the names of the demons). Sugatah and Tathagatab
(denote Buddha).^
4. Brahma, Atmabhub (self-born), Surajye^fha (chief of
the Devas) (are the synonyms of Brahma). Vi^^u, N&raya^a
and Hari (are the names of Vi$9u). Revatiia (husband of
Revatl), Halirama (R^a with with plough) (are the words
denoting Balarmna) (elder brother of Kn9&) . Kauna, Pafica-
^ra (having five shafts) and Smara (are the names of God of
love).
5. Lak^mi, Padmalay a (having the lotus as abode), and
Padm& (are the names of Goddess Lak^mi) . Sarva (all things) ,
Sarvelvara (lord of all beings) , and 8iva (auspicious) (are the
*Tbe Pur&pa summarises the Aznarakoia in eight chapters. This chapter
is an abridgement of the KA^da I, Svargavarga 6-79 verses and PAtalavmrga
239-347 verses.
I. The founder of Buddhism.

names of Siva) . Kaparda is his matted hair. Pin&ka is the bow
(of lord Siva) also known as Ajagava.
6. His attendants are (known as) Pramathas. Mrd^i
(compassionate), Ga^dilcft (fierce) and Ambika (mother) (are
the names of Goddess P&rvatl). Dvaimatura^ (having two mo¬
thers) and Gaj&sya (having an elephant face) (are the names
of lord Gane^a) . Sen&n! (leader of an army) , Agnibhfi (fireborn) and Guha (reared in a secret place) (are the names of
Skanda) .
7. Akhandala (breaker) , Sunuira (favourable for the grow¬
th of grain) , Sutr&man (guarding well ) and Divaspati (lord of
the heaven) (are the names of Indra) . Pulomajk (duaghter of
Puloman, a demon) , Sac! (powerful) and Indra^l are the names
of wife (of Indra).
8. His (Indra’s) mansion (is known as) Vaijayanta. Jayanta
(victorious) (is the name of) P&ka^asani (son of P&ka^sana,
Indra) . Airavata, Abhram&tanga (elephantine cloud) , Air&va^a
and Abhramuvallabha (mate of the female elephant of the east)
(are the names of the elephant of Indra) .
9. Hl§diid (that which delights) , Vajra, that it not a femi¬
nine (word) , Kuliia, Bhidura (neuter words) and Pavi (mascu¬
line) (are the words denoting Indra’s club) . Indra*s chariot is
called) Vyomayana and \^mana (the vehicle of the sky) . (The
latter word is) not feminine. I^yufa, Amfta and Sudha (denote
ambrosia) .
10. Sudharma is the council of gods. Svargafigi and Suradirghika (denote the celestial Ganges) . The celestial women
such as Urvafi and others (are denoted by the words )Svarveiya
and Apsarasah. (Here the latter word is always) feminine and
plural.
11-12. Haha and Huhii (are the names of) Gandharvas
(semi-divine beings) . Agni, Vahni, Dhanafijaya (conqueror of
wealth), Jatavedas (knower of all things), Kr$navartman (whose
way is black) , Afi'aya&i ( consuming everything with which it
comes into contact), P&vaka (purifier), Hira^yaretas (having
golden seed) , Sapt^cis (having seven rays) , Sukra (white) •
A^uiuk^a^i (shining forth) , Suci (pure) and Appittam (bile of
1. having a natural mother and a step-mother.

988 Agni PurSifa
water) (are the words denoting fire) . Aurva, Viidava and Vadavanala (denote the submarine fire) .
13-14. Among the words denoting the flames of fire, JvMa
and Kila (are masculine and feminine) , Arcis (feminine and
neuter) and Hetiand Sikh& (are) feminine. Sphulinga and Agnikai^^a (denote a spark of fire). (These words are used) in all the
three (genders) . Dharmar4ja (lord of virtue) , Paretara( (master
of the dead), Kkla (the Time) , Anlaka (Destroyer), Dandadhara (Wielder of a staff) and Sr^dhadeva (lord of the ancestral
rite) (are the synonymns of God of Death) . Rak$asa, Kaupapa
(coming from a corpse) , Asrapa (blood drinker) , Kravykda
(flesh eater) , Yatudhana and Nairrti (are the words denoting a
demon).
15. Pracetas, Varuna and Pas! (having a noose) (denote
Varuna, the upholder of moral laws) . 8vasana (who breathes) ,
Spariana (who touches), Anila, Sadagad (always moving),
Matari^van, Prai^ia ( life breath) , Marut and Samlrai^a (denote
wind) .
16. Java, rofhha and tara (denote speed). Lagku, kfipram,
aram, drutam, satvaram, capalam, tUn^am, avilambitam and dht (de¬
note haste) .
17-18. Satatam, an&ratam, aSrOntam, santatam, aviratam, amiam,
nityam, anavaratam and ajasram (mean eternally) . AtiSaya, bhara,
ativelam, bhrSam, atyartham, atimdtram, udgddham, nirbharam, tivram,
ekdntam, nitdntam, gdiham, bdiham^ and dfdkam (denote excess) .
19. Guhyake^a, Yakfaraja (chief of Yak^as), Rajaraja and
Dhankdhipa (lord of riches) (denote Kubera) . Kinnara, Kimpuruya, Turangavadana (horse-faced) and Mayu (denote the
Kinnaras, a class of semidivine beings) .
20. Midhi and Sevadhi (mean treasure) . (Both the words
are) masculine. Vyoma, abkram, pufkaram, ambaram, dyo, divam,
antarikfam and kham (denote the sky) .
21 -22a. Kdffhd, did and kakubha (denote) the direction.
Abhyantara and antardla mean the interspace ^between the heaven
and earth) . Cakravdla and nut^dala (mean a range or orb of thi¬
ngs) . Taiitvdn (having lightning) , vdrida (giver of water)
stanqyiim (that which makes sound) and baldhaka (stand fat
cloud) . Kddambini and meghmdld (denote a row of clouds) .
SkmtaaatdgatjUa (mean the rumbling of thunder clouds) .

22b-23. Samps, Satahradd, hrddini, airdDati, kfanaprabhd, tadit,
sauddmini, vidysU, caflcald and capald (denote lightning) .
23b-24. SphUrjathub and vajranirghofa (mean the peel of
thunder) . The cessation of rain (is denoted by the word) avagraha.
Dhdrdsampdta and J5ar<2( denote incessant rain) . Sikara (is known
to be) drops of water (carried by wind) . Var^opala and karakdp
(are the first rain drops falling like a stone) . A cloudy day (is
known as) durdinam (a bad day) .
25. Antardhdy vyavadhd (feminine) , antardhi (masculine) ,
apavdrat^m, apidhdnam, tirodhdnam, pidhdnamy and dcchddanam (mean
concealing or covering) .
26-27. (The words) Abja, Jaiudtfka, Soma, Glaub, Mfgdfika,
Kaldnidhi, Vidhu and Kumudabandhu (denote the Moon) . Bimba
andmandala (are the words denoting the orb of the moon,
the former is) feminine (and the latter is used in) all (the gen¬
ders) . A sixteenth digit (of the moon) is kald, Bhitta, iakala and
khar^daka (denote a part) . Candrikd, kaumudi and jyotsnd (denote the
lustre of the moon). Prasdda and prasannatd (denote clear lustre) .
28-29a. Lakfanam, lakfmakam and dhnam (stand for a mark).
Sobhd. kdnti, dyuti and chaol (denote lustre) . Susamd (denotes)
exquisite lustre. Tusdra, tuhimwh himam, avaSydya, nihdra, prdleyam,
HHra and himam denote snow) .
29b. Nakfatram, rkfam, bham, tdrd, tdrakd and (denote an
astciism). There the last word may also be feminine.
30. Gum, Jiva and Adgirasa (are the words standing for
Jupiter). Uianas, Bhdrgaoa and Kaoi (denote Venus). Vidhuntuda
(afflicting Moon) and Tama (denote) Rahu. The rise of
the constellations is known to be lagna.
31. Sages such as Maxici, Atri and others^ are the seven
sages. (They are known collectively as) CitraSikha^d^ns. HaridaSva, Bradhna, Pusd, Dyumarjii, Mihira and Raoi (denote the Sun) .
32-34a. (The halo around the Sun is known as) parivefa,
paridhi, upasdryakam and rmaifd^lam, (The ray of the Sun is denoted
by the words) kira^, usra, mayOkha, ajhhi, gabhasti,gf^i, dhff^.
1. Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasiftha are the remainiof
five.
2. the Amara 210 reads pxini.

Afftt PwrS^
bhdm, kara, maridt 2uid dldhiti where marici is feminine and mas¬
culine (while) dldhiti is feminine. (The lustre is denoted by the
words) prabha, ruk, ruci^ tvif, bhd, bhUh^ chavi, djmii, dipti, rod and
iodt where the last two are neuter, (while the other words are
feminine) . (The lustre of the Sun is denoted by the words) prakdia,
dyota and Stapa.
34b-38a. (The words) kosiymit kaoop^amt mandosr^ and
kaduf^am (denote little heat) . They take neuter when referring
to a quality and take all genders as attributes. Similarly
(the words) tigmam'ttkfnamandkkar(m (denoting excessive heat)
take neuter or all the genders. (The words) diffa, anekd and
kdlaka (denote time) . (The words) ghasra, dinam and ahas (denote
day) . Styantf sandfyd and pitfprasfib (denote the evening) . PratyUfas, aharmukham, kalyam, ums and pratyOfas (denote dawn).
The three twilights (are known as) prdkfa (morning) , aparShtfa
(evening) are madhyShna (midday) . Night is denoted by the
words) iaroari,ydmi and taml. (The night endowed with darkness is)
tamisrd and (that with moonlight is) jyotsnl. The night together
with the preceding and succeeding days (is known as) paksitfi.
The two (words) ardkardtri and niiltha (denote) midnight. Pradofa
and rajanimukham (is the period preceding the night) .
38b-40. The intervening period between the pratipat (first
lunar day) and the fifteenth (lunar day) is parvan. There
are two fifteenth (days) at the end of each one of the fortnights.
Paurffamdsi and pUr^imd (denote the last days of the bright lunar
fortnight) . (If that full moon) is a digit less (it is known as)
anumati. If it is full, (it is) rdkd, Amdodsyd, is being near; daria
and sUryendu-saAgama (union of Sun and Moon) (denote
tlie last days of the dark lunar fortnight) . If the moon is perceiv¬
ed (on the new moon day) , (it is) sinivdli and if the same (is
seen) a digit less, (it is) kuha.
41 -42a. Sashvarta, pralaya, kalpa, kfaya and kalpdnta (denote
deluge) . (The words) kalusam, vjrjiskm, enab, agham, aitihab, duritom and dufkftam (denote sin) . (The words) dkarmam, pv^yam,
h^as, sukftam and vffa (denote good deeds) . The word dharmam
(is used) in the masculine and neuter.
42b-43a. (The words) mat, priti, pramada, harfa, promoda, dmoda, sammada, dnandathub, dnanda,Sarma, sdtam andsukham
(denote rejoice) .

43b-44a. (The words) iva^reyasam,Hvamf bhadram, kafyib^am,
maiigalam, iubham, bhdvukam, bhavikanif b/tauyam, kuialam and
kfmam (denote only welfare) . (There) is used in mascu¬
line and neuter.
44b. Daivam, di$tam, bhdgadheyam, bhdgyam, niyati and vidhi
relate to (fruits of) previous birth. (The latter two) are
feminine.
45a. KsetrajHa, dtman and parufa relate to the soul in the
body. Pradhdnam and prakfti (relate to the state in which the
three qualities are in the same proportion) . (The latter is used)
in the feminine.
45b-46a. HetUy kdratjam and bljam (denote) cause. But nid&na
is the primary cause. Cittamy cetaSy hfdayamy svantaniy hrt, mdnasam
and manas (denote mind) .
46b-47a. Buddhiy numi^dy dki\a^dy dhiby prajndy matt,
prek^dy vpalabdhiy cit, sarhvit, pratipat, jhapli and cetand (denote
intellect) .
47b-48. The intellect {dhi) which possesses retentive power
(is known as) medhd. Sadkalpa (resolve) is an activity of mind.
Cared (discussion) , SaAkkyd (deliberation) and viedrand (inquiry)
(relate to examination of an object by means of knowledge) .
Vieikitsd and sarftSaya (relate to doubtful knowledge). Adfydhdra
(inference), tarka (logical reasoning) and uha (conjecture)
(relate to logic), Mrrwya and mean conclusive knowledge.
49, (The words) milkyddf^fi and ndstikatd (are used to de¬
note knowledge arising from the argument that the other world
does not exist) . Bhrdnti, mithydmati and bhrama (mean false
(knowledge) . AAglkdra^ ab/iyupagama, pratUraya and samdSraya
(denote acceptance) .
50-5 la. Knowledge relating to liberation from mundane
existence (is) jHdnam. (When it is used with reference to)
architecture and scientific literature, ( it is) vijndnam- Mukti,
kaivalyam, nirud^am, ireyas, nibireyasam, amYtam, mokfa and apavarga
(denote liberation from mundane existence). (The words)
ajHdnam, avidyd and ahammati (stand for ignorance). (Among
these, the last two words are used) in the feminine.
51b-52a. (The word) parimala (is used to denote) fragrance
arising from pounding or rubbing which attracts men. That
which attracts very much (is known as) dmoda, (The words)

992 AgmPurd^
surabhi and ghrSifatarpana (denote an object possessing good
fragrance).
52b-53. (The words) SuklOf subhra, iuci, b'eta, tUaday fyeta,
pdndara^ avaddtay sitOy gauray valak^Uy dhavalay arjunOy kariiitay p&^dttra
and p&^d^ (denote white). That which is little white (is denoted
by the word) dkOsara.
54. (The words) niloy asitCy Jyitrnny kdhy sySmala and mecaka
(denote) black. (The words) pitOygnura and haridrabha (denote
yellow) , (The words) p&laUiy harita and harit (mean) the green
colour.
55. (The words) rohitCy lohita and rakla (denote red colour) .
(The word) hm (denotes) the colour resembling red lotus.
Little redness (is denoted by the word) anota. (The word)
pdfrda (stands for) red mixed with white.
56-57a. Sydva and kapUa (denote whitish red). Dhilmra and
dhumala (denote) red and black mixed. Kadara. kapila, pingOy
pUaAgOy kadru and pingala ( denote reddish brown) . Citraniy kirmiray katmdsay sabala, eta and and karhura (denote variegated
colours) .
57b. (The words) vyShdra, ukti and lapitam (denote speech) .
Apabhrarhia (means) a corrupted word.
58. A collection of tiA (verb) and subanta (noun) is a
sentence. Or it may be an activity together with the case rel¬
ation between a noun and a verb. Itihasa is that which has
happened in the past. Purdna has five characteristics.^
59. Akhyayikd is a narrative of a past event. Prabandha is an
imaginary story. Samdhdra and sahgraha (denote a collection
of stories) . Pravaklikd and prahelikd (are involving conjecture) .
60. Samasyd is a puzzle that has to be completed. Smrti is
a collection of texts (composed for propagating) religious
and moral duties. Akhydy dhvd, and abhidhdna (denote name) .
Vdrtd and vfttdnta are said (to denote) narration of worldly course
of events.
61. (The words) IiUti , akdreujd and dhvdnam {denote calling) ,
Upanydsa and vdhmukha (mean beginning of a speech) . Vivdda
and lyavahdra (are used in the sense of disputes relating debts,
1. These are: creation, secondary creation, royal genealogies, Manu
periods and genealogy of gods and sages.

gifts etc.)* (The words) prativ&kyam and uttaram (are used in the
sense of reply).
62. Upodghdta and uddhara (are used to denote the thought
relating to accomplishment of a contextual object). MithydbhiSarhsanam abhiiapa or abuse). (The words)
yaias and kirti (denote fame) . (The words) praina^ prcchd and
amyogaka (mean a query).
63. (The word) dmreditam (means) repetition two or three
(times). (The words) kutsd^ nindd and garhanam (denote censure) .
(The words) dbhdfanam and dldpa would (mean conversation
preceded by mutual call). Pralapa is meaningless utterance.
64. Anuldpa and mukurbha^a (mean repeated conversation).
Vildpa and paridevana denote speech preceded by weeping. VipraIdpa and virodhokti (denote mutually contradictory utterances) .
Samldpa is conversation between one another.
65. Supraldpa and suvacanam (mean good utterance) . ApaIdpa and nihnava (mean veiled statement). Rulati^ means in¬
auspicious utterance. Sangatam and hrdayangamam (would denote
well-constructed sentence) .
66. That which is exceedingly sweet is sdnivam. Abad^
dham and anartkakam would (mean absurd). Mftkuram* and paru’
/(7m (mean harsh utterance), and grdmyam (mean unrehned utterance) . The statement which is pleasing and true
(is) sunrtam.
67-69. Satyam, tathyam, ftam and samyak (would mean truth).
(The words) ndda, nisvdna, nisvana, drava^ drdva, sarfirdva and mrdva
( denote ordinary sound) . Marmara (denotes) the sound made
by cloth and leaves. (The sound made) by the ornaments (is)
Hhjitam. Nikuar^a kvdna {denoit the ViMnd) of a lute. The
sound made by birds ( is) vdsitam. Koldhala and knlakala (mean
the clear sound made by many) . The two (words) gitam and
gdnam mean the same (namelyi a song) . PratiSrut and pratidhvdna
(mean echo) , where the former is feminine. (The sounds such
as) nifdda (and the like) arise from stringed instruments and
throats (of singers) .
1. The printed text wrongly reads ufott,
2. The Purapic text mixes this term and the next. This has been corrected
on the bashr of Anura»

Affid Purdffa
70-71. A subtle (sound) iakdkalL That which is sweet and
not explicit is kala. Mandara is a lofty sound. Tdravi a very loud
sound. Where there is a resonance and well blending of the
(last) three sounds it is said to be ekatdla. Vit^, vallaki and idpa^
(denote lute) . That which is known to have seven strings is
panv&dinL
72. Vii^d and other instruments are spread out. Muraja and
the like are bound. Vadiia (flute) and others have holes. An ins¬
trument made of bell-metal and the like is ghanam.
73. Thus there are four kinds of musical instruments having
the appellation v&ditram and dtodyam, Mrdadga and Muraja (are
synonyms) • Anfydk, dliAgyait and Qrdhvaka are different kinds of
MTdahgas,
74-75a. The drum that is sounded (at first) for the sake of
fame (is known as) ^hakkd, Bherl and Dundubhi (are synonyms) ,
the former is feminine and the latter masculine.^ Anaka and
Pataka (are synonyms) . Jkarjhari, piifdima, Mardala and Padova
(are different kinds of percussion instruments^ .* Tdla is the mea¬
sure of time relating to the performance.
75b. Laya is the equal proportion of the performance and
time (relating to music, dance etc. )Tdpdaaam, ndtyamt IdsyamznA
nartanam (are synonyms) .
76. Artyom (dance), gitam (singing) and vddyam (instru¬
mental) , the three (are known collectively as) tauryatrikam. The
king is known as Bhatfdraka and Deoa. (The queen) who had
been anointed is Devi.
77-81a. Sfitgdra (erotic), vlra (heroic), kantna (pathos),
adbhuta (wonder), hd^a (mirth), bhaydnaka (frightening), bibha^
tsa (disgust) and raudra (wrath) are the sentiments. The erotic
(is also denoted by the words) fuei and ujjvala. The heroic senti¬
ment (is ako known as) utsdhaoardhana. Kdru^antf karund, ghr^^d,
kfpd, dayd,anukampd and amtkroia {denote the sentiment of pathos).
Hasa, kdsa and hdsyam (mean the same) . Bibhatsa (is also known
as) rnkfia. These two are masculine (when denoting the senti¬
ment) . Vimaya, aShutam, dicaryam and Htram (draote wonder) .
Bhairavam, ddm^am, bhifo^fom, bhifmam,ghorttru, bhimam, bhaydnakam,
1. The textual reading is wrong.
2« The reading fiib« in the text is not correct; apv would be better.

bhayaikkaram and praHbhayam (denote frightening) . Raudra is ugra
(terrible) . (These fourteen beginning with adhkuta are masculine
relating to a sentiment.) (Otherwise they take) the three (gen¬
ders). Data, trdsa, bhitib, bhibf s&dhmsam and bhayam (mean
fear) .
81b. The change relating to mind is bhdva. Anubkdva is
the e3q>ression of the mental change.
82. (The words) garvOy abhimdna and aharhkdra (denote
pride). Mdna is elevated thinking. Anddara, partbkavay paribhdva
and tiraskriyd ( mean disrespect) .
83. (The words) vri4d, lajjdy trapd and hrl (would mean
shyness). The desire for wealth (is) abhidhydnam^. (The words)
kautuhalanty hautukaniy kutukam and kutuhalam (denote curiosity).
84. (The words) vildsa^ bibhoka, vibhramay lalitamy held and
Hid denoting the behaviour of women are known as hdva pro¬
duced from erotic state.
85. (The words) dravay keliy parihdsa, krl(fd and Hid (denote
only erotic sport). Kdrdanam (means child*s play) . A burst of
laughter with a motive (is) acchuritakam. The same, if little, (is
known as) smitam.
86. Adkobkuvanam and pdtdlam (denote the nether world) .
Vfotda) chidrarriy ivabkramy vapd 9Xid Susi (denote a hole in
general) . Garta and avata (denote) a hole or pit in the earth.
(The words) tamisramy timiram axid tama (denote darkness).
87. (The words) sarpa, prddkuhy bhujagOy dantaSdka and
bileSaya (denote a serpent) . (The words) vifoniy kfveda and gara^
lam (mean poison) . (The words) niraya and durgati (mean
hell) . The latter is feminine.
88. (The words) pi^ahtt kildlamy amjtamy udakamy bhuvanam and
vanam (are used in the sense of water) . Bhahgay taraiiga and Urmi
denote waves. Kallola and tdlola (denote mighty waves) .
89. (The words) pffantiy bindaoab and pfsatah (stand for
drops of water). (The words) kfUam, rodhas and tira{ka)m
(denote banks) . That which rises from water is pulinam (sand) .
(The words) jambdla, padka and kardama (mean mire) .
90-91 . The overflow of floods is (denoted by the words)
1. Amara 489 reads meaning desire to covet another's pro¬
perty.

996 Agni Purdffa
jalocchvdsdh and parivdhdfi. (The words) kUpakdfy and viddrakdff.
(are pits made in the dry bed of rivers), iltara and
(are used in the sense of ferry charges). The wooden watercarrier is drot^i. Kalufa and dvila are (used to mean) impure
and Off AA) pure. (The word) gabhirakam (denotes deep). Agadham
(means very deep). (The words) and kaivarta (denote a
fisherman). Jamb Okas (bivalve shells) are oysters in the water.
92. Saugandhika and kalhdra (denote white lotus blossoming
in the evening) . Indivara is a blue lotus. Utpala and kuvalaya
denote blue lotus. Kumuda and kairava (are used to denote)
white (lotus).
93. The root of these lotuses (is) Sdluka. (The words) padmam
and tdmarasam (denote a lotus). Nilotpalam and kuvalayam (denote
a lily) . The red lotus is known as kokanadam.
94-95. Karahdfa and Hphdkandam (denote the root of a lotus).
Kinjalka and kesara mean the filament, not in feminine.^ (The
words) khatd and dkara (denote the place from where the
gems are produced). The former is feminine. Pdda and pratyantaparvata (denote) smaller hills. That which is still nearer to the
hill, (is said to be) upatyakd. The earth above the hill (is known
as) adhityakd. The groups of words belonging to the heaven and
hell have been described. Listen to me ! 1 shall describe words
having different meaning.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYONE*
The indeclinables
Fire-god said :
1 . (The indeclinable) ail is used in the (following) in the
sense of a little, pervading, limit and in combination with verbs.
(The particle) 2 known as pragTkj^ais used in sentences to denote
remembrance. (The same with a visarga) (denotes) anger and
affliction.
1. After summarising the first JTiltifb of the IVirdpa jumps to the
middle of the second Kiftpi-
*The Pur&qa summarises in this chapter, fimn Amara III. padkti 2814.

2. (The particle) ku (is used) in the sense of sin, condem¬
nation and little. Dhik (is used in the sense of) disgust and
censure. Ca (is used) to connect with another, as a collection,
union with one another, for connecting mutually independent
words with a common word.
3. Svasti (is used in the sense of) benediction, well-being
and meritorious act. .^h*( has the sense of) excess and crossing.
Svit (is used in the sense of) interrogation and doubt. Tu (is
used to denote) division and limitation.
4. Sakrt (is used in the sense of) together with and once.
Ardt (has the sense of) near and far off. (The word) paiedt {is
used in the sense of) western direction and the end. Api (has
the sense of collection) . Uta has the sense of option.
5. Safvat (is used in the sense of) repetition and together
with. Sdkfdt (denotes) perception and identity. Bata (is used in
the following senses) : grief, pity, pleasure, surprise and invita¬
tion.
6. Hanta ( is used to express) rejoice, pity, beginning of a
sentence and grief. Prati is used according to tradition in (the
sense) of a representative both as repetition and as indicative
etc.
7. Iti (is used in the sense of) cause, context, making ex¬
plicit etc. and conclusion. Purastdt (is used to denote) in the
east, at first, before and in front of. Api is also (used in the
same sense) .
8. Tdvat and tdvat ( are used in the sense of) whole, end,
measure and determination. Atha (is used to express) auspiciousness, continuity, beginning, query and whole.
9. Vrthd (is used to convey) uselessness and devoid of in¬
junction. Ndnd (conveys) many and both. Nu (expresses) query
and option. Am (expresses) succession and resemblance.
10. Nanu (is used to indicate) query, determination, per¬
mission, pacification and invitation. Apt (is used to denote)
censure, collection, query, doubt and conjecture.
11. Vd (expresses) comparison and option. Sdmi (conveys)
half and disgust. Amd (denote) togetherness and proximity. Kam
(means) water and head.
12. Evam (is used to convey) similarity and such and such
a manner. NUnam (is used) in logic and determination. Jofom

998 Ag^ PurSgM
(is used to mean) silence and happiness. JTtm (is used to convey)
query and disgust.
13. NSma (is used to mean) making explicit, conjecture,
anger, approximation and censure. Alam conveys (the sense of)
ornament, satiety, ability and prevention.
14. HSm (is used to convey) doubt and inquiry. Samayd
(denotes) proximity and middle. PunaljL (conveys) not being the
first and difference. Nth (expresses) certainty and prohibition.
15. Purd would (be used to indicate) continuity, long past,
nearness and the future. The three (words) urarl, dri and urarl
(are used in the sense of) expansion and that which is agreed
upon.
16. Sva}^ (is used in the sense of) heaven and other
world. Kila ( is used in the sense of) tidings and conjecture.
(The word) khalu (is used to denote) prohibition, verbal em¬
bellishment, desire to know and pacification.^
17. (The word) abhitafy (is used in the sense of) proximity,
both ways, quickness, whole and facing. Prdduh (is used to con¬
vey) name and explicitness. Mithah (denotes) between one an¬
other and in secrecy.
18. (The word) iirah (is used to denote) disappearance and
horizontal. (The particle) hd (is used to express) pain, anger
and grief. Ahaha (is used to denote) surprise and grief (The
particle) (is used to denote) cause and determination.
19. (The words) cirdyay cirdrdtrdyay cirasya and others (are
used) in the sense of long time. Mukuhy pmah punahy SaSvaty
abhikftuim and asakrt (again and again) have the same (sense).
20. (The words) irdky jhafitiy anjasdyahndya, sapadiydrdk and
madkfu are (used in the sense of) quickness. (The words) bala^
vaty sufthu and kinrnta (denote) excessive. Kinty kimu and uta (are
used in the sense of) option.
21. (The particles) tUy hiy cay smayha and vai (are used) for
completing a quarter of a verse. Su and ati (are used to denote)
worship (reverence). Divd (is used to denote) at day. Dofdand
naktam (are used in the sense of) night.
22. Sdei and /tra^ ( are used) in the sense of horizontally.
(The words) pydfy pdf, adgay he, hat and bho^ (are used) in the
1. The PurSpa reads wrongly aoasara.

sense of calling a person. Samaydf nikasd and hiruk (have the
sense of proximity) .
23. Sahasd (is used in the sense of) unexpected. Purafif
puratafy and agratahi (mean) in front of. Svdhd, vaufaf,
vofafand svadhd (are used) in offering made to the gods.
24. (The words) kincit, if at and mandk (are used in the
sense of) a little. Pretya and amutra (are used in the sense of)
the other world. Tathd and tathd (convey) similarity. Aho and ho
(indicate) surprise.
25-26. (The words) iOf^im and t&frjiikam (are used in the
sense of) silence. Sadyafy and sapadi (denote) the present mo¬
ment. Disfyd and samupajosam (convey) rejoice. (The words)
antare, antard and antaretfa (denote) *in the middle’. Prasahya
means *by force’. The two (words) sdmpraiam and sthdne (convey
the sense) appropriate. Abhlkfnam and SaSvat (mean) eternally.
27. (The words) nahit a, no and na (indicate) non-exist¬
ence. (The words) mdsma, md and alarh (are used in the sense
of) restraining. Get 2i.ndyadi (are used to denote) alternative.
The two (words) addhd and anjasd (are employed to convey)
truth.
28. Prdduh and dvih indicate explicitness. Orht evarh and
paramam (convey) opinion. (The words) samantata^f parita^,
sarvatah and viivak (convey) all around.
29. Kdmam (is used to convey) permission unwillingly
granted. An acceptance preceded by Jealousy (is indicated by
the word) asta. (The word kdmam h) also (used in the same
sense). Pfanu (indicates) a contrary opinion. Kaccit (indicates)
affectionate enquiry.
30. (The words) ni^ samam and duh satnam (are used to
convey) condenmed. Tathdsvarh and yathdyatham (convey the
sense) of appropriate or befitting. Mffd and mithyd (indicate)
false. Tathdrtham zudyaihdtatkam. denote truth.
31. (The words) eveah^ tu^punafy, vai and vd are expressions
(indicating) conclusion. PrJA: (conveys) the thing that has taken
place already. The two (words) afinam and azuiyam (are used
to indicate) certainty.
32. iSafArst (isused to mean) the year. Arvdk (means)
below, i^and eoaih (convey) approval. Svayam (means) by the

AgntPurd^a
self. NUaihi (means) low. Uccaify (means) gre&t, Prdya^ (denotes)
a great quantity, ^anai^ (is used in the sense of) slowly.
33. The word janJ (denotes) eternal. Bahify (conveys the
meaning) outside. Sma (indicates) the past. Astam (denotes)
invisible. Asti (conveys the sense) of reality, t/isan expression
of anger. l7;n( indicates) a query. Ayi (is an expression of) paci¬
fication,
34. HUm (is used in) discussion. (The word) (has the
sense of) end of the night. Namah (conveys) obeisance. Anga (is
used ) in the sense of again. Dustu (is an expression of) censure
and suffUf of praise.
35. Styam (conveys the sense) in the evening. (The words)
prage and prdta^ {convey the sense) ‘in the morning’. Pfika^d
(conveys the meaning) nearby. (The word) parut (denotes) the
last year and pardri, the year before the last. Tati (denotes the
current year).
36. Adya (denotes) the present day. (The words) purvedyufy
etc. ( convey the sense of) the previous day etc. Similarly one
should know that (the words uttaredyuh^ aparedyu^y adharedyul}.,
anyedyuhf anyataredyuh and itaredyuh are formed) from uttara
(tomorrow) , apara (some other) , adhara (the previous) , any a
(some other)) anyatara (some other next) and itara (some
other).
37. Ubhayadyuh and uhhayedyufy (convey the sense of) both
the days. Paredyavi (means ) on the next day. Hyali ( denotes)
yesterdayand ivahf theday yet to come next. Paraivah (denotes)
the day after tomorrow.
38. (The words) tadd and taddnim (denote at that time).
Tugapat (means) once. Sarvadd and sadd (mean) always, Etarhiy
sampratiy iddnim, adhund and sdmpratam (mean) the present
moment.

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTWO
Words having many meanings
Fire-god said :
1 . (The word) ndka (is used to denote) the sky and hea¬
ven. (The word) loka (means) the world and people, ^loka (is
used to mean) a verse and fame. Sayaka (has the meaning) an
arrow and sword.
2. Anoka (denotes) a bheri as well aspafaha (two kinds of
drums) . Kalahka is a mark as well as a scandal. (The letter) ka
in the masculine (is used to denote) wind, Brahma and the
Sun and karfi in the neuter (is used to denote) head and
water.
3. (The word) pulSka (denotes) empty or bad grain,
abridgement and rice-water. (The word) kauHka (is used in the
sense of) Mahendra, guggulu (resin got from cow) , owl, serpent
and alligator.
4. A monkey and a dog (arc denoted by the word) S&ldvfka. MSnarh is a means of measure. Sarga (is used in the sense
of) one’s nature, natural state, relinquishment, decision, chapter
and creation.
5. (The word) yoga (is used in the sense of) an armour,
means (expedience), contemplation and union. (The word)
bhoga (has the meaning of) happiness and enjoying the com¬
pany of a harlot. The word abja (is used to denote) conch and
moon.
6. Karafa (denotes) a crow and the cheek of an elephant.
Sipioispa (denotes) a leprous person. (The word) riffa (is used
in the sense of) prosperity, good and bad luck and good
and bad luck.
7. (The word) vyuffi (is used in the sense of) a fruit and
plenty. (The word) dffPi (is used to denote) knowledge, eye and
perception. (The word) nifpah (has the sense of) accomplish¬
ing, non-existence and destruction. (The word) k&fPhd (is used
to denote) excellence, state and direction.
8. (The words) idd and ild (convey the sense of) a cow,
earth and speech. Pragd4hcan (denotes) much and difficult. The
word driha (means) capable of and stout.

AgrU Pitrd^
9. lyo^ha (has the meaning) placed in order and firmness.
(The word) (denotes) Vyasa, Arjuna and Hari^.
(is used to denote) the stake in gambling etc., wages, price and
a particular coin.
10. (The word) guf?a (is used in the sense of) the bow¬
string, quality of a substance, (qualities like) sattva (goodness) ,
bravery* and treaty etc. (The word) grdmanl (is used to denote)
excellent (person) and leader (in a village) .
11. (is used to convey) desire and desire to drink.
(The word) vipca^i (is used to denote) a merchant's shop. TiAfmm ( is used to mean) poison, battle and iron in the neuter,
but in all the three (genders) when (denoting) sharp-edged.*
12. (The word) pramdria (is used to meeui) cause, limit in
the idsiraj extent and the knower. Kara^a is the excellent means.
It is also (used to denote) the sense-organs. (The word) irii^am
(is used to convey) a barren land and a desert.
13. (The word) (is used in the sense of) a mahout
and a charioteer. (The word) keti (denotes) flame*. (The word)
Srutam (is used to convey) scriptures and accurate knowledge.
Kftam (is used to mean) the (first) yuga and enough.
14. Pratlta (is used to mean) well-known and delight. Abhijdta (is used to denote) bom in a good family and wise. (The
word) vivikta (means) pure and devoid of men. MSrehita
(means) stupefied and elevated (prosperous) .
15. Artha (conveys the sense) *to be expressed*, riches, an
object, use and end. Tirtham (expresses the sense of) water
tank, scriptures, water courses honoured by sages and precq>tor.
16. Kakudab (is used in the sense of) importance, the in¬
signia of a king and a limb of a bull (hump on the shoulder)
in the masculine and neuter. The feminine (word) sarhvit (con¬
veys the sense of) knowledge, conversation, a disciplined action,
battle and name.
1 7. (The word) upanisat (is used in the sense of) dhama and
secret doctrine (such as) philosophy. (The word) ^arat (has the
1 . Thu line is not in the Amara,
2. The text wrongly reads iukla instead of Uuaya.
3. The printed text wrongly reads soara instead xAkhara.
4. Vide Attma paAkd 2476. The Fiad^a has omitted the other senses:
ray of the Sun and weapon.

meaning of) a season and a year. (The word) padam (is used in
the sense of) endeavour, protection, position, mark, foot and
object.
18. (These are used) in all the three (genders) : (The word)
svldU (denotes) favourite and sweet. Mrdrt (denotes) not sharp
and soft. Sat (is used to convey) truth, good people, existence,
praiseworthy and respectable.
19. (The word) vidhi (is used to denote) an injunction and
Brahma. Pra^idhi (conveys the meaning of) request and a spy.
VadhUhi (means) wife, 8on*s wife and woman in general. Suihi
(denotes) plaster (used in temples etc.) , nectar and the milkhedge plant.
20. (The word) Sraddhd, (denotes) respect and desire. Par^ditammanyah is one who thinks himself as learned and proud as
well. Brahmabandhu (is used in the sense of) censure. Bhdnu means
ray as well as Sun.
2 1 . GrOvan ( is used to denote) a hill and a stone. ( The word)
pfthakjana (denotes) a fool and also a low class man. (The word)
Hkharin (denotes) a tree as well as a mountain. Tanu (denotes)
the skin and the body.
22. (The word) yatna (denotes) soul, firmness, intellect,
nature and path of Brahman. Utth&nath (denotes) effort and re¬
medial act for family. Vyuttkdnarh (denotes) rejection.
23. (The word) nuy&tana (is used to denote) revenge, gift
and restitution of a deposit. ( has the sense of) grief,
fall and crime due to passion or wrath.
24. Hunting, dice-play, dreaming during the day, accusa¬
tion, women, intoxication, the triple symphony (dance, music
and instrumental music) and strolling about idly are the group
of crime arising from passion.
25. Slandering, bravery, offence, hatred, jealousy, extravag¬
ance, reprimand and harshness are the eight crimes arising from
wrath.
26. KaupUiam (is used to denote) a wrong deed, secret and
organ of generation. Maithmam (is employed in the sense of)
relating to union with wife and sexual union. PradkSnam (de¬
notes) the superme q>irit and intellect. Praj/idnam (is used to
mean intellect and mark.

Agni Purdifa
27. Krandanam ( means ) crying and calling. Varpna (denotes )
body and extent. Aridhanam (means) accomplishing, attunment
and satisfaction.
28. ' Ratnam (is used to mean) that which is excellent among
its own class. Lakfma (is used to denote) a mark and chief.
Kaldpa (denotes) an ornament, peacock’s pliunes, quiver and a
collection.
29. (The word) talpam (is used to denote) bed, an apart¬
ment on the roof and woman. Dimba (is used the mean) a child
and a fool. (The word) stambha (is used to denote) a pillar of
a building and dull. (The word) sabhd (is used to convey the
meaning of) an assembly and member of a house.
30. RaSmi (is) a ray (of light) as well as rein (of horses etc.).
(The word) dharma (is used to denote) merit and self-control
etc. (The word) lalama (conveys the meaning of) tail, mark (on
the forehead of horses etc.) , horse, ornament, prominence and
banner.
31. (The word) pratyaya (is employed in the sense of) sub¬
ject to control, oath, knowledge, faith and cause. (The word)
samaya (is used to convey) an agreement, practice, time, a dogma
and knowledge.
32. (The word) atyaya (is used to mean) transgression and
crime. Satyam (means) an oath and truth. (The word) viryam
(is used in the sense of) strength, and greatness. Rupyam (is
used to mean) praiseworthy form.
33. Durodara (is employed to denote) a gambler and durodaram ( to denote) the stake in gambling. (The word) kdnidra
(is used to mean) a great forest or a difficult path, in the mas¬
culine and neuter.
34. (The word) hart (is used to denote) Tama (god of
death) , Anila (wind) , Itidra (ruler of the celestials) , Candra
(Moon) , Arka (Sun) , VistjiU and a lion etc. (The word) dara
(is employed to mean) a hole and fear, in the masculine and
neuter. (The word) jafhara (means) hard (besides stomach) .
35. Uddra (is used to denote) giver and great. Itara (means)
different as well as low. Cddd (denotes) crown and hair. The
lock of hair (is called) mauli,
36. (The word) Bali (is used to mean) tax, offering etc.
(The word balam (is used to denote) an army and firmness.

(The word) nivl (is employed to mean) the knot on the
waist garment of a women and ransom (against the prince etc.
held as captive) .
37-38a. (The word) orsa (is used in the following senses) :
the scrotum (that discharges semen) , rat, excellence, good deed
and a bull. (The word) j akarsa (is used to denote) dice-play, the
die and the board for dice-play. (The word) aksam ( means) an
organ, and in the masculine, the dice, difference in the measure,
dispute and the vibhitaka (one of the three myrobalans) .
38b. (The word) usi}i$a (is used to mean) crown etc.'
Kar^ conveys the sense of a small river.
39. (The word) adhyaksa (means) visible and one who
presides over. (The word) vibhavasu denotes the Sun and Fire.
(The word) rasa ( is employed to denote) (the sentiments)
such as erotic and others, poison, splendour, qualities (such as
sweet, sour etc.) , passion and juice.
40. (The word) varcas ( denotes) feces as well as splendour.
(The word) aga (denotes) sin and crime. (The word) chandas
(means) poetry and desire. Sddhiyan (is used to denote) good as
well as strong. Vyuha (means) a collection as well as (strength) .
(The word) flAi A (denotes) Vftra as well as a serpent*. Fire,
Moon and Sun (are referred to as) tamonuddh (destroyers of
darkness) .
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYTHREE
The words denoting earthy cily^ forest and herbs*
Fire-god said:
1. I shall describe the words denoting earth, city, forest,
herbs and lion etc. (The following words denote the earth) :
bh&ltf ananta, kfami, dhStri, kfm&t jyS, kuh and dharitri.
1. The cro%vn and the turban. Cf. Amara Pahkti 2776.
3. The A<ripa omits this word. Cf. Amara pahkti 2812.
*The Purdfa summarises Amara khedas II. 2, 11. 3 and II. 5

Agni Fwltifa
2. (The words) wfi and mrUik& (denote a piece of earth).
Commendable earth (is denoted by the words) mTtsd zjoAmrtsrUl,
(The land space on the earth is denoted by the words) jagaty
viffapanif lokot bhuvanam And jagati.
3. (The words), ayananif vartma, mSTga^ adhvay panthdy par
davi, STti, sara^l, paddhati, padydy vartani and ekapadi (denote a
path).
4 -6a. {The viordi) pujki purly nagariy paitamm and pufabhedanam (denote a town). Sth&niyam is a big city surrounding big
pathways. Sdkhdnagararh is a suburb of a principal city. The
suburb where the harlots dwell is veia. Apa^ and ni^adyd (denote)
the place for selling goods. Vipa^i and panyavithikd (denote) the
market street. Rathydy pratoll and viHkhd (denote) the pathways
in the interior of a village. Caya and vapram ( mean the earth
dug up from a moat) in the masculine and neuter.
6b. Prdkdra, varana and idla (denote the surrounding fence
set up with poles, thorns etc.). A surrounding fence made up at
the border (with bamboo, thorns etc.) (is called) prdcinam.
7-8. Bhitti and kudyam (denote a wall) . That wall set with
bone etc. inside (is known as) edUkath. (The words) vdsa, kufi,
idld and sabhd (denote the assembly hall). Sanjavanam And catu-
^dlam (is a group of four houses forming a court) . Parruiidld and
ufaja (not feminine) denote a hermitage. Caityam and dyatanam
(denote a sacrifiicial hall) . VdjiSdld and mandurd (denote a
stable) .
9. The dwelling place of the rich (is) hamyddi. The place
of the gods and kings (is called) prdsddi. (The words) dvdhy
dvdram and pratihdra (denote a door), where the word dvdh is
feminine. Vitardi and uedikd ( mean a fence) .
10- 11 a. (The words) kapotapdlikd and vtfadkamy respectively
masculine and neuter (denote a pigeonhouse made of wood etc.) .
Kapdfa and arara are synonyms (meaning a door). and
(denote steps made with wood etc. for ascending).
Sammdrjani and SodharA (mean broom-stick). Sadkara and
avakara (denote sweepings) .
llb-12. (The words) adri, goirCy giri and grdvd (denote
mountains in general). (The words^ gahanamy kdnanam and vanam
(denote a forest) . (The words) drdma and vpaoanam (denote) an

artificial garden (that has been accomplished) . The same that
is fit for harem (is called) pramadavanam.
13. ('I'he words) vithi, dlihy dvalih, pa^tih and irenl (denote
a row) . (The words) lekhdfy and rdjaya^i (denote lines) . A tree
(that is seen) with fruits (produced) from flowers (is) v&naspatyal^,
A tree (that is seen) with fruits not (produced) from flowers (is)
vanaspalih.
14. Those which end with fruit-bearing (arc known as)
osadhi-s, (The words) paldSi^ druh, drwna and agama (denote a
tree) . (The words) sthdnu, dhruva and ianku (denote a cut tree) .
(The word) sthdnu is optionally masculine. (The words) j&rciphulldj utphulla and sarhphulla (mean a flower that has blossom¬
ed).
15-16a. (The words) paldlam^ chadanam and panjarn (denote
a leaf) . (The words) idhtnam^ edha^ and samity faraininc (denote
dry wood and grass) , Bodhidruma and caladala (denote the holy
fig tree) . Dadhittha, grdhty manmatha, dadhiphala, puspapfiala and
dantaSatha (denote the woodapple tree) .
16b- 17. (The words) udumbaray hemadugdhay kovidara and
dvipatraka (denote udumbara) . The saptaparna (tr<*c) (is also
known as) viSdlatvak* The kftaniala (tree is also known as) suvarnakoy drevatUy vyddhighdtay iampSdia and cuturahgala,
18. liYit Jambira (tree is also called) danlaiapha. The Varutm
(tree is also called) tiktaSdka. Punndga (tree is also called) purufay
iungdy kesara and devavallabha,
19-20a. NimbatarUy manddra and pdrijdtaka (are the other
names of) paribhadra (tree) . Vanjula and citrakrt (are the other
names of tiniSa tree) . Pitana and kapitana (denote) the dmrdtaka
(tree). (The other names) of madhuka (are) gu^apufpa said
madhudruma.
20b. Gudaphala and srarhsl (are the other names of) pilu,
Nddiyi is the other name of ambhuvelas.
21. Signify, tik^^agandhakoy ak^iva and mocaka (are the other
names of) iobhdhjana. If this {iobhdfljana) is red (it is called)
madhuHgruh, Arispa and phenila are synonyms.
22. Lodhra (is also called) gdlavay idbaroy liritOy tilva and
mdrjana, Udddlaka (is also known as) ieluhy SUpndtakay Hta and
bahuvdraka,
23. .j(The other names of) vikaiikataiyae) sruvdtffkfUy granthila

A^i Pur&!fa
and vydgkrapit. Tinduka (is also called) spkdrjaka and kdla
{skandha)^. (The terms) nddeyi and bhSmijatnbuka {duiota ndga^
raAga) *.
24. Kdkatindu and {kdka) piluka are synonyms. Kramaka and
Pafpikdkhya would (denote lohitalodhra)*, Kvmhhi (is also known
as) kaidarya and kapphala,
25*2r)a. Vir<a}rkpai arufkara and agnimukhi (are the synonyms
of) bkalldtaki in (all tlie three genders) . Sarjaka, pitasdrakaP and
asana (are synonyms of) jiva (ka). Sarja and afvakan^a (arc syno¬
nyms of) sdla.^ Arjuna (tree) (is also called) viratanAt indradruh,
and kakubhah,
26b-27. Ingudi (is also known as) t&pasataru. Sslmali (is also
known as) mocd, Cirabilvaf naktamdla and karaja (are the other
names of) karafijaka. {PQiika is also known as) prakirya and pUtikaraja, Markafi and adgaravallari (are varieties of karaHja)
28. Rohi, plikaiatru and dddimapufpaka (are synonyms of)
rohitaka, Kkadira (is also known as) gdyatriy bdlalanaya and danta^
dkdvana.
29. Arimeda and vipkhadira (denote varieties of bad smelling
kkadira), Kadara (denotes) the white kkadira, {Erartda is also
called) paHcdkgulay vardkamdnay cadcu and gandkarvahastaka,
30-3 la. P^d'Uaka and martwaka (are synonyms of madana),
Devaddru ( is also called) pitaddru, ddru and puiikdfpkam, Priyadgu
( is also known as) iydmdy makildkvayd, lata, gouandani, gundrd,
pkalini and pkali,
31b-32a. Sot^aka (is also known as) rruarid^opar^a, patrortpa,
nafa, kapvadga, funpuka, syondka, iukandsa, fk^a, dirghavrnta and
kupannapa,
32b. Pitadru and sarala (are synonyms) . Miada, ambuja and
kijjala (are the synonyms of a kind of reed) .
1. AmarapaikUl^b,
2. qf,ibid,pamn^,
3. Cf.ibid.pamm,
4. The Atrdpa wrongly reads Cf Amara paAkti 735.
5. C(f. Amara paiikti 737. The pur&^c reading is wroim^.
6. Aman paAkti 738.
7. Cff, Amara paAkH 745.

33. Kdkodumbarikd and phtUgub (are the synonyms of malayfL
Arifta, picumardaka^, sarvatobhadra (are synonyms of) nimba, Sirifa
(is also known as) kapUana,
34-35a. Va {ba) hula (is said to be vahjula, {Kapild* is also
called as) picchild and aguruiirhSapd. Jayd^ jayanti and tarkdri ( are
synonyms of vaijayantikdP, Keu^ikd (is also known as) gai^ikdrikd^
§riparnam and agnimantha. Vatsaka and girimallikd ( are synonyms
of kufajd) P
35b-36. Kdlaskandha (is a synonym of) tamdla, Tai^iuliya (is
known as) alpamdri^a. Sinduvdra (is also known as) nirgur^i^. The
same (mallikd) grown in the forest (is known as) dsphotSP, Tuthikd
(is also known as) ga^ikd and ambaffkd. Navamdlikd (is also known
as) saptald.
37. Atimukta and pufi^raka (are different varieties of kunda) .*
Kumdri (is also known as) sahd and taratii. Therein^, the red
variety is kurabaka and the yellow variety is kurunpaka,
38. The blue jhinfi (is also known as) bdi}d, (It is also
known as ddsi and artagaleP,) Jhi^pi (in general is known as)
saireyaka. If it is red, it is known as kurabaka. If it is yellow, it is
known as sahacarl (and also as sahacara) .
39. Kitava and dhUrta (are the other names of) dhattOra.
Rucaka ( is the other name of) mdtuluAgaka. Samira^, maruvaka,
prasthapu^pa And phanijjaka (are the synonyms otjambira)*.
40-42a. Kupheraka (is the other name of) parndsa, Vasuka and
dsphopa (are the synonyms of) arka. Sivamalli and pdiupaia (are
synonyms). Vjndd, vfk^ddanU jivantikd and vfkfaruhd (are the
synonyms of the plant that clings to a tree and grows). Guidcl
(has the other names) tantrikd, amirtdf somavalli a,nd madhupar^i.
Murvd (is also called) morapd, madk&likdf madkuiremy gokar^i and
pllupar^i.
1. C/. Amara paAkti 773-picumaiuUt.
2. qf. ibid. paAkH 773.
3. CT. ibU. paAkti. 779.
4. Gf. ibid. paAkti. 781.
5. The PwA^ mixes with the previous. Cf. Amara partis 785 and 788.
6. qf. Amara, paAkti 792.
7. Refers to amldaa. qf. Amara. paAkti 796.
8. Cf. Amara paAkti 797.
9. qf. ibid. paAkti 606-907.

Agni PurSffa
42b-43. PdthS, (is also known as) dmbasfhdf viddhakarr^U pracind
and vanatiktikd. Kafuh, kafumbhard^ cakrddgi and iakulddani (are
the names of kafurohir^i^) . Atmaguptd, prdvffdyi^ oxid kapikaechu
(are the other names of) markafi.
44. Apdmdrga ( is also known as) Saikharika, pratyakpami and
mayUraka. PhahjikiP and brdhmanl (are the other names of) bhdrgi.
Dravanti, iambari and v]rfd (are synonyms).
45. Ma^d^kaparni, bhaifdi^ij samahgd and kdlame^ikd (are
synonyms of maHji^fhd') . Rodani, kacchurd, anantd, samudrantd and
durdlabhd (are synonyms of dhanvaydsa) *.
46. Pfiniparniy prthakpariii, kalqHy dhdvani and guhd (are
synonyms) . Jiidigdhikd, sprii, vydghriy kfudrd and dussparld (are
synonyms) .
47. Avalguja, somardjU suvalliy somavallikd, kdlameHy kf^naphald
and pUtiphali (are synonyms of) vdkuci.
48. Karjidy usand and upakulyd ( are synonyms) . Sreyasi and
gajapippali’^ (are synonyms) . Cavyath and cavikd (are synonyms) .
Kdkacinciy gunja and kr^nald (are synonyms) .
49-50. ViSvdy vifd and prativkd (are synonyms) . Vana.<rdgd(a
and gokfura (are synonyms) .Pfdrdyafii and (are synonyms).
KdliyakOy haridruhy ddrviy pacampaedy ddruRikldP and haimavaW ( are
synonyms ofparjani). Ugragandhdyfadgranthd,golomi and Maparvikd
(are the synonyms of) vacd.
51. Aspkofd and girikami {arc synonyms) . Sirhhdsyay vdsaka
and vrfa (are synonyms) . Madhurikd (is also called) misi and
chatrd. Kokildkfa (is also known as) ik^ra and kfura.
52. Vidadga is known as kftnighna (and is used) in the mas¬
culine and neuter. Vajradru (is also known as) snaky snuhi and
sudhd.^ Mfdvika and gostani ( are the other names of) drakfd. Bald
and vdfydlakd (are synonyms) .
1. Clf. Amara. patUeH 819.
2. pfdtfffdjfOfia. cf. Amara pankti 82 1 .
3. Amara paikti 827 reads haf^ikd.
4. Cf. Amara paAkti 831 <832.
5. karipippalL Cf. Amara padkti 842.
6. Aawa padkti 852 reads dira karidrd.
7. ibid, reads parjanf.
8. Amara paiAU 839 reads gu^d.

lOU
53. K&ld and nutsOraaidald (are synonyms of black trivrt)
Trivft (is also known as) triputd and trivftd. Madhukam, klitakam,
ya^timadkukam and madhuyasfikd (are synonyms).
54. Ikfugandhd (is also known as) viddri, ksirahtkla and kroffrl^
Gopi, iydmdt idrivd and anantd (are the other names of) utpala^
idrivd.
55. Alocd and rambkd (are synonyms of) kadali. Bhanfdki
and duspiadharfiiljii {arc synonyms). Sdlaparni (is also called)
sthird and dhruva. ^rngi and vrfa (arc the synonyms of the herb)
vrsabha.
56. Gddgeruki (is also called) ndgabald. Mufa{sa)li and
tdlamulikd (are synonyms), Pafolikd (is also known as {jyotsni
and jdla. Aja^rngi and visd^ikd ( arc synonyms) .
57. Ldngali (is also known as) agniHkha. Tdmbiiliand ndgavalli (arc synonyms) . (The fragrant) retjukd (is also called) hareifu
and kaunti. Hribera (is also known as) divyandgaram?-
58. (The other names of) Saileya (are) kdlanusdri, vrddhd^
aimapdspam and Htasivam. Mura (is also known as) tdlaparni, daitya
and gandhakufi.
59. Sukam and barham (are other names of) grantkiparnam
(as well as) bald^, Tripura and trufi (are the synonyms of
maildy. ^^ivd and tdmalaki (are synonyms of bhwnydmalaki) . Hanu
and haffavildsini (are synonyms).
60. KufannaPam, ddiapuranif vdneyam and paripelavam (are
synonyms) . Japamarhsi (is also known as) tapasvini. Sprkkd (is
also called) devU laid and laghu.*
61. Karc&raka and drdvidaka (are synonyms) . Gandhamdli is
also known a^iaphi. Vfddhaddraka (is also known as) fksagandhd,
chagaldntrd and vegl.
62. Raktaphaldj bimbikd and piluparni (are the other names
of) tundikeri. Cdngeri^ cakrikd^ and amboiphd {are synonyms).
Svarnakfiri (is also known as) himdvati.
1. This name is not found in Amara paMi 892.
2. This term is not found in Anuira paiUUi 913.
3. Cf. Amara paAkti 899.
4. The purft^c reading UUSb is obviously wrong.
5 padkti 929 reads euhrikd.

Agni Purdtfa
63. Sahasraoedhl, cukra and iatavedhi (are the other names of)
amlmeUu, Jivanti ( is also known as) jivani and jivS. Bhu (mi) -
nMa (is also called) kirStaka?^
64. KUrcaSiffa and madhuraka (are synonyms). Candra^ kap>
vjrka,* dadrughna and edagaja are synonyms. Probably varf&bhU and
sobahdrifii are also synonyms (?) .
65. Kunandatiy nikumbhastrdf yamdni and vdrsikd (are syno¬
nyms).* Laiunam (is also known as) grnjanam, ariffa, mahdkanda
and rasonaka.
66-67. Badard and grsti (are synonyms of) vdrdhi. Vdyasi (is
also known as) kdkamdci. Madhurd (is also known as) latqpufpd,
sitaechat*di aticchatrdy mm, andkpu^pi and kdravi. Saram, p^asdra^if
kafambhard and bhadrabald (are synonyms) . Karcdra and iafi (are
synonyms) .
68. Pafola is (also known as) kulaka and tiktaka. Kdravella
(is also known as) kathillaka. KSsmdisidoka (is otherwise called)
karkdru. Karkafi (is known as) urvdruff, and (used) in the
feminine.
69. Kaputumbi (is also called) ikfvdku. Indravdrutji (is also
known as) m§dld. (The other names of) surcai^ (a^c) arSoghna and
kanda. Mustaka and kuruvindaka (are synonyms).
70. (is also called) vm^Say tvaksdra, karmdra, maskara
and tejana. Chatra, aHcchatrOy pdlaghnay mdldtmaka and bhustp^
(denote different kinds of jalatppa) .
71a. Tdla is also called tjrt^rdja, PUga (is also called) ghotiipd
and kramuka.
71b. ^drd&laP and du^il (are synonyms of) vydgkra (tiger) .
Hatyakfa, kesari and hari (denote a lion) .
72. (The words) kola, potri and vardha would (denotea
boar) . (The words) kokay ihdmrga and vrka (denote a wolf) . LStdy
Urt^andhkay tantuvdya and markapa (denote a spider) .
73. Vficika and Svkakipa (scoipion) (are synonyms). Sdraiigd^
and tokaka are synonyms (denoting a cdtaka bird) . Kfkavdku and
1 . kirdtatikta, qf. Amara pakkti 934.
2. Corrupt reading for kdmpilya and kokmia. ^ Amara paAkti 941-2.
3. The Pur&pic reading is corrupt. Cf. Amara patiui 937-38.
4. The section <ki animals begins here.
5. From here begins the listing of synonyms of birds.

tdmracG^a (are synonyms denoting a cock) , Pika smd kokila (are
synonyms denoting a cuckoo) .
74. Kara fa &nd arif fa (denote) a crow. and kahva de¬
note a crane. CakravSka is also known as koka and cakra,
Kddamba and kalaharhsaka (are synonyms).
75. PataAgikd and puttikd (are synonyms denoting different
kinds of honey-bees) . Dvirephat pu^paliff bhrAga^ safpada, bhramara
and ali (denote a bee) .
76. ( denotes a peacock) . Kekd (denotes) the sound
made by a peacock. (The words) /aArunt and (de¬
note a bird) . Paksati is the base of the wing. It is in the feminine.
Caiku and trofi (denote the beak) . Both ( the words ) are femi¬
nine.
77-78. (The words) uUlnam and sandinam (denote) the gait
(of birds). Kuldya and nidam (denote a nest). They arc (used) in
the masculine and neuter. PeSi, kosa and a9(fa (denote an egg) .
If less than two, anda is used in the neuter. (The young one of a
bird is denoted by the words) prthtika, Sdvaka, /tiu, potOy pSka^
arbhaka and dif^bha. (The following words denote a collection) :
sandoha, vyUhaka, gaifia, stoma^ oghay nikaray vritay nikurambaniy kada*
mbakaniy sangh&tahy saHcayab and vrndam. Puhjay rdSi and kufakam
(are used to denote heap of grains) .
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFOUR
Words denoting men and the four classes of men
Fire-god said\
1 . I shall describe the class of men, brahmins, k^atriya-s,
vaiiya-s and Sudra-s. (The words) narak* pancajandfyy martydfi (de¬
note men). {yhcvfoxda) yofityyofdy abald diXidvadhUh (denote a
woman) .
2. A person seeking a lover, going to the place indicated
(by the lover) (is called) abhisdrikd. (The words) kulafdy purfiiaali and asati (mean a wanton woman). A nude woman (is call¬
ed) kopad.

Agni Pttrib^
3. K&tydyanl is middle-aged, (wears ochre garment and it
without husband)^. One who lives in other’s house (is called)
sairindhrl. (She is independent and proficient in hair dressing
etc.).^ is not old (and serves the harem). Mdlini is a
woman in her monthly course.
4. Vdrastrif ganikd and vetyd (mean a courtezan) . Brothers*
wives are (mutually known as) ydtara-s. Husband’s sister (is
known as ) nananda. ( The descendants for seven generations are
known as) sapin4a-^ and sandbhi-s.
5. (Sisters born of the same womb are called )sanidnodaryah,
sodaryah, sagarbhyah B,iid sahajdh. {The words) sagofra^ bdndhava,
jddti^ batidhu, svah and svajana are synonyms (denoting relatives
belonging to the same clan) .
6. (The words) dampatly jampatiy bhdrydpati and jdydpati
(denote (he husband and wife) . (The outer skin of the embryo
is known as) garbhdiaya, jardyu and ulbam. (The foetus is called)
kalaloy in the neuter.
7. (The words) garbha and bhrUtita are synonyms denoting
(the young one in the womb). (The words) kliba^ Sa^4ha (arc
used to denote) a eunuch. Ulldnaiayd and 4ifnbd would (mean a
child that sucks milk from the mother’s breasts). Bala (boy) (is
known to be) md^vaka:
8. (The words) pican4ila and bfhatkuk$i (mean a person hav¬
ing a big belly) . (The word) abhrafa (is used to mean) a natandsika (one having a flat nose) . (A naturally deformed person is
denoted by the words) vikaldhga and apoganda. (The words) drogyam (free from illness) would (also be known as) andmayam.
9. (A deaf person is denoted by the words) r<f«and ba^ira,
(The word) gadtda (is used to denote) a himch-back. (The
word) kuni (is used to denote) a person having a maimed hand.
(The words) k^aya^ io$a zxid yak^md (mean consumption) . Pra/iVytya and pinasa (catarrh) (are synonyms) .
10. Kft&y kfutam 2Hid ksava (sneezing) (are synonyms). (The
word) kfut is feminine. (The words) kdsa and kfovathu (meaning
cough) are both masculine. iSotha (swelling) is also known as
1. The purioK omits the other characteristics. See Amara pai^H 1108.
2. Amara pahkti 1 109.

ivayathu and iopha, Pddasphopi (sore on the foot) (is also known
as) uipadikd.
1 1 . Kilasam and sidhmam (scab) are synonyms. Pdma, p&md,
and vicarcika (are used to mean) kacchU (scab) . (The words)
kofha, ntan^dakamf kufPham and ivitram (white leprosy) (are syno¬
nyms) . Arsas (piles) (is also known as) darndmakam,
12. (The words) dndha and nibandka (denote suppression of
urine and feces) . Grakal}iruk and pravdhikd (denote diarlioea) .
(The words) bijanif Vilyam^ indriyam and suUam (mean
semen) . (The words) palalarn, kravyam\and dmi^am (denote flesh) .
1 3. Bukkd and agramdrhsam (denote the lotus-shaped flesh in
the heart) . Hr day am and hft (heart) arc synonyms. Vapd and vasd
(denote the marrow of the flesh) . 7’he artery on the back of the
neck (is known as) manyd. (The words) nd^iy dhamani and Sird
(artery) (are synonyms) .
14-15. Tilakam and kloma (denote lump of llcsh) . Afastifkam
(is tile fluid on the fore-head) . Dufikd (denotes) the rheum of
the eyes. (intestine) (is also known as) puritat. Plihd and
gulma (spleen) (arc synonyms) . (The words) vastuud (in the mas¬
culine) and sndyu (in the feminine) (denote tendon) . Kdlakha^'-
dam and yakjt are synonyms (denoting liver) . Karpara and kapdla
(denote skull) , kapdlam in the neuter. Bones (are in general de¬
noted by the words) kikasamy kulyam and asthi.
16. (The word) kahkdla (denotes) skeleton in the body. (The
word) kaieruka (denotes) back-bone. The skull-bone (is called)
karofiy in the feminine. (The word) parSukd denotes the bones on
the sides (of the body) .
1 7. The limbs of the body (are denoted by the words) aA~
garh^ pratika and avayava. (The words) iariram, var$ma and vigraha
(denote a body) . Sroni-phalakam (buttocks) (is also called)
kafa (and that word is) masculine. AVz/t, fro^fand kakudmati (hip)
(are synonyms) .
18. The hinder part of the waist of women (is known as)
nitambay in the neuter. The frontal part is jaghanam. The kSpaka^s
(hollows below the loins) are in the nilamba. (The word is
used) in the neuter. (The hollows above the loins are called)
ktdatndara^s.
1 9. The fleshy portions in the hip are called) sphicau {sphic)
and kafipofthau, (The organ of generation of woman is called)

Agni PurS^a
upastha (because that is near) the two which are to be described
now. In the case of women it is (called) bhagam and yoni. ^ifna,
medkra, mehanam and Sepha (denote penis) .
20. (The words) pica^ia^ kuk^i, jafharanit udaram and tundam
(denote belly) . Stana and kuca (mean breast) . CUcuka is the tip
of breast. (The words) kroiam and bhujdntaram denote chest. The
word krodam is not masculine.
21. SkandhOf bhujaiiras and arhsa denote shoulder. (The junc¬
tion of shoulder is known as) jatru. (Nail is denoted by the
words) punarbkava, kararvhay nakhara and nakha (used) not in
feminine.
22. PrddeSika is the span of the thumb and the forefinger.
T&ld is the span of the thumb and the middle finger. Gokarna
is the span of the thumb and the ring finger. The span of the
thumb and the little finger is vitasti measuring twelve finger
breadths.
23. The open hand with the fingers extended (is called)
capefa, pratala &nd prahasta. Ratni (is the distance) from elbow
to the end of closed fist. Aratni (is the distance) from elbow
to the end of little finger.
24. Neck with three lines (is called) kambugrivd. (The words)
ampt^ ghdfd and vfkdtikd (denote the backside of the union of
head and neck) . Cibuka (chin) is below the lips, then the two
ganda-s (cheeks), the throat and chin.
25-26. The outer ends of eyes are (called) apditga- s. Kafdkfa
(is used to denote) the look with apdAga. (The words) cikura,
kuntala and vdla (denote hair) . (The words) pratikarma, prasddhananiy dkalya, vefa and nepathyam (denote) beautification. It is
perceivable and is produced by union with a play. CUddmani is
the crest-jewel. The central gem in a necklace (is called)
tarala*
27. (The ear-omament is called) kamikd and idlapatra,
Lambanam or laJantikd (denote) a long necklace. (The words)
mafijira and nUpura (denote the anklet) on the foot. Kifikini and
denote a small bell) .
28. (The words) dairghyarhy dydma and droha (are used to
denote the length of a cloth etc.) . (The words) pari^dha and
viidlaid (denote the width) . Pataccaram (denotes) a rag. Sadivydnam
(is the cloth worn) on the shoulder.

29. (The words) raeani and parisyanda (denote the arrange¬
ment of flowers etc.) . (The words) dbhoga and paripOnfatd (denote
the fulfilling of all services). Sanwdgaka and samputaka (mean a
casket) . (The words) pratigraha and patadgraha (mean a spitoon) .
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYFIVE
Words relating to the class of brahmins
Fire-god said :
1-3. (Words denoting genealogy are) vathSa, anvavSya,
gotram, kulam, abhijana and anvaya. Aedrya is that person
who expounds the scriptures. The person who instructs the
priests in the sacrifice (is called) vratt, ya§(a OLtid yajamdna. Upakrama (denotes) the beginning after having known (the course
of action) . Those having the same preceptors (are called) satirthydli. The members of an assembly (are called) sabhya-s, sdmdjika-Sy sabhdsada and sabhdstdra-s. (The priests who officiate in a
sacrifices are known as) ftoija-s and ydjaka s. Adhvaryu is the
priest associated with the Tajurveda. Udgdtf is the priest profici¬
ent in the Samaoeda and Hotf in the ^goeda,
4. Ca0a is the wooden ring on the top of a sacrificial post.
Sthaifdilam and catoaram are synonyms (denoting the ground
made] ready for a sacrifice) . The transformation that occurs in
milk by the addition of curd is known as dmikfd.
5. Ghee together with curd (is called) pffoddjya. (The
words) paramdrmam and pdyasam (denote cooked rice mixed with
milk) . The animal that is killed in a sacrifice after being sancti¬
fied with formulae (is called) updkfta,
6. (The words) parampardkamt iamanam and prokfatym (con¬
vey) the sense of killing. (The words) pdjd, nama^d^ apaciHt
sapasyd, arcd and arhasid are synonyms (denoting worship) .
7. VariDojyd, fuMlfd, paricaryd and vpdsasid. (are synonyms
meaning mode of worship) . (The words) niyama and vratam (sig¬
nify religious observance) . (They are) not feminine. It consists
of the meritorious deeds such as fasting and the like.

Agtti FwBuia
8. The first injunction is called mukhya. That which in infe¬
rior (subordinate) to that (is known as) anukalpa. Kalpa (the
texts laying down injunctions) is known as vidhi and krama.
Viveka is the power to distinguish between the World and the
spirit.
9. The receiving of instruction in the scriptures after purifi¬
cation is known as upakaronam. (An ascetic is denoted by the
words) bhiksUy puriurafy knrmandiy parSiari and maskari.
10. (The sages arc in general denoted by the words) fsi~s
and satyavaedh. A student who has had the ceremonial bath (is
called) snalaka. Those who have conquered the sense-organs
(are known as) yatimh dtjiAyatayah,
11. The daily rite which depends on the body as means
(is known as) j'^mrt'.But niyama is that which depends on exter¬
nal conditions (and is voluntary) . The state of brahman (is de¬
noted by the words) hrahmabhUyam, brakmalvam and brahmasdyujyam.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSIX
Words relating to ksatriyaSy vailyas and other classes
Fire~god said :
1 . (The words denoting the warrior caste are) murdhabhifikta, rdjanya, bahujot kfatriya and virdf. A king who is respected by
the vassals is known as adhiivara.
2. (A king who holds way over the entire earth is known as)
cakravarti and sSrvabhauma. A king who is different from the
above is a mandaleivara, (Minister or counsel is known as) mantri, dhisaciva and amatya. (The chief counsel is known as^ mahdm&tra and pradh&naka.
3. A person who attends to disputes (is called) prddoivdka
and aksadarSaka, The man in charge of gold in a royal treasury
(is called) bhaurika, (The words) adhyakfa and odhikTta are
synonyms (denoting a superintendent). The person invested
with the charge of the harem (is called) araarvorhitka* (The
words) sauvidalla-afkaficukin-s, stkdpatya-s and rawiufa-s (also denote
the same).

4-6a. The words fa (sa) iff 4a and varsavara (denote the servants
in the harem, who are eunuchs) . (The words) sevaka, arthi and
anujivi (denote a servant) . A ruler of the region other than one’s
own is &Mtru (enemy) .One who is beyond that region is a mitram
(friend) . A person beyond that is ud&sina (neutral) . A king who
is in the rear (of a kingdom) is p&rfnigraha .
6b-7. ( A spy is denoted by the words) cara^ sfhL^n and pranu
dhi. The time that is to come is Syati. The present time is known
as tatkdla and tadatvam. The fruit accruing in future (is called)
udarka. (The fear that is caused) by such factors as excessive
rains and fire (is) adffpam. (The fear that is caused) by one’s
own kingdom or other (is) drfpom.
8. (The words) bhadrakumbha zx\6. purtjahmbha (are synony¬
ms meaning a pitcher that is full) . (A vessel made of gold is
called) bhrngdra and kannkalukd. (A rutting elephant is called)
prabhinna, garjita and matta. (A particle of water splashed by the
trunk of an elephant is called) vamathu and karnsikora.
9. A goad is known aaspfu in the feminine and nfiLu^a^ in
the masculine. (The words) paristomn and kutka (denote) the
carpet on the back of an elephant in both (the genders) . (A
vehicle used by ladies for ‘ tr4nsport is called) knrniratha and
pravahanam. The words dold (palanquin) and prenkhd (swing)
etc. (are used) in the feminine.
10. (The words) &dhoraff.<lh^ hastipakdk^ hastydrohah and nifddinahi (denote mahouts) . (Warriors arc denoted by the words)
bhdfdk, yodhdh and yoddkdrak. (The words) kafUuka and vdrancP
(mean armour) . They arc not feminine.
11. iSirsanya (is used to denote) iirastra (helmet). (The
words) tamtramy varma and darManam (are used to mean armour) .
(The words) dmukta^ pratimukta, pinaddha and apinaddha (are used
to mean a person covered by armour) .
12-14. An arrangement of army (for the sake of battle) is
vyuha. (The words) cakram and anikam (denote an army) . It is
not feminine. The patti (consists of) an elephant, a chariot,
three cavalrymen and five infantry. Three times the constituents
of a patti and subsequently in the same way in order would be
1. Amara paAkti. 15 93 reads tdroadfUi.

Affd furib^
sendmakham, gulmat gaiia^ vdhinlt pflandt camu(!^ anikini, daSdnikinl
and akfauhi^i. A bow (is also known as) kodar^i^it ^<1 ifodsa.
The tip (Aro/t) (of a bow) is known as apani,
15. The middle of a bow (is called) lastaka. (The bowstring
is called) maurvlf jyd, iinjini and g^na. (The words) pr^atka, bd^at
viiikha, ajihmaga, khaga and diuga (denote an arrow) .
16. (The words) tunCt upgsadga^ tunira 2LndL nisafiga (denote
a quiver) both in the masculine and feminine. (The words) asi,
rifpi, nisiriiMa, karavdla and krpdna (mean a sword) .
1 7. Tsaru is the handle of a sword. Ili and karavalikd (denote
a short sword) . The words kuphdra and svadhiti (denote an axe) .
(The word kuphdra is used in) both (masculine and feminine)*.
(The words) ckarikd and asiputrikd (denote a knife) .
1 8. Prdsa is known to be kunta (meaning a spear) . Sarvald
and Umara (mean an iron club) (used) in the masculine and
neuter. (Bards who sing praises and wake up in the morning are
called vaitdlika-s and bodhakara-s. Mdgadhas (are bards in gene¬
ral) . Vandin-s and stuti {pdphaka-s) (are bards singing in praise
of the kings) .
19. Sarhiaptaka-s are those who do not turn back from battle.
(The words) patdkd, vaijayanti, ketanam and dhvajam (denote a
banner) . (The word) dhvajam (is used) in the masculine and
neuter.
20. (A fight with enthusiasm) I first, I first, (is known
as) aharkpdrvikdy in the feminine. Where mutual ego is shown (I
am capable) it is known as ahamahamikd,
21. (The words) iakti, pardkramat prdi^, JIautyam, sthdraa,
saha and balam (denote valour) . MUrcchd, kaimalam and moha
(denote stupefaction) . Avamardana and pidanam (mean devasta¬
tion of grains etc. by the invading forces) .
22. (The words) abhyavaskandanam and abfydsddanam (mean
encountering an enemy by trick) , Vijaya and jaya (are synonyms
meaning conquest). (The words) nirodsanam, sar/ijhapanam,mdra^
lyam and pratighdtanam (mean killing) .
23. (The words) pafkatd, kdladhamat^ difpdntay pralaya and
aty^a would (mean death) . (The words) vipt bhSmispfk and
vai^a (denote a tradesman and agriculturist). (The words)
vartanam taidjivanam (mean livelihood in general).

24. Kf^ (agriculture) etc. are to be known (as the means
of livelihood of a vaUya) . (The words) kusldam and vfddhijivikS
mean existing on interest by lending money) . Uddh&ra (means
debt). (The word) arthaprayoga^ (also means kusida). Aoptfa
(denotes) the ear of a corn.
25. Kiridaru (denotes) the beard of a com. Stamba (means)
a bunch of grass etc. (Paddy etc. arc denoted by the words)
dhanyam, vrihi SLiid stambakari, (The minute particles of straw) are
known as kadaAgara and busam,
26. Blackgram etc. are grains in the form of pods. Barley
and other grains are in the form of beards. (Grains such as)
niv&ra are wild grains ( tpiadhdnya) . A winnowing basket is also
known prasphofanam.
27. (A sack made of cloth to carry grains is known as)
syQta and praseva. Kandola and pifa (denote a cotainer made
of bamboo etc) . Kafa and kilihjaka (relate to different varieties of
reeds) . These are similar. Rasavati^ pakasthanam and mahinasa
(denote a kitchen) .
28. The kitchen superintendent (is called) paurogava. (Cooks
are denoted by the words) Jt//>aA;arc-s,oa//aDa-s,^rJ/t4;a-s, indkasika-s
suda-^, audanika-s and guna-a. ■
29. (A frying pan is denoted by the word) ambarifam, in the
neuter and bhrdftra, in the masculine. (The words) karkarif dlu
and galantikd (denote a small pitcher) . (A big pitcher is called)
alinjara and manika, Sufavi (is the name of) black cumin seed.
30. (The words) drandla and kulmdfom (denote a kind of
gruel) . The words hiAgu and rdmafham (denote asafoetida).
(The words) niJd, haridrd and pltd^ feminine (denote turmeric).
(The words) mat^a^4i ^d phd^ilam (mean molasses) .
31. Transformed milk (is called) kurcikd. (The words)
cikkofifam, masj^am and snigdkam (denote bland). (Rice parched
and flattened is denoted by the words) prtkuka and cipipaka.
Fried and powdered barley (is called) dhdni, in the feminine.
32. (The words) jemanam, leha and dhdra (denote food).
(The words) mdh^i and saurabhi denote a cow. Those which are
yoked (are called) yugyal^, prdsaAgyalp and Sdkapafy.
1. Cf. Amara peAkH 1714. The Purd^a while making an extract mixes the
two terms.

1022 Agni Purd^
33. (A cow) that has delivered a calf long time back (is
called) vafkayanif and (one) that has delivered recently (is
Call^) dkenu. (The cow) that is attacked by a bull (for mating)
(is called) sandhint. A barren cow (is called) vehat.
34-35. (A person sustaining himself by buying and selling
is called) pany&jiva and dpanika. A thing left as trust (is called)
upanidhi and the word is masculine. The words vipana and
vikraya (mean sale) . The numerals one to eighteen (are to be
used) in all the three (genders) and the numerals twenty on¬
wards take only singular always. While counting number two
takes the plural. Among them (the numerals) upto ninety are
feminine.
36-37. (A unit measuring ten is called z.pnnkt{) . Successive
multiples of a paftkti would be hundred, thousand etc. They are
measured by tuldngtdiprastha^^s. Five gunja-‘S (make) one
ddyamdsaka. Sixteen {mdsa^s) (make) one aksa (otherwise called)
karfa. The word is not feminine. Four karfa-s (would make) one
palam. An ak$a (measure) of gold (is known as) siimrna and bista.
A pala (measure) of the same (is called) kuruvisla.
38. One hundred palas (make) one ttUa. That (word) is
feminine. Twenty iuld-s would make one bhdra» (A karsa measure
of silver) is called kdr^dpa^a or kdrsika. A karfa (measure) of
copper (is known as) pana.
39-40a. (The words) dravyam, vittanit svdpaUyam, riktham,
fklham, dhanam and vasu (denote wealth) . (The words) riti and
drakuta (denote brass). It is not in the feminine. (The words)
iulbam 9^nd audumbaram (are synonyms of) tdmrakam (brass).
Kdli^asam and aya (are synonyms of) hha (iron) .
40b. (The words) kfdra and kdea (alkali) (are synonyms) .
(The words) capaloy rasa, sUta and parada (are synonyms
denoting mercury) .
41. The horn of the wild buffalow (is called) gavalam.
Trapu and piccafanp (tin) (are synonyms) . Sisakan^ (denotes
lead) . (The words) hiifdi^o, abdhikapha (sea-foam) and pkena (are
1. lu/d is explained below; aitgidi is fingerbreadth sindamcpraftha k^^ual
to thirtytwo pe/a-s explained below.
2. The other equivalents are given in the noct verse.
S. The PwrirfHt wrongly mixes this word with the previous.

synonyms) . (The words) madhUcchiffam and sikthakam (bee-wax)
are synonyms.
42. (The words) raAgam and vaAgarn^ (denote tin) . (The
words) picu and tUla (mean cotton) . Kuna f I (dentoes) manaJ^ild
(arsenic) (especially the Nepalese variety) . Tavakfdra (nitre)
would be (known as) pdkya. (The words) tvdcksiri and varhia^o^
cand (denote a medicinal substance got from the bamboo) .
43. Vrfaldfy, jaghanyajdh and i&drdh (are synonyms) (denot¬
ing the fourth class of men) . Can (fs/<j-s and other low caste men
(are known as) mixed (castes) . Kdru and Hlpi (denote the
artisan) . Their union (with those) of their own caste (is called)
Srtnit both in (the feminine and masculine) .
44. (A painter is denoted by the words) raAgd-jiva and
citrakdra. (A carpenter is denoted by the words) tnkfdt vardhaki
and tua^fd. (The words) nddindama and svar^kdra (denote a
goldsmith). (The words) ndpita and antdvasdyi (denote a
barber) .
45. (A shepherd is denoted by the words) jdbdla and
ajdjwa. (A person living by serving the god is called) devdjiva and
^vala. (Actors are denoted by the words) jdydjivas and
(The words) bkftaka and bkftibkuk (denote a person living on
wages) .
46. (A low person is denoted by the words) otvarria, pdmara^
nica, prdkfta, prthagjana, nihina^ apasada nnd jdlma, (The words)
ddsera and cefaka (are used to denote) a servant.
47. (The words) pafu, peiala and dakfa (mean a clever
person) . Mrgayu is known to be lubdkaka (hunter) . Cd^d^ (low
classman) (is also known as) divdkirti. (The word) pustam (is
used) in (the sense of) plastering.
48. A puppet (made of cloth etc.) is pdhcdlikd. Any young
animal (is known as) oar^ara. (The words) madjUfd, pefaka and
pefd (denote a box) . (The words) ttUya, sddhdra^a and sama
(mean equal or similar) . (The wend) pratimd would (mean)
pratikrti (an image or statue) . The brahma and other classes have
been described so far.
1. Clf, the previous verse.

Affii Furd^
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYSEVEN*
The class of words dependent on the substantives
for their genders
Firc'-god said :
1 . Listen to me ! I shall describe the genders of the sub¬
stantives in general. (The words) sukrtiy punyavdn and dhanya
(denote a fortunate person) . (A generous person is denoted by
the words) maheccha and mahdtaya.
2. (The words) praoinay nipunay abhijiUiy vijua, nifi^ta and
iikfita^ (a proficient person) (are synonyms) . (A very liberal
person is denoted by the words) vadanya, sthiUalak$yay danaiaunda
and bahuprada.
3. The words krtiy^ krtajhcF and kuiala (mean a clever
person) . (The word) dsakta (means one drawn towards some¬
thing). (The words) udyukta and utsuka (mean being drawn
towards something by one’s own desire) . (The words) ibhya,
&dhya and pariofdha (denote a rich man) . Adhibhuk, n&yaka and
adhipa (mean a master) .
4. (A person endowed with fortune is denoted by the words)
lakpniodny lakftnana and Mia. (The words) svatantray apdvrta and
svairi (denote an independent person) . KhalapU would (mean)
bahukara (a sweeper). (The words) dirghasUtra and drakriya
(denote a lazy person) .
5. Jdlma and asamiksyakdri (mean a person acting without
discriminating good and bad) . One who is slow in doing things
is known as ku^fka. (One who is proficient in doing things is)
karmaiUra or karmafha. (The words) bhakfaka, ghasmara and
admara ( denote a gluttonous person) .
0 Jjolupa (denotes a person having ardent desire) . (The
words) gardhana and gfdhm^ (denote a greedy person) . (A
modest person is denoted by the words) oinita and pratrita. (The
*Thi8 chapter summarises AmarOy kdvdo HI, pakktis 2030 ff.
1. Other words having the same meaning have been wrongly put in the
next verse in the Purioa.
2. These words should be read with those in verse 2.
3. This word means a grateful person. Probably a lr,> for krtmukha,
CL Amara, poMtiy 2033.

words) dhff^uk and viyUta (are synonyms of) dhr^fa (immodest) .
Mbhrta^ and pratibh&fwita (denote a person having imagination) .
7. (The word) adhira (means a person afflicted by fear,
hunger, thirst etc.) . (A cowardly or timid person is denoted by
the words) bhiruka and bhiru, (The words) vanddru and abhiv&»
daka (denote a polite oi respectful person) . (The words)
bhUstfu, bhavisnu and bkamtd (mean a person desiring to become
rich). A knower (is denoted by the words) vidura and vinduka,
8->9a. (The words) mattaf Saw^da^ utkafa and kflba (denote
an intoxicated person). Canda (means) atyantakopana (extremely
short-tempered). Devadrayad is a person adoring a deity. A person
serving the world is viSvadrayah, A companion, especially the
husband (is denoted by the word) sadkryah. A person serving
crookedly (is called) tiryaA.
9b- 10a. (The two words) Pdrqj'uAi/T/va/u and vdgmi (denote
a logician). A garrulous person (is denoted by the word)
vavaduka. (A person indulging in unrefined talks is denoted by
the words) jalpdka^ vacdla^ vdcdfa and bahugarhyavdk,
lOb-11. (One who is censured is called) apadhvasta and
dhikkfta. (The words) kllita s^ndsarfiyata (denote a person) bound
(with rope etc.) . (The words), ravana* and Sabdana (denote a
person making sound). (The words) ndndivddi ^.T^d ndndikara are
synonyms (denoting laudatory singer) . (The words) vyasandrta
and uparakta (denote a person afflicted by misfortune) *.
12. (The words) vihasta and vydkula are synonyms (mean¬
ing a person who does not know what to do on account of grief.
(The words) njrJarhsaj krOray ghdtuka and pdpa (mean a person
bent on harming others) . DhOrta and vahcaka (mean a cheat) .
(The words) mUrkhay vaidheya and vdliSa (denote a fool) .
13. (A miser is denoted by the words) kadaryoy kfpairfa and
ksudra, (The words) mdrgar^y ydcaka and arthl (mean a beggar) .
(The word) ahariiyu (means) an egoistic person. A person en¬
dowed with good fortune (is called) Subharkyub14-1 5a. (The words) kdntaniy manoramam and rucyam (are
used in the sense of a beautiful thing) . A thing that is desired
1 . Amaray paAkti 2075 reads pragtdbha.
2. The Purdfia wrongly reads carofa.
3. The next two words repeated from verse 10— obviously a mittake.

Agni Purfkga
(is denoted by the words) kfdyam and abhlfttam, (The words)
asdram and pkalgu (mean a worthless thing) . (The word; ignyam
(means void) . (An important thing or person is denoted by the
words) nuMiyat varya and vareijya^ (The words) Sreffha
and pufkala would (mean the outstanding) . (The words) prdgiya,
agrya, agriya and agriya (also mean an important person) .
15b- 16. (The words) vadramf um iLiid oipulam (mean wide).
(The words) pinam, piva^ sthUlam and pivaram (mean) stout. (The
words) stokOf alpa and kptllaka (are used in the sense of a little) .
(A minute thing is denoted by the words) sukfmamy Hakfiymif
debkramt kfiam and tanu, (The words) tndtrd and kuH (in the
feminine) and leoja and kana (in the masculine) (have the same
sense) . (The words) bkdyiffhamf puruha and puru (mean plenty) .
17. (The words) akhandam, pQr^m said sakalam (denote the
whole) . (The words) upaka^tha^ antikoy abhita, samipay saoidha*
and abhydsa (mean near) . (The word) nediffham (means) very
near.
18. (The word) davi^pham would (mean) very far. (The
words) nistala and vartula (would mean) circular. (The words)
ucctty prlbhiUy unnata and udagra (mean high) . (An eternal thing is
denoted by the words) dkruvay nitya and sandtana.
19. (The words) dviddharriy kutilamy bhugnaniy vellitam and
vakram (denote the crooked) . (An unsteady thing is denoted by
the words) caHealam and taralam. (The words) kafkoramyjafkaram^
and drdkom (mean hard) .
20. (The words) pratyagrdy abhinava, navyoy navinay nutana
and nava (mean fresh or new) . (The word) ekatdna (means)
concentrated on a single object. (The word) uccai^d^ (means)
quickly.
2 1 . (The words) uecdoacam and naikabhedam (mean manifold
ways). (The word) sambddka (means a narrow way). Kalilam
(means a difficult path) . (The words) HmUmiy stimitam and
klinnam (mean wet). (The word) abhiyoga {meam) abhigraha (an
attack) .
1. Some of the other words having the same meaning have been given
in the Pwdsa in the next verse after a break.
2. Theptd. text of the Pwmpa reads stamidka.

22. (The word) sphdti (is used to mean) increase. (The
word) prathd (is used to denote) fame. (The word) samAkSra
(means) a collection. (The word) apakara (means) apacaya
(removal) . (The words) vikdra and parikrama (mean movement
on foot) .
23. (The words) pratydhdra and updddnam (are used in the
sense of restraining the sense-organs). (The extraction of
extraneous objects from the body is denoted by the words)
nirhara and abhyavakarfaniam. (The words) vighruty ontardya
and pratyUha would (mean an obstacle). {The words) dsyd,dsyand
and sthiti (are used in the sense of a seat) .
24. (The words) sannidhi and sannikarfa (would (mean
proximity) . (A difficult path is indicated by the words) saAkrama
and durgasahcara. (The words) upalambha and anubhava (convey
the meaning of experience) . (The words) pratyddeia and nirdkrti
(are used in the sense of rejection) .
25. (The words) parirambhay parifvaAga, sathile^a and ujbagdhanam (denote embrace) . An inference (is that which is
gained) by means of]&aA:^c (subject of a syllogism) , Arlu (reason)
and the like^. The words 4<^marcP and viplava (are used) in (the
sense of) frightening an enemy by shouts.
26. The knowledge about an object, that is not perceived,
(arising) from the statement is said to be Sdbdam.^ Upamdna {ka)
(comparison) would be the cognition arising from seeing the
resemblance in a similar (object) .
27. Arthdpatti (presumption) would be the knowledge about
a different thing which would not exist without (the thing seen)
Abhdva (non-existence) is the cognition *4t is not there** when
the counter-correlative is not apprehended on the ground. Thus
ends the genders of substantives told by Hari (Vi^^u) for the
sake of knowledge of men.
1. 'Ibis is not found in Amara.
2. The printed text wrongly reads hkramara,
3. Hms and other terms of given here are not found in Amara^

Agni Puraga
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYEIGHT
Constant dissolution, occasional and total dissolution
Fire-god said :
U2. The dissolution of beings is of four kinds, such as
constant dissolution of all beings (that takes place daily) , the
dissolution (known as) Brahma, (otherwise known as) naimittika
{pralaya), the prdkfta pralaya, occurring at the end of a thousand
of ioMt yuga^ periods and the absolute dissolution (of all beings)
by the union of all souls in the supreme soul by means of
knowledge.
3-5. I shall describe to you the nature of the naimittika
dissolution that occurs at the end of a kalpa* period. When the
earth (has become) almost depleted at the end of a thousand of
four^^a cycles, there would be a severe drought for hundred
years. Then (all) the beings would perish. Then (lord) Vi^nu,
the lord of the universe, remaining in the seven rays of the
Sun, drinks the waters. The water in the oceans, the earth and
the nether world and the like gets dried up.
6-8. Then by the divine power (of lord Vi§nu) , the very
same seven rays (of the Sun) , nourished by the water, become
seven Suns. O Twice-born ! They burn the three worlds
completely together with the nether world. (The surface of)
the earth would (appear) like the back of a tortoise. Then the
terrible fire (of dissolution) , a manifestation of (lord) Rudra,
burns the nether worlds below in association with the breath
of the serpent jSefoP, Then the all-pervading (fire) bums the
(region) from the nether worlds to the surface of the earth and
from there to the heaven.
9-1 1 . Then all the three worlds appear like one blazing
mass. Then the inhabitants of the two worlds, oppressed by the
terrible heat, ascend to the Maharloka and tothejanaloka from
1. The four yugas— tr$td, dvdpara and kali are reckoned as equivalent
2. One kalpa is equivalent to a day of Brabin4 consisting of one thousand
yagas,
3. The serpent having thousand hoods on whose body reclines (lord)
Vifpu.

Maharloka. After the world is burnt (by the God) (assuming)
the form ofRudra, there arise clouds of different shapes together
with lightning from the breath of (lord) Hari (Vi^nu) . They
rain for a hundred years and put down the fire that lias arisen.
12-13. When the water rises up to the region of the seven
sages (Great Bear) , a hundred storms issue from the breath of (the
lord) Vif^u and disperse those clouds. Then after having drunk
the wind lord Hari lies down on that mass of water, having
assumed the form of Brahma, extolled by sea-dwelling persons
who have gained supernatural powers and by sages.
14. (Lord) Madhusudana (slayer of demon Madhu; i.e.
Vi^nu) lies down (on that mass of water) resting in the yogic
sleep, which is his divine illusory form, contemplating His own
form known as Vasudeva.
15. He then lies down (in sleep) fora kalpa^ (period) and
after waking up, in the form of Brahma, He creates. O Twice*
born! Then (the universe) lies in an unmanifest state in the
Prakrti for two parardhaP-i.
16-19. One place is ten times the other place when ex¬
pansion is made from one place. Then the eighteenth place
would be said to be pardrdha. The prdkrta dissolution is known to
be twice the pardrdha. O Twice-born ! When everything is burnt
by contact with fire and on account of drought, (it is prdkfta dis¬
solution) . The modifications of tnahal (one of the principles) ,
(get merged into one) losing their separate existence, and get
re-absorbed (into prakrti) on account of the will of (lord)
Kr$na. 'Wa.icT first swallows the qualities of earth such as smell
and the like. Then earth (divested of) its characteristic of smell
tends towards dissolution.
20. Then water having the characteristic of taste remains.
It is drunk by light. When it is lost, fire glows on.
21 . Then wind swallows light together with its characteristic
of colour and form. When fire is lost, strong wind blows on.
22. The characteristic of wind, namely touch, is then
consumed by ether. O Twice-born ! When wind is also lost,
ether remains without any sound.

Agni Pur^
23. (The characteristic) of ether is sound. Ether (together
with its characteristic) is swallowed by Bh&tddi ( i.e. AhaAkdra
or Ego Principle in which the element of Tamas dominates ) . Ether
bom of Ego and Bhutddi are swallowed by Mahat i.e. Buddki
tattva (the first evolute of PrakYti in Sankhya) .
24-25. Earth gets merged in water, water in light, light in
wind, wind in ether and ether in ego. O Twice-bom ! that
(sets merged) in the principle oi mahat zxid (the principle
of) mahat is swallowed by prakfti (nature) . The prakrti (consists
of two parts) such as manifest and unmanifest. The manifest
(part of prakfti) gets merged in the unmanifest.
26. The purusa (primordial being) is pure and is one un¬
decaying (entity) . He is also a part of the Supreme Soul. These
prakrti and purusa get merged in the Supreme Soul. There is no
determination such as name, species and the like in that lord of
alL (That Supreme Soul) is composed only of existence. He is
to be known and (is of the form of) knowledge. (All) other
souls (are merged) in (such Supreme Soul).
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTYNINE
The description of absolute dissolution
and the process of creation
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe absolute dissolution. Absolute dissolution
arises from knowledge after having known the sufferings caused
by the mind etc. from one's disinclination.
2. The sufferings are of two kinds : physical and mental.
The physical sufierings are manifold. O Twice-bom ! Listen to
me ! I shall describe ffiem.
3-5. The (individual) soul after having discarded the
sensual body enters the womb as a result of (the past) deeds. O
Twice-bom ! this body known as dtivdhika (that is carried for¬
ward) is peculiar to men alone. O Twice-bom ! when the
time for death comes the bodiesof men are carried away by the

servants ofYama (God of Death) along the path of Yama. O
Sagel this is not the case with the other beings. Such a person
would wander in heaven and hell like ^tghataymtrd^,
6-7. O Brahmin ! This is a land of deeds and is knovm to
bear fruits (of one*s actions). Yama (God of Death) is the cause
of one's birth. He determines the hell (to which one has to go)
on account of the deed. Being awaited by them (men) , Yama,
makes them get their befitting places (dependent) on their
(deeds) . The beings which have got ethereal (bodies) reach the
(befitting) wombs.
8-9a. A man is led by the messengers ofYama and he sees
him (Yama) . A pious man is honoured by him and a sinner is
beaten. Gitragupta^ informs him the good or bad deed (done) in
(every) house.
9b- 1 2a. (The departed soul) dwells in the Ativdhika
(provisional) body and partakes the funeral oblations offered by
the relatives. O Knower of virtue ! (After the funeral is over)
(the soul) rejects that pff to body (attained after death) and
ascends to another region from that of the preta-s. It dwells
(there) experiencing hunger and thirst and partakes the raw
offerings (made to it by the relatives) . A person does not get
release from this newly acquired body without (eating) the
funeral oblations. He partakes the ball-offerings there itself.
12b- 13a. When the sapiniikarancP has been done, a (dead)
man discards the to body and gets a sensuous body after one
year.
1 3b- 14. Both the bodies are said to be sensuous and designa¬
ted as inauspicious and auspicious. After having enjoyed by
means of the sensuous body, one gets released from the bondage
of deeds. Demons devour that body after that.
15. O Twice-bom! A person who does sinful deeds, would
enjoy (the fruits of good deeds at first) in the heaven. Then he
takes a second body of sinners to experience (the fruits of
sin) .
1. A mechantim for drawing water fr<nn a well.
2. One of the assistants ofYama who records the virtuous and vicious
deeds of men.
3. The rite performed at the end of one year or on the twelfth day
after the^jdeath of a persrni to unite the dead with the dqiarted ancestors.

Agni Purd^
16. After experiencing the fruits of sin one that has enjoyed
heaven, is thereafter bom in a pure and prosperous family.
17. A person doing pious deeds having (a little of) sin would
first experience (the fruits of) the sin and when that body is
dissolved would attain a beautiful body.
1 8. A person gets freed from hell even if a little of past deed
still remains. There is no doubt that he would be bom as an
animal after getting liberated from hell.
19-20. The soul after having entered the womb dwells in
the foetus. It gets hard in the second (month) . The limbs (grow)
in the third (month) . Bones, skin and flesh (are formed) in the
fourth (month) . Hair grows in the fifth (month) . Heart (is
formed) in the sixth. The soul feels pain in the seventh.
21. Thus (the child) remains in the womb being covered
with the placenta and having hands folded above the head. A
eunuch stays in the middle (of the abdomen) , a female (child)
on the left side and a male (child) on the right side.
22. The child stays in the womb facing the back (of the
mother) . There is no doubt that it (the child) recognises the
person in whose (womb) it stays.
23. It knows fully all the incidents of previous life from
birth onwards. A person finds a great darkness and (experiences)
suffering.
24. In the seventh month it partakes the food eaten by the
mother. It becomes extremely restive in the eighth and ninth
months.
25. It suffers when there is coition and physical exercise
on the part of the mother. It becomes sick when (the mother is)
sick, a moment ^of agony) appearing as if lasting for a hundred
years.
26. It is tormented by the (past) deeds and makes resolu¬
tions : *‘0 Brahman ! After getting out from the womb I will
gain knowledge relating to liberation (from this bondage)
27. Being pressed down by the wind inside (mother s)
womb, it gets out through the vagina. It gets afflicted in the
first month (after birth) and feels pain when touched with the
hand.
28. The auditory organs, minor organs and the state of
being separate (are produced) in the body from the ether with

(its attribute of) sound. The process of breathing, movement
and the feeling of touch are due to the wind.
29. Personality, sense of seeing, heat, celebrity, biles, intellect,
colour, strength, shade, splendour and valour arise in the body
from fire.
30. Sweat, the organ of taste, moisture, marrow, taste,
blood, semen, urine and phlegm and the like are produced in
the body from water.
31-33. The sense of smell, hair, nail, weight and firmness of
the bones (are) from earth. The delicate organs, skin, flesh, heart,
navel, marrow, ordure, fat, moisture and the upper part of the
belly are got from the mother. Veins, arteries and semen are
got from the father. Lust, anger, fear, joy, the states of being
pious and not pious, form, voice, colour and the discharge of
urine and the like are due to one*s own (state) .
34. Ignorance, negligence, idleness, thirst, hunger, infatu¬
ation, jealousy, defectiveness, grief, weariness and fear are
qualities of tamas (temperament) .
35. O Great sage ! Lust, anger, valour, desire to do
sacrifice, garrulousness, ego and contempt for othersare qualities
of rdjasa (temperament) .
36. Desire to be righteous, desire for emancipation, extreme
devotion to (lord) Kesava (Vi^nu) , compassion and diligence
should be termed as arising from sdttvika (temperament) .
37. A person in whom wind predominates would be fickle,
irritable, cowardly, garrulous, yielding to vices of kali {yuga)
and dreams of flying in the air.
38. A person in whom bile predominates would be pre¬
maturely grey-haired, irritable, very learned, fond of battle
and one who sees conflagrations in dream.
39. A person in whom phlegm abounds would be a stead¬
fast friend, constantly enthusiastic, having firm limbs, endowed
with wealth and one who perceives water and white colour in
dream.
40-41 . Serum is the life force in the body of beings. Blood
(serves as) the anointment. Flesh causes urination and perspir¬
ation. Bones make (the body) firm. Marrow would fill up and
increase potency. Semen gives potency. Ojas (virility] is the
sustainar of life.

Apii PurlbifA
42. Virility is subtler and lesser yellow than semen and
flows in the vicinity of heart. There are six parts of the body,
viz, two thighs (legs), two hands, head and belly.
43*45. The six external layers of skin are the epidermis,
(the layer) that contains blood, the next one that contains
features of grace, the fourth one that bears the sacs (storing
fluids) , the fifth one that is the seat of abscesses and the sixth
one that supports life. There are seven sheaths (namely) that
which supports flesh, the second one, blood, that which is the
prop for liver and spleen, the next one that holds fat and that
which supports bone, that which holds marrow, phlegm and
feces, situated in the abdomen. The sixth is that which holds
bile and (the next one) that holds semen in the region of that
SAC*
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
The constituent parts of a body
Fire-god said :
1-2. The auditory organ, skin, the two eyes, tongue, nose,
intellect, the five elements and their qualities (such as) sound,
touch, colour, taste and smell, the anus, the organ of generation,
the two hands, the two feet are the embodiments of sky. Their
functions are emission, exhilaration, taking, movement and
speech and the like.
3. Five among these are organs of action, five are organs of
sense. The five great elements are objects of senses having the
mind as that which governs.
4. The soul is unmanifest. The principles are twentyfour.
The purufa is the supreme. (The soul exists) just like the fish in
the water attached and detached.
5. The qualities sattoa, rajas and tamos dwell in the unmani¬
fest {PrakfU), The inner being is the purufa. It is the Supreme
bmliman, the cause.

6-7. One who knows this Supreme purufa, attains the sup¬
reme position. There are seven sacs in the body. The first one is
the sac of blood. (The other sacs) are those of phlegm, of un¬
digested food and of bile. The fifth one is that of digestion. The
receptacles for wind and urine (are the sixth) and seventh. The
uterus is the eighth one in women.
8-9. The sac of digestion gets dilated by bile and the vagina
by internal fire. The uterus would resemble lotus and expand
during the menstrual period. There it holds semen together with
blood. O Sage ! semen deposited in the vagina is led to the
uterus in course of time.
10. Even during the menstruous period, the vagina would
be surrounded by wind, bile and phlegm. It would not get dilated
then.
11-12. O Fortunate one ! heart, lungs, liver and spleen are
formed in due succession. O Knower of virtue ! spleen and liver
of men are formed from the essence of the serum that gets con¬
densed. Lungs (are formed) from the froth of blood.
13. Blood is then converted into bile and it is then known
as tanioka. Heart is formed from the spreading of fat and
blood.
14. Intestines of mortals are formed from the spreading of
blood and flesh. They should be known as three and a half
i^ama-s^ ( long) in men.
15. They are three vydma^z (long) in women according to
tliose learned in scriptures. Its rise in passion is said to be from
the union of blood and wind.
16. Heart assumes the shape of a lotus from the expansion
of phlegm. That cavity hangs down and the soul remains
therein.
1 7. All the feelings which accompany consciousness remain
there. Spleen is to its left and liver is on the right.
18-19a. Lungs are on the right side of the (above) lotus.
The sense organs are formed from the veins and arteries in the
body which carry the phlegm and blood. They are the means to
cognise objects.
1. A ojfima is a measure of length equal to the q>ace between the tips of
the fingers of either hand, when the arms are extended.

Agni Purdufa
19b-20. The orb of the eyes is white. It is a paternal ele¬
ment and it owes its origin to the phlegm. The orb is black
arising from wind and it is a maternal element. The entire skin
is formed from the bile and it is formed from the father as well
as the mother.
2 1-24. The tongue is formed out of flesh, blood and phlegm.
The testes are from the marrow, blood, phlegm and fat. One has
to know the ten vital places of life in the body (namely) head,
heart, navel, throat, tongue, semen, blood, anus, pelvis and
ankles. Sinews are said to be sixteen in the two hands, two feet,
including four on the back and the neck. The membranes are
sixteen from head to foot in the body. Flesh, sinews, arteries
and bones are firmly placed around the wrist and ankles separa¬
tely.
25. There are six brush (-like formations) in the hands, feet,
neck and anus as pointed out by men.
26. There are four thread-like flesh formations in the region
of the spinal column. There are ninety muscles, which bind them
(in their places) .
27-28a. There are seven slvanUz (a kind of thin muscles) ,
among which five are on the head, one each in the penis and
the tongue. There are sixtythree bones. Together with the mi¬
nute ones there are sixtyfour in all. The teeth and nails are
twenty.
28b-30. Hands, legs and the tips of these are the four places
(of bones) . Bones are sixty in the fingers, two on the heels, four
at the ankles, four at the elbows, the same number on the shanks,
two each at the knee, cheek and thighs which arise from the hip
and shoulder. One has to know in the same way at the akfosthSna,
shoulder and hip.
31. There are one at the penis, forty-five on the back, and
similar number of bones at the neck, collar bones and cheek.
32. The base of these which are two, have their places at
the neck, eye, throat, nose and feet. The ribs together with the
palate and lumps of flesh are seventytwo.
33. (There are) two temporal bones. There are four (bones)
on the skull and the head. There are seventeen bones on the
chest. There are two himdred and ten (bones) of the joints.

34. Among the sixty-eight in the arms sixty-one remain
distributed. In the neighbourhood are eighty-three (bones) . The
sinews are nine hundred.
35. (There are) two hundred and thirty (bones) and seventy
in the interior. Six hundred go upwards. (The bones) of the arm
have been described.
36. The muscles are five hundred. Forty (among them) go
upwards. There are four hundred in the arms and sixty in the
interval.
37-39. There will be twenty-five more, ten more on the
breast, thirteen in the organ of generation and four in the uterus
in the case of women. There are thirty lakh veins in the bodies
of men. There are also others numbering nine (thousand) and
fifty-six thousand. They carry the (vital) fluid, the moisture and
the fat inside the body just as the channels (carry water) to the
basins (around plants) .
40-43. O Great sage ! There are seventy two crores of hair.
O Twice-born IThea measure of marrow, fat, urine, bile and
phlegm, feces, blood and fluids are in order one and a half times
more than the preceding one respectively. The semen is half
ahjalu The ojas is half of that. Wisemen point out that the men¬
strual fluid (in women) is four times. Knowing that the body is
a mass of dirt and impurity, one should discard and (take
interest) in the soul.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYONE
The description of hells
Fire^god said:
1-2. 1 will describe to you the path (leading) to Tama (i.e.
the world of God of Death) which have been pointed out (by
the learned) . The bodily heat getting intense and diffused by the
deranged wind, obstructs the body as well as all the defects.
Moreover it breaks the subtle places of life (in the body) .
1. A measure of corn.

Agni Puriista
3-4. The wind excited by cold seeks an aperture (for its
movement) . The seven apertures are-— two eyes, two ears, two
nostrils and head. The eighth one is the mouth. Generally the
lives of pious men escape through these holes.
5. (The lives) of doers of bad deeds (escape) through the
anus and the organ of generation in the lower (region) . The
lives of yogins get out breaking the head by own will.
G-7. When the time for death has come, when the life force
has approached the apdruP, when knowledge has been engulfed
by darkness and when the vulnerable spots (in the body) have
been surrounded, the life ismoved by the wind from the umblicus.
Being affected thus it draws the eight fundamental attributes
of vitality (life) within.
8-10. The accomplished beings and celestials witness with
their spiritual vision, the exit (of life) , the birth and the entry
into the uterus. As soon as the life leaves the body it assumes a
light body by means of yoga. When one is dead, the ether, wind
and lustre go upwards from the body, the water and earth (go
downwards) (and get merged in their respective elements) . The
messengers ofYama lead this light body.
1 1 . The path to the place of God of Death is much dreadful.
It extends over (a space of) eighty-six thousand (kroSas) . Being
led thus, it partakes the food and water given by the kinsmen.
12. After having seen the God of Death, being directed by
him on the words of Citragupta (the personal assistant of God
of Death) , a person is taken to the dreadful hells. A virtuous
person is lead to the heaven by auspicious path.
13- 14a. I shall describe the hells in which the sinners are
placed and the sufferings (therein). There are twenty-eight
important hells below the earth at the end of the seventh layer
of the region covered by dreadful darkness.
14b-18. Ghora is the name of the first hell. Sughora is
below that. The others are Atighora, Mah&ghora, Ghorarupa,
the fifth, the sixdi known as Taralatara^ the seventh one Bhayanaka, Bhayotkat^, K&laratn, Mahacanda, Capda* Kolahala,
the one known as Praca^d^* Padma, Narakanayika, Padmavafi,
Bhi^ani, Bhima, KarMika, Vikarala, Mahavajra, Triko^a,
1. One of the five vdnds in the body.

Paflcakonika, Sudirgha, Vartula, Saptabhuma, Subhumika and
Diptamaya. The wicked suffer in these.
19. There are five foremost (divisions) among each one of
the twenty-eight hells known as Raurava and others numbering
one-hundred and forty.
20-22. Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Maharaurava and Raurava,
Asipatravana (forest of sword-like leaves), Lohabhara, Kalasutra,
Mahanaraka, Safijivana, Mahavici, Tapaiia, Sampratapana,
Sahghata, Sakakola, Kudamala, Putimrttika, Loha^ahku and
Rjisa (are the sub-divisions) . Salmali is the main river.
23. One should know that the hells are governed by dread¬
ful looking serpents. They put the sinners in each one of the
hells as well as in many of them.
24. Having their faces resembling cats, owls, frogs and vul¬
tures etc., they throw the man in caldrons of oil and then light
the fire.
25-28. Some (are put) in frying pans, some in copper vcs.scls,
some others in iron caldrons and others among sparks of fire.
Some are placed on the tip of pointed pikes. Some are pierced
in the hell. Some are thrashed with whips. Some are made to
eat molten iron. The men arc made to consume dust, excreta,
blood, phlegm etc. and made to drink hot wine by the mess¬
engers of God of Death. The men are again pierced. They are
tortured by mechanical devices and (the bodies are) eaten by
crows etc. Hot oil is sprinkled over them and the head is pierced
repeatedly.
29-30. Wailing aloud ‘Oh ! father!’, (the men) denounce
their (past) deeds. After having reached dreadful hells as a
result of censurable great sins, the great sinners are reborn here
when the (fruits) of the (past) deeds are exhausted. A killer of a
brahmin is born in the womb of a deer, dog, pig and camel.
31. A drunkard (is born in the womb) of a Pukka^a^ or
Mleccha^. A person stealing gold (gets) the state of an insect,
worm or locust. A person defiling the bed of his preceptor
(attains) the state of a clump of grass.
1. A mixed caste; an offspring of a hunter male and a i€dra woman.
2. A non-Aryan,

Agni Purib^a
32. A killer of a brahmin would get consumption. A drun¬
kard (would have) dark brown teeth (a dental disease) . One
who steals gold (would) have bad nails. A person violating the
teacher’s bed (would have) a skin disease.
33. A person commiting a sin by a particular limb would
get that limb affected. A person stealing food would become
dyspeptic. A person harming the articulation (of a man) (would
be bom) dumb.
34. A person stealing grains would have abnormal limbs.
A miser (would be born as) having a fetid nose. A person
stealing oil would become a bird. An informer would have an
offensive breath.
35. A person abducting the wife of another and defiling
a brahmin would be born as a brahmardksasa (a kind of ghost)
in an uninhabited forest.
36. A person stealing gems (attains birth) in a low caste.
(One who steals) perfumes (would be born) as the female of
the muskrat. One who steals leaves, vegetables (would become)
a peacock and one who steals grain (would become) a crow.
37-38a. (A person stealing) a domestic animal, milk, vehicle,
fruit, honey, flesh, condiment, clothe or lotus and salt (would
respectively be bom as) a goat, crow, camel, monkey, fly,
vulture, gfhakdka (domestic crow), one afflicted by psoriasis
and as cricket.
38b-39. Afflictions in mundane existence are said to be of
three varieties namely, adhydlmika (affecting mind and its facul¬
ties) , ddhibhautika (caused by weapons etc.) , and ddhidaivika^ due
to the planets, fire and gods. Men should nullify them by know¬
ledge, by atonements, vows, making gifts and worship of (lord)
Vi§^iu etc.

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYT WO
The major and minor religious observances {yama-s and niyama-s)
Fire~god said :
l-2a. I shall describe to you rhayoga having eight consti¬
tuents in order to get free from the sufferings due to mundane
existence. Knowledge makes Brahman manifest. There, yoga is
the concentration of mind and the withdrawal of the mind
(from all other objects) . (It is) the highest (union) of the in¬
dividual soul and the Supreme Brahman.
2b-3. O Brahmin ! Non-injury, truthfulness, non-stealing,
celibacy and rejection of gifts are known to be the five major
observances. These together with the minor observances yield
enjoyment and emancipation. Purity, contentment, penance,
study of one’s own scriptures, worship of God are minor obser¬
vances.
4-5a. Non- injury means not causing injury to the beings.
Non-injury is the foremost virtue. Just as the footsteps of the
travellers on foot could be contained in the footstep of an ele¬
phant, so also all the virtuous acts are said (to be included) in
non-injury.
5b-7a. Injury (would) create anxiety, cause suffering,
mental and physical pain (spilling of blood) , slandering, great
obstruction to beneficial thing, opening of vulnerable parts,
denial of happiness, obstruction and killing. Thus it is of ten
kinds.
7b-8. Truthfulness is defined as speech that would be
extremely beneficial to beings. Speak the truth. Speak
what is pleasing. But do not speak the truth that is not
pleasing. Do not also tell a lie that would be pleasing. This is
the eternal virtue.
9-10. Celibacy is the shunning of sexual enjoyment. It is
eightfold. Men declare that sexual enjoyment is eightfold
such as remembrance, praise, sport, seeing, talking in secret,
resolve, endeavours and the final consummation.
1 l*12a. Celibacy is at the root of action and an action be¬
comes fruitless otherwise.,Even the elders in age and wisdom,
such as Vasi$tha, Candramas, Sukra, the preceptor of gods
(Brhaq>ati), and Pitamaha (Brahma) were captivated by
women.-

Agni PurStfa
12b-14a. The three kinds of wine are known as gau4i
(from molasses), paiffi (from flour) and m^z>i (from honey).
The fourth sort of wine is known as woman by which the world
has been deluded. One gets intoxicated just after seeing a wo¬
man, but one gets intoxicated by wine only after drinking.
Since a woman is like wine by being looked at, one should not
look at her.
14b- 15a. A person who forcibly takes away another*s pos¬
session, whatever it may be, would certainly attain the state of
lower animals. (Similar would be the result) for eating (steal¬
thily) the butter offered as oblation.
15b-17a. (A mendicant) may accept a loin-cloth as cover¬
ing, clothing, wallet that prevents cold and a pair of sandals.
But one should not covet anything beyond these. Dress etc. are
put on (the body) for the sustenance of the body. Body is
associated with virtue. Hence it should be protected with care.
1 7b- 18. Purity is said to be twofold — external and inter¬
nal. External purity is to be maintained by means of earth and
water and the internal by cleaning the feelings. One who is
pure in both these respects is said to be pure, and not otherwise.
19-20a. Contentment is said to be the feeling of satisfaction
with whatever one gets. Penance is the concentration of the
mind and senses on a single object. The conquest of senses and
mind is said to be the foremost among all virtues. Penance
which fulfils all desires is threefold, namely, oral consisting of
repetition of sacred formulae etc., mental (consisting of)
eschewing desires, and physical (consisting of) the worship of
gods etc.
20b-31 , The Vedas begin with pra^ava (the syllable orh) and
also end with the pranava. Pranava is the entire collection of
words. Hence one has to repeat prat^ava, (It is composed of) the
syllables a, u and w, ( the latter) being half a syllabic instant.
The three syllabic instants (represent) the three Vedas, The
three worlds BkR etc. are its qualities. (It also represents) the
three states such as waking, dreaming and deep sleep. (It is also
equated with) the gods Brahma, Vi§nu and MaheSvara. (The
divine forms) such as Pradyumna, drivasudeva etc. (have all
come) duly from the syllable oth. (The pranava) to which a
syllabic instant is not added or that which is bereft ofa syllabic

instant or more is not auspicious. One who has learnt the
syllable ofh is a sage and none else. The fourth syllabic instant
is endowed with the gdridhari (accent) and is indicated on the
head. It is the fourth one, the Supreme Brahman, like the
lamp in a pot. One has to contemplate always (that Brahman)
resting in the lotus of the heart. Praijava is the bow, the (indi¬
vidual) soul is the arrow and Braliman is said to be its target. It
should be known with all assiduity and one should become
united like the arrow. This single syllable is Brahman. It is the
supreme entity. A person who knows this syllable would get
what he wishes (to get). The goddess Gayatri is its metre* The
lord within is known to be its sage. The Supreme Soul is its
deity. This application would yield enjoyment and prosperity.
*Bhuh, to the soul of fire* is (the formula of) the heart. *Bhuva^,
to the soul of Prajapati* is (the formula of) the head. *Svali, to
the soul of Sun* is said to be the armour of the tuft. *Orh bhUr
bhuvah svah* is the armour. *To the soul of truth* (is) the wea¬
pon. After having placed (lord) Vi$nu, one should repeat
(this formula) for the sake of enjoyment and emancipation.
32-33. One should offer oblations of sesamum and clarified
butter etc. One would obtain all things. A person who repeats
the syllabic twelve thousand times everyday would have the
manifestation of the Supreme Brahman (in front of him) in
twelve months. By the repetition (of the syllable) one crorc
times (one would gain perfections) such as anim& (subtlety) etc.
One would gain the grace of the (goddess of) learning (by
repeating this) a lakh times.
34. Sacrificial rites for (lord) Vi^nu are of three kinds,
Vcdic, Tantric and mixed. One should worship (lord) Hari
(Visnu) , by one of these three methods that is desired.
35. The position which one gains by prostrating fiat on
the ground like a stick and worshipping (lord Vi^Qu) , (he
would) not (gain) by means of (performing) hundreds of
sacrificial rites.
36. The import of these explained here would become
manifest to those great men who have extreme devotion for the
god and also for the preceptor as for the god.

Agni Purd^a
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYTHREE
Description of Ssanas {different physical postures)
and control of breath
Fire-god said :
l-3a. (The term) denotes postures such as the *lotus*^
etc. Sitting in that posture one should contemplate the Supreme
(Being) . After having established oneself firmly in that posture
in a pure place which is neither too much raised nor too much
lowered, on the skin of an antelope and the kuSa (grass), one
should concentrate after controlling the mind and the .senses.
Seated in that posture one should practise for the sake of
the purification of the self.
3b-6. The body, head and neck should be held erect and
firm without movement and one should look at the tip of the
nose. One should not look in any other direction. One should
protect the testicles and the penis with the heels, and place ( the
heels) on the thighs, keep the hands across with effort and
place the back of the right palm on the left (palm) . After rais¬
ing the face slowly and holding the mouth forward (one should
practise the control of breath). Prana is the wind in one’s body
and its dydma is its retention.
7. (Holding and) closing (one of) the nostrils with the
finger (exhale and) empty the air from the chest with the other
nostril. Because of emptying it is known as recaka (exhalation).
8. Fill the inside with external air like a leather bag till it
gets fully filled and remains steady. It is known as pQraka (fill¬
ing) because of filling to the full.
9. When one neither lets off the air inside nor inhales the
air but remains steady like a completely filled pot, (it is called)
kumbhaka,
10-11. (^ain prd$dydfna is divided into three classes) :
Kanyasa (the shortest one) is inhaling once for a duration of
twelve m<!frd-s (moments). Madhyama (the middle one) is inhal¬
ing twice lasting for a duration of twenty-four moments. Uttama
(the longest) is inhaling thrice lasting for a period of thirty-six
1. See verses 3b AT below.

moments. Uttamottama (the foremost one) is that which produces
sweat, shivering and stiffness.
12-13. One should not tread on untrodden ground. (By
doing so) (one would be liable to get) hiccough, breathing
(trouble) etc. When the vital air is conquered there would be
little defect in the feces, urine etc. (One would gain) health,
quick gait, enthusiasm, clarity of voice, grace in strength and
colour and the loss of all defects.
14. That (prSndydma) which is not accompanied by,
muttering (of prayer, divine name etc.) and contemplation (is
known as) not impregnated. That which is accompanied (by
muttering of ‘om* etc. is known as) impregnated. An impreg¬
nated (prdtfdydma) should be practised foremost for the subju¬
gation of the senses.
15. When the senses are conquered along with the acqui¬
sition of knowledge and detachment and one has acquired
mastery in prandydnia, everything else would then become
conquered.
16. The senses are really everything (which leads) to
heaven or hell. By controlling- them or leaving them unbridled
(one would go) to heaven or hell.
17-18. The body is said to be like a chariot and the senses
(are) its horses. The mind is said to be the charioteer. Prdt^ydma
is known to be the whip. With the reins of knowledge and deta¬
chment and by getting rid of illusion, the mind attains steadiness
by means of prdndydma alone.
19. (The practice of) prdndydma (gives) the same benefit
that would accrue to a person who drinks drops of water
through the tip of a kaia (grass) month after month for whole
period of one hundred years.
20. Pratydhdra is said to consist in the withdrawal and re¬
straining of the senses which are ordinarily immersed in the
ocean of objects.
21 . One should pull up the self by one’s own effort just as
a man sinking in the water (is pulled out). (One should cross)
the rapid current of the river of enjoyment of objects by resort¬
ing to the tree of knowledge.

Agm Purina
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFOUR
Contemplation
Fire-god said :
1. The root is known (to be used) in (the sense of)
contemplation. A constant meditation on (lord) Vi^nu without
digression of mind is said to be contemplation.
2. Contemplation is said to be that power of the soul equal
to the thought of the (Supreme) Brahman by means of one’s own
will unconditioned by any category.
3. (In other words) contemplation is said to be that
thought found to be together with a similar thought resting on
an object to be contemplated and which is free from the
thought of any other kind.
4. It is said to be contemplation when the mind thinks
constantly of a thing that is to be contemplated at any fixed
place.
5. A person who discards his body (with his mind)
endowed with such contemplation would elevate his family,
kinsmen and friends and would become (lord) Hari (Visnu).
6. The position which one attains by contemplating (lord)
Hari with faith for a moment or half in this manner, could not
be got by (performing) all great sacrificial rites.
7. A person who knows the truth should apply himself to
(the practice oQ^oga, after having known the four ( things) such
as the contemplator, contemplation, the thing to be contem¬
plated and that which is the benefit of the contemplation.
8-9a. A person would obtain release (from bondage of
mundane existence) by practising^^a (and would also gain)
eight (kinds of) great powers^. (A person who is) endowed with
knowledge and detachment, earnestness, forbearance, devotion
to (lord) Vi$];iu and is always enthusiastic is deemed to be the
Supreme Soul after such contemplation.
9b.- 10a. The Supreme Brahman is both embodied and not
embodied. Contemplation is (the constant) thought about that
1. These are the eight miraculoiu powers such as afmd (becoming
minute as an atom) etc.

(lord) Hari. (Lord) Hari, the omniscient and supreme should be
known as endowed with parts and without parts.
10b. The benefit of contemplation is the gain of powers
such as anirnd (ability to become minute like an atom) and the
like (as well as) emancipation.
1 1 -1 2a. (Lord) V i^ijiu associates (us) with the fruit and hence
one should contemplate the Supreme Lord. One should always
think of the lord while moving, standing, sleeping, waking,
opening and closing the eyes, whether one is clean or not clean.
12b- 14a. After having established (lord) Kesava (Vi§nu) in
the mind residing inside the body one should worship Him as
seated on the pedestal of one’s lotus-like heart, by means of the
(union) of contemplation. This sacrifice (in the form) of
contemplation is supreme, pure and is dev<ud of all defects. By
worslii])ping thus one gets released (from bondage of existence)
and not by external cleanliness and sacrificial rites.
14b. (Because contemplation) is free from the defect of
violence, it is the means of purifying the mind.
IS-lfia. Hence the sacrifice in the form of contemplation is
the highest as it yields final beatitude. Hence after having dis¬
carded the temporal impure external means such as the sacrifi¬
cial rite etc., one should intensively practice
16b- 17. First of all one should contemplate in the heart the
three qualities, unmanifest, free from any modification and
endowed with the objects of enjoyment and (the feeling of)
pleasure after having covered (the quality) tamas by means of
rajas and then rajas by means of saltva.
18- 19a. Then one should first contemplate the three spheres
such as black, red and white in order. The Supreme Soul, the
twenty fifth principle, that is beyond the limiting adjunct of
sattoa (quality), should be contemplated. After having discarded
the impure thing, pure thing should be thought of.
19b-21. A glorious divine lotus exists above the Supreme
Being. It measures twelve inches wide. It is pure, blossomed
and white. Its stalk is eight finger-breadths (long) . It bad its
origin from the bulbous root of the navel. The eight petals
of the lotus should be known as the eight qualities such as
a^imd. Its pericarp, filament and stalk are knowlec^e and
detachmCht.

Agni Purd^a
22. Its root is the dharma (characteristic) of (lord) Vi$nu.
Such a lotus should be meditated upon. Its characteristic,
namely, knowledge and detachment, is wholly composed of the
foremost glory of (lord) Siva.
23*24a. After having known the lotus posture completely,
one would have the end of all miseries. One should meditate on
the lord (in the form of) the syllable Orh, that is spotless, of the
size of a thumb and of the form of the wick of a pure lamp.
24b-25a. Otherwise one should contemplate (the lord) as
resembling the form of an asterism, as having the form of a
cluster oTkadamba (flowers) and illumined by a cluster of rays.
25b-26a. One should contemplate and repeat the syllable
Orh that is supreme, undecaying (symbolizing) the lord, the
principal entity, that transcends the purusa and dwells in the
lotus (of the heart) .
26b-28. (Yogins) want to contemplate on gross things first
for making the mind firm. One would be able to get steadiness
in (contemplating on) minute things also after gaining firmness
(in the above) . A stalk ten finger-breadths long is at the root of
the navel. A lotus of twelve finger-breadths and having eight
petals (is supported) by the stalk. Orbs of sun, moon and fire
(are situated) in the pericarp and the filament.
29-32a. (Lord) Visnu having four arms bearing conch, disc,
mace and lotus and stationed at the centre of an orb of fire, or
(lord) Hari having eight arms bearing a bow, rosary, bracelet,
noose and goad etc., and of a golden complexion, white com¬
plexion, wearing the Irivatsa^ (mark on the chest), the kaustubha
(gem), a garland of wild flowers and a gold necklace, and shining
with ear-ring (in the shape) of a fish (should be contempleted) .
(He should also be imagined) as wearing a sparkling gem
(studded) crown and silk robes and endowed with all kinds of
ornaments. Otherwise (one may contemplate a form) of the size
of twelve finger-breadths as one would like.
32b. (One should also repeat the formula) **I am Brahman,
light, soul, Vasudeva (name of Vis^u, as manifested in the
form of Kr$9a), the liberated, Orh".
1. The curling hair on the chest.

33. When one has become tired of contemplation, one may
repeat the formula. When one has got tired of repetition one
may meditate. (Lord) Vif^u gets pleased quickly with a person
engs^ed in the repetition (of a formula), contemplation and the
like.
34. The merits of (performing) sacrificial rites are not
worth even a sixteenth part of the merits of the rites of repeat¬
ing (a formula) . Diseases, calamities and (evil influences of)
planets do not approach a person repeating (a formula). One
would get the benefit of devotion, liberation and conquest over
death by means of the repetition of a formula.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYFIVE
Fixing^up of the mind in the object of contemplation
Fire-god said :
1 . Dhdrand is the fixing-up of the mind firmly on (the object)
to be meditated upon. Like dhyana (contemplation), it is also
twofold according as the object is an embodied or an unembodied form of (lord) Hari.
2. The mind does not get shaken from the object that lies
outside. That period for which the mind remains in a state of
obsorption in a particular place without being distracted (is
known as) dhdrand.
3. is said to be that period for which the mind
remains absorbed (in the contemplation) of god, without de¬
viating from its object.
4. Dharand has a duration of twtXvt yama^-s. Twelve dhdrand
-5 (are equal to) dhydna. It is said to be samddhi which consists of
twelve (such) dhydna-s.
5. If a person practisting dhdrand discards his life, he attains
supreme position in the heaven after elevating twenty-one (genera¬
tions of his) family.
1. OqBJ’dfiia u equal to three hours.

Agni Purdifa
6. When a particular part of the body of Ayagin gets affected
by disease, (the yogin) should fix up the mind on that particular
part as though pervaded by the mind.
7<*10, {Dh&rai)d is fourfold namely) dgmyi^ vdruniy aiidni and
amftdlmikd (respectively) belonging to Agni, Varu^a and I^na
and (the fourth) of the nature of ambrosia. O Foremost among
the twice-born ! (In the agncyl), the iikhd (formula of the tuft)
of (lord) Vi^nu ending with pha^ should be repeated. The glorious
tip of the spear that is cleaved by the ndii-^ (arteries) should be
pierced with that. O Great sage ! The votary should think of all
those from the big toe to the skull as surrounded by orbs of rays
spread across lower and upper parts (of the body) by excessive
lustre. One’s own body that has been (conceived mentally as)
burnt to ashes should be withdrawn into one’s self. O Twiceborn ! The cold, phlegm etc. and sin get destroyed thereby.
11- 15a. (The varva^i dhara^d is explained now). One should
think of the head, neck, (?) and (?) (as existing) in
the face bent downwards. Then after conceiving the mind
as unbroken and concentrated, the entire earth should be thought
as being filled with showers of snow produced by glittering spray.
(The mind) should be brought down from ^ftBrahmarandhra^ to
the Milladlidra^ through the path of su§umndP by means of shak¬
ing and as remaining in the orb of the full moon should be
flooded with nectar-like water (produced) by contact with snow.
A votary who is afflicted by sufferings such as himger, thirst and
the like should bear this vdrurti{dhdraf}d) vigilantly for the sake of
pleasure.
15b-20. I have described to you the vdruni dhdrairUl. Listen to
me ! (I shall now describe) the aiidni dhdrar^d. One should con¬
template the grace ^of (lord) Vi$nu, after having nullified
the (airs) prd^a and apdna* in the lotus, that is verily Brahman,
in the sky, until one’s thoughts cease. Then one has to repeat the
great truth. The lord (should also be contemplated) as pervading
1. An aperture in the crown of the head through which the soul is said
to escape after the death of a person.
2. A mystical drcle above the organs of generation.
3. One of the arteries in the human body.
4. The printed text wrongly reads

everything, as half moon, supreme, tranquil, without any sem¬
blance and unstained. Until a person knows one's real form
through the words of his preceptor the entire unreal world
(movable and immovable) appears as real. When that
Supreme Principle is realised all the entities from the world to
the brahmarit the knower, the means of knowledge and the things
to be known, the shaking of the lotus in the heart by means of
contemplation, repetition, offering oblation, worship etc. and
everything, (would appear) like the sweet cakes given by the
mother. (The whole thing) may also be done with the formula
of (lord) Vi^hu. I shall describe to you the amrta-dhdranS
(now) .
21-22. {In the amfta’dhSrand the votary) should contemp¬
late a lotus resembling the full moon held in the clenched hand of
the votary. (Then the votary) should contemplate with effort a
region of the full-moon having the spendour of a lakh moons
filled with the waves (of bliss) of (lord) Siva as situated on the
head. (Then he should think of the same as filling) in the lotus
of the heart. (Then the votary) should think of his body at its
centre. The votary would become free from distress by means
of the dhdrand-s and the like.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX
Deep meditation {samadhi)
Fire-god said :
1 . The deep meditation is said to be that contemplation in
which the consciousness alone appearing in its spiritual aspect,
remains like the ocean of coagulated milk made immobile and
ceases to be operative.
2. Ayogin is said to be in deep meditation if he remains
steady in contemplation with the mind deeply absorbed, like
fire (kept) in a windless (place).
3-4. He does not hear or smell or see or spit out. More¬
over, he does not feel the touch. His mind docs not make any

Agni Purd^
resolve. He does not think and remains like a log of wood with¬
out knowing anything. A person who is absorbed in the lord
thus is stated to be in deep meditation.
5-10. Just as a lamp remaining in a windless (place) does
not shake, this is said to be similar. For a yogin who is in deep
meditation, contemplating himself as (lord) Vi$t?iu, divine
portents occur indicating success. The essential ingredient of
the ear gets fallen. There would be pain in the teeth and the
limbs. The celestials beseech thsit yogin with divine pleasures.
The kings (approach) him with gift of land. The rich offer
wealth. The Vedas and all other idslras become manifest them¬
selves. He gains mastery over the metres as well as poetry in
abundance. Excellent medical recipes, medicinal herbs and all
sculpture and other arts become known to him. The virgins of
the world of Indra and qualities such as imagination (also
come to him) . (Lord) Vi;9U gets pleased with one who dis¬
cards these as grass.
11 -12a. (Such a yogin) endowed with the wealth of
powers such as atfimd (becoming subtle like an atom) etc.,
after having imparted knowledge to the pupil and after having
enjoyed the pleasures as much as desired and after having dis¬
carded the body, should abide in his self that is of the form of
knowledge, bliss and Brahman.
12b- 13. Just as a dirty mirror is not capable of knowing
the self (i.e., the reflection of the self) , so also the soul experi¬
ences pain in the body because it is connected with all (things).
A person united with^o^;z does not experience the pain of all.
14. Just as the single JWa (space) becomes distinct in the
pot etc., so also the single soul (remains) in many as the Sun
(is reflected) in the reservoirs.
15. The Brahman, sky (ether), air, lustre, water and
earth, the materials on earth, these worlds, this soul and the
movable and immovable (objects) have all (come) from Him.
16- 18a. Just as a potter (makes) a pot by the conjunction
of clay, rod and the wheel and just as a person building a
house makes a house with grass, earth and wood, so ako the
soul creates itself (its body) in different wombs making use
of the materials (five elements) and combining them. (The

soul) gets fettered by its (past) deeds, faults and ignorance by
its own will.
18b-21. The (individual) soul is released (from bondage)
by means ofknowledge. does not fall sick because of his
virtue. Just as a lamp is maintained (to burn) by the combi¬
nation of the wick, base and oil, (so) (the body) also under¬
goes changes. The life goes away premature. Like a lamp the
soul that is inside the heart, has many rays — white, black,
tawny, blue, red, yellow and brown. A person who remains
(firm) above all these, pierces the region of the Sun, crosses
the world of Brahma and attains the highest state.
22-23. One reaches the abodes of the celestials by means
of the other hundred rays which are situated above. Those
rays of different forms which are below have soft lustre. He
moves around here by means of them for enjoying (the fruits)
of (his past) deeds.
24-25. All the organs of sense, mind, organs of action, ego,
the earth etc. (are known as) tlie k$etra (‘field') . The unmanifest
soul is said to be the knower of the kfetra. The lord who is in all
the beings is existent, non-existent, as well as both existent and
non-existent.
26-27a. The intellect has its origin from the unmanifest.
Then the ego and the (five elements) sky etc. come into being.
They have twenty-one qualities. Sound, touch, colour, taste
and smell are their characteristics.
27b-28. That (quality) which rests on a particular thing
gets absorbed in that particular thing. Sattva, rajas and tamos
are also stated to be its qualities. He wanders like a wheel
being possessed by rajas and tamos.
29. The one who is without a beginning and the first is
(said to be) the Supreme Being. That which is knowable by
means (cf knowledge) and the senses is said to be a modification
(of that self) .
30. The Vtda-Sf PurdM-s, learning, Upanifod^s, verses,
aphorisms, expositions and all other words are from Him.
31. Those who perform the agnihotra^ rite for progeny.
1, A short rite invoking Fire-god.

pass through the path of the manes, the upavithi and that of
(sage) Agastya towards the heaven.
32>35a. Those who are given to charity and are endowed
with eight qualities, the eighty-eight thousand sages, who
kindle the household fire are born again as the upholders of
virtue. They reach the celestial world by the path of the
seven sages and the serpents. Only so many sages devoid of
all beginnings remain in each one of the places endowed with
penance, celibacy, discarding association and learning till all
the beings get destroyed.
35b-36a. The study of the Veda-s^ sacrificial rites, celebacy,
penance, restraint, earnestness, fasting and truth are the causes
for (gaining) knowledge of the soul.
3t>b-40a. All those who adhere to truth have to practise
profound meditation in this way only. It should be seen,
thought about and heard by the twice-born. Those twice-borns
who ihus find (the truth) by resorting to the forest and medi¬
tation and are endowed with truth and extreme earnestness,
will become united with pure white lustre in course of time.
Then those people reach the celestial world, the Sun, lightning
(and attain) the world of Brahma. They are not reborn here.
40b-42a. Those men, who gain heaven by means of sacri¬
ficial rites, penance and gifts, reach the world of manes, the
moon, the sky, air, water and earth through smoke, night,
dark fortnight and the dakfindyana (the period when the Sun
moves towards the south ) . They are again born here and again
return.
42b-44. Those who do not know the two courses of the
soul would become a serpent or a cricket, or a wcMrm or an
insect. The individual soul would become immortal by contemp¬
lating the Brahman resembling a lamp in the heart. Even a
householder who accepts wealth acquired in the right way,
remaining steady in knowledge about the truth, getting de¬
lighted in ('seeing) guests, who performs ancestral rites and
speaks truth, would get release (from bondage) .

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSEVEN
Knowledge of Brahman
Fire-god said :
1. I shall describe the knowledge about Brahman for the
sake of getting released from the ignorance of mundane exist¬
ence. A person gets released (by constantly thinking), this
soul, is verily the Supreme Brahman."
2. The body is not the soul because that is perceived like
a pot etc. It is known certainly while sleeping and at the time
of death that the soul is different from the body.
3. If the body is the soul it should behave like one which
does not undergo any change etc. The organs such as the eye
and the like are only instruments (of knowledge) and hence are
not the soul.
4. The mind and the intellect also are not the soul. They
are only instruments like a lamp (for supplying light) . The lifebreath is also not the soul as (no ?) consciousness manifests
during deep sleep.
5-6a. The consciousness is not experienced during waking
and dreaming (states) because it is mixed up. Since the lifebreath devoid of consciousness is known during deep sleep, the
soul is not the same as the organs which belong to the soul (as
instruments) (and so are not identical with it) .
6b-7. The ego is also not the soul because of its non¬
constancy like the body. This soul which is distinct from the
above-mentioned categories remains in the heart of all (beings).
(The self) is the seer and enjoyer of all things like a glowing
lamp in the night.
8- 10a. A sage should contemplate thus at the time of
commencing deep meditation : Sky ( came) from Brahman,
air from sky, fire from air, water from fire, earth from water
and the subtle body from that (earth). The quintuplated
forms of the five elements came from the free forms of the five
elements. After having meditated upon the gross body, one
should think of getting absorbed in Brahman.
1 Ob-1 3. The elements have been quintuplated and the
Vira( (the first creation of Brahman) is known to be their

Agni Purgifa
effect. This gross body is the product of the ignorance of the
soul. Wise men know knowledge through the senses as the wak¬
ing state. The world has attachment for it. These three are not
creation. The effect of the elements which are not quintuplated
is said to be the The union of the seventeen (categories)
is known as the 'golden egg.* The body is stated to be the
subtle mark of the soul.
H. Dream is the recollection of experience occurring in
the waking state. The soul also would resemble it. (The soul
that has not been fettered) with the universe (is known as)
taijasa.
1 5. There is one single cause of the two known as the
gross and subtle body. The soul, that is knowledge and possess¬
ing lustre, is said to be inferred from that.
16-17. It is not (existence) , not asat (non-existence),
not sadasat (existence as well as non-existence) . It is neither
composed of components, nor devoid of components. It is
neither separated, nor not separated. It is both separated and
not separated. It is inexplicable and is the creater of bondage
and mundane existence. That single Brahman (is obtained) by
means of knowledge and is never obtained by means of actions.
18. (The means of the knowledge of the soul) by all means
is to control the senses which are the cause of the bondage of
the soul. The place of the intellect is deep sleep. It affects the
two.
19. This wise soul is known to be the prar^ava composed of
the three syllables. The syllables a,u and m combined (is the
pranava) .
20. It is the witness of all things as 'I*. It is of the form of
consciousness alone in the waking, dreaming and other states.
Ignorance and bondage in mundane existence etc. are not its
work.
21. It is eternal, pure, free from bondage, truth, bliss and
without a second. I am Brahman. I am Brahman. 1 am the
supreme splendour and the ever free Orh,
22. I am Brahman, the supreme knowledge — this con¬
templation destroys the bondage. Brahman is eternal, bliss,
truth, knowledge and endless.

23. This soul is the Supreme Brahman. **You are that
Brahman.** This individual soul is instructed by the preceptor,
(to identify' himself with Brahman) as am Brahman.*'
24. That Brahman is the Sun. I am that partless being.
Oih. The knower of Brahman gets freedom from the worthless
mundane existence. He would become Brahman.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYEIGHT
Knowledge of Brahman
Fire-god said :
1. lam Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of earth,
water and fire. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of
wind and sky.
2. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the
primary undertaking. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light bereft
of the first creation and the soul.
3. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of wak*
ing place. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of the
feeling of imiversality.
4. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the
syllable *a\ I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of
speech, hands and feet.
5. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of anus and
penis. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of ears, skin
and eyes.
6. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of taste
and form. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of all
smells.
7. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light without tongue and
nose. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of touch
and sound.
8. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of mind
and intellect. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of
consciousness and ego.

Agtti Pttrdffa
9. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence free from (the
vital winds) and apdna (in the body). I am Brahman, the
Supreme Lustre bereft of (the vital winds) vydna and uddna (in
the body).
10. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of (the
vital wind) tamdna (in the body) . I am Brahman, the Supreme
Effulgence devoid of old age and death.
11. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence bereft of grief
and ignorance. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light free from
htmger and thirst.
12. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of all
modifications of sound. I am Brahman, the Supreme Efful¬
gence bereft of the golden egg.
13. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the
dreaming state. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid
of luminosity etc.
14. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light free from harm etc.
I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of knowledge relat¬
ing to an assembly.
15. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre bereft of infer¬
ence. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid of the qualities
such assattva (goodness) and the like.
16. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of the
feeling of and asat (existence and non-existence). I am
Brahman, the Supreme Light, bereft of all components.
17. I am Brahman, the Supreme Lustre devoid of differ¬
ence and non-difference. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light
devoid of the location of deep sleep.
18. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence free from the
feeling of being learned. I am Brahman, the Supreme Light
free firom the syllables such as *ma*.
19. lam Brahman, the Supreme Lustre free from the
means and objects knowledge. I am Brahman, the Supreme
Light free from knowledge and knower.
20. I am Brahman, the Supreme Effulgence devoid of
being a witness etc. 1 am Brahman, the Supreme Light devoid
of effect and cause.
21. 1 am Brahman devoid of body, organs, mind, intellect.

life-breath and ego. I am Brahman, the fourth state that is free
from (the states of) waking, dreaming and deep sleep.
22. (I am) eternal, pure, wise and free, truth, bliss and
without a second. I am Brahman. (I am) Brahman endowed with
knowledge and absolutely free. OiA. I am Brahman, the Supreme
Effulgence, deep meditation and the supreme being that confers
emancipation.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTYNINE
Knowledge of Brahman again
Fire-god said :
1. (The votary) reaches the r^on of the gods by (per¬
forming) sacrificial rites and the region of Virdt by (doing)
penance. By renouncing actions (one would gain the place) of
Brahmi. By detachment (one would get) absorbed in nature.
2. Liberation is got by pneans of knowledge. These are
known to be the five courses. Detachment is turning away from
the feelings of happiness, torment, grief etc.
3. Renunciation is giving up all actions already performed
together with those yet to be performed. (By such means) one
would get free from the difference of change beginning with the
immanifest and ending with discrimination.
4. Knowledge is said to arise from knowing (the soul) as
different firom the animate and inanimate things. The Supreme
Soul, the Supreme Lord is the sustainer of all things.
5. He is glorified in the Vedas and the philosophical trea¬
tises by the name of (lord) Vi^pu. That lord of the sacrificial
rites (known as) TajfLapurufa is worshipped by those who are
engaged in that.
6. That embodiment of knowledge is perceived by those
who have abstained from (doing actions) by means of associa¬
tion with knowledge. That Supreme Being (is referred to) as
speech (consisting of the sounds) short, long and protracted
etc. -

Agni Purd^
7. O Great sage ! The action that is the means of attaining
Him is said to be knowledge. The knowledge is said to be two¬
fold : that which is explained in the Agama^^s and (that which is
obtained) from discrimination.
8. The Sabdabrahman (Brahman composed of sound ) is an
embodiment of the Agama^s and the Supreme Brahman is the
knowledge arising from discrimination. One should know the
two Brahmans — the Sabdabrahman and the Supreme Brahman.
9. Learning in the form of the and the like (is known
as) aparam ( not the supreme) . The imperishable Brahman is the
supreme (learning). This (Brahman) is denoted by the term
^'BhagavdrC* (prosperous) in service, worship and other acts. (The
letters of the word mean as follows :)
10. The syllable ^bha* has two senses — bhartd (protector) and
sainbhartll{onc who collects or hoards). O Great sage ! The letter
*ga' (means) the leader, the conveyor and the creator.
11. The word (which is the combination of the
letters and ^a) means the six: the entire wealth, valour,
fame, fortune, knowledge and detachment.
12. All the things exist in (lord) Vi^nu. That Supreme
Spirit is threefold. In the same way (the word) Bhagavdn (is
used) in the case of (lord) Hari and elsewhere as a courtesy.
13. He knows the creation, destruction, the coming and
going of the beings, true knowledge and nescience and hence is
designated ^Bhagavdn'.
14. The term connotes knowledge, power, sup¬
reme opulence, strength and splendour in entirety without the
bad qualities fit to be avoided.
15- 16a. In olden time, Khan^ikya Kelidhvaja imparted to
(King) Janaka*, xhtyoga (as follows) : The seed of the origin
through ignorance is twofold .* the notion of self in things
which are not the self and the notion that self and body are
identical.
16b-20. The soul enshrined in the body made of five
1. The sacred texts explaining the nature of Siva or Vi$Qu and the
ateethods of worshipping them.
2. The famous king of Mithil&; known for his knowledge; became an
anchorite in later days.

elements and engulfed in illusion and darkness entertains the
bad thought am this*. In the same way a person (entertains
the thought) in the sons, grandsons etc. and their progeny. The
learned (entertain) similar notion with respect to the physical
bodies of others. A man does work for the welfare of all the bodies
(men). But a person (begins to think) that those bodies are
different; it becomes a cause for the bondage. This spotless soul
is verily of the form of liberation and knowledge. Impiety of the
form of painful experience belongs to the prakrti and not to the
soul. Just as water cannot be united with Are and a union is
brought about by means of the intervening vessel, (pain and
illusion though they do not belong to the soul, appear as though
associated with the soul) .
21. O Great sage ! The sounds such as etc. (are said
to be) the result of its action. In the same way, the soul unit¬
ing with prakrti^ is endowed with the feeling of the self.
22. (The self seems) to enjoy all the bodily attributes. But
it is different from them and it is without any modification. The
contact (of the mind) with the things is for bondage and one
should withdraw his mind from the things of the senses.
23. After having withdrawn it from the things, one should
think of (lord) Hari, the one identical with Brahman. O Sage !
It leads a person meditating on Brahman to gain the state of
Brahman.
24-25a. After due thought (one should strive) by means of
one’s own effort. (The attraction of Brahman) would be
like the magnet (drawing) the iron. It is said to be^o^a which
is the union of the distinct mental path with Brahman depen¬
dent on one’s effort.
25b-27a. (The mind) steady in a stale of deep meditation,
attains the Supreme Brahman. By means of self-control, by
withholding the senses from the objects, conquering the winds
by doing retention of breath, regulation of breath and subjugat¬
ing the senses by means of withdrawal of breath, one should
make the mind steady in the auspicious repose.
27b-2d. Brahman, that is to be resorted to by the
mind, is twofold, namely, embodied and not embodied. (The
sages) Sanandana and others were endowed with the thought of

1062 Agm Pwtibfa
being Brahman, while the gods and other created beings
(gained elevation) by means of action.
29-32. In the case of the golden egg etc., it is twofold such
as due to knowledge and action. The mental activity is said
to be threefold. The whole universe is contemplated as
Brahman. That knowledge which is of the form of pure ex¬
istence, beyond the reach of expression, that which docs not
possess the sense of being diflRsrent and which could be known
by the soul is designated as Brahman. That is the Supreme Form
of (lord) Vifpu, devoid of form, unborn and indestructible. It
is difficult to contemplate at first (the formless). Hence one has
to meditate on the embodied form ( at first) . Such a person
would become indistinct from the Supreme Soul by attaining the
state of absence of the attitude of possession. (The feeling of)
his difference would be due to his ignorance.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
Knowledge of non~dual Brahman
Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall impart the knowledge of the non-dual Brahman
which was expounded by Bharata. He (Bharata) performed
penance at Salagrama (name of a place) worshipping Vasudeva
(Kffpa, a manifestation of Vi9nu) etc. Because of the company
of a deer, (the sage) thinking of the deer at the end of his life,
became a deer (in the next birth) . But because he carried the
memories of his past birth even after being bom as a deer, (he)
discarded his life by means oiyoga and regained his self. Having
attained identity with the non-dual Brahman, he wandered in
the world like an inert thing. An attendant of king Sauvira
advised (him) to serve (the king) for wages and led him to the
camp. Being prompted by the words of the servant, the wiseman accepted to serve and carried the palanquin in order to
destroy (the past deed) of the self. While others (carrying the

palanquin) moved fast, he was lagging behind. Seeing the others
moving fast and himself (moving) slow the king said to him :
The king said :
6. Are you tired ? you have borne my palanquin only for
a short distance. You seem to be stout. Are you not able to
stand the fatigue ?
The brahmin said :
7. I am not stout. I have not borne your palanquin. I am
neither tired nor fatigued. O King ! You are a person to be
borne.
8-10. The pair of feet rest on the earth, the two shanks on
the pair of feet, the two thighs on the pair of shanks, which in
turn are the support for the belly. Then the region of the chest, the
two arms and the pair of shoulders are resting on the belly. This
palanquin is on the shoulder. What has the feeling of ‘mine* done
here. This body remaining on the palanquin is beheld as your¬
self. There (the terms) ‘you* and T’ (are worldly conventions).
This may be described in another way.
11-14. O King ! I, you and others are being borne by the
elements. This conglomeration of gui^as (Equalities’) fallen in
the stream of g^oas goes on. O Ruler of earth ! These 'qualities*
of goodness etc. are bound by the (past) deeds. The kamui (past
deed) is acquired by ignorance in all the creations without any
exception. The soul is pure, imperishable, calm, devoid of g^r^
and superior to parkrti. Among all the creations, this alone does
not have growth or decay. O King ! Just as it does not have
growth, so it does not also have decay. Hence how is it that you
have said 'you are stout* 1
15-18. This palanquin is resting on the earth, shank, feet,
hip, thigh and belly etc. and similarly on the shoulder. Hence
(my) feeling is same as yours* O King ! By means of bearing
the palanquin (I have become similar) to the other beings.
Whether originated from a mountain, other materials or a house
or originated firom the earth, as the purufo (soul) is different
from the physical causes. How can there be a big burden to be
borne by me? O King ! With what material the palanquin has
been iqgde, the other worldly things have been made with the

1064 Agni Purd^
same material. In this respect, yourself, myself and all others
have been made similar.
1 9. After having heard these words, the king held his feet,
beseeched him to forgive (and said) : **Be pleased. Lay off this
palanquin and speak to me who is listening to you. Who are
you? For what reason have you come here ?”
The brahmin said ;
20-21. Listen to me. It is not at all possible to tell you
who I am. Everywhere the act of coming is for the sake of
enjoying (the fruits of past deeds). Every being reaches a place
etc. to enjoy the pleasure or pain arising from (the past) pious
or impious (deeds) resting on place etc.
The king said :
22. O Brahmin ! How is it not possible to say that I am
that person who is here. O Twice-born ! It is not wrong (to
apply) this word *1’ to mean the self.
The brahmin said'.
23-28. It is not wrong to use the word ‘I* to denote
the self. But it is fallacious to think and say that a thing
that is not the self is the self. When there is a single soul
enshrined in all the bodies, it is meaningless to ask who you
are and who I am. O King ! You, this palanquin, these palanquin
bearers going in front, and this world of yours are not said to
be existence. Wood (the material for making the palanquin) is
got from a tree. O King ! Is this palanquin on which you are
placed designated as a tree or as wood ? A sensible man does not
say that the great king is seated on a tree. So also (seeing) you
on a log of wood, all do not say that you are on a palanquin.
( In reality) the palanquin is a combination of wood in a parti¬
cular design. O Excellent king ! Look at the palanquin in its
distinctive feature.
29. A man, a woman, cow, horse, elephant, bird, tree should
be known as worldly convention to denote the bodies due to the
^ect of (the past) deeds.
30. O King 1 the tongue, teeth, lips and palate say *1*.

They are not *1* because all these are means of making an
utterance.
31 . For what reasons does speech itself says ‘1* ? Even then
it is false and not proper to say speech is not I.
32. O King ! because (limbs such as) the head, anus etc.
of men are different from the body, how can I denote them as ‘I* ?
33. O Excellent king ! Only if something different from
me exists, it is possible to say *This is I and that is another*.
34. In fact, there is no difference such as immobile, animal,
tree and different bodies etc. These are all the effects of past
deeds.
35. O King ! A person (designated) as a king and those
(designated) as the soldiers of the king, that and other appella¬
tions are not real.
36. You are a king to the world, a son to (your) father, a
foe to an enemy, husband to (your) wife, father of a son. O
King ! How shall 1 call you?
37. O Lord of the earth ! Are you this head? Do not the
head and belly belong to you? Are not the feet etc. yourself? Or
do they not belong to you?
38. You are different from all the constituent parts. O
King! Think seriously as to who you are.
After having heard that, the king said to that anchorite
brahmin (who was a manifestation of lord) Hari (as follows):
The king said:
39. O Twice-born ! Once I endeavoured to ask sage Kapila
(to explain to me) what was beneficial (to a man). You are a
part of that sage Kapila. You are giver of knowledge on earth
for my sake. (Release) the wave of knowledge from the ocean (of
knowledge) . Impart to me whatever is beneficial to me.
The brahmin said :
40-44. You are again asking (me) what is beneficial. You
are not asking about the reality. O King ! All those things which
are beneficial are unreal. After having propitiated the gods,
(men) desire for abundant wealth, desire for sons and for king-
(ju>m. O King ! What is the benefit? The wise (hold) that the
commu^on with the Supreme Being is the only good. Acts such

Agni Furd^
as the (performance of) sacrificial rites (would not confer this
union) . One would not get wealth (by such union) . The union
of the self with the Supreme Being is said to be the foremost
thing. The ( Supreme) Soul, which is one, is all-pervading, even,
pure, without characteristics, superior to nature, devoid of birth,
grourth etc., omnipresent and undecaying. It is wholly of the
form of supreme knowledge and that lord is not associated with
qualities, kinds etc.
45-47. O King ! Listen to me ! I shall describe to you the
dialogue between Nidagha and ^tu^. ^tu was the son of Brahma
and was a wiseman. Nidagha, the son of Pulastya, was his disci¬
ple. After gaining knowledge from him, (Nidagha) came to the
city and was living there. Once ]^tu, while walking along the
banks of (river) Devika, thought of him. After one thousand
celestial years had passed, (9>tu) had gone to see Nid&gha.
After doing Vai^vadeva* (worship) Nidkgha took food and asked
him *'You have eaten. Have you been satisfied? Is that satisfac¬
tion eternal?**
said:
48-55. O Brahmin ! A person feeling hungry would get
satisfied after eating food. I had no hunger. Why do you ask
me about getting satisfied? O Twice-born ! Hunger and thirst
are said to be the properties of the body and hence do not be¬
long to me. Because you have asked me I shall say that I am
always satisfied since I am the (Supreme) Spirit, omnipresent
smd all-pervasive like the sky. Hence I am the inner self of all
the beings. How then can I be restricted to this? I neither go,
nor come, nor am confined to a particular place. You are not
different from me, nor am I different from yourself. Just as a
mud house is strengthened by plastering with mud, so also this
body made of earthly (element) (is held fast) by infinitesimal
particles of earthly (materials) . O Twice-bom ! I am ^tu, your
preceptor, come to impart to you wisdom. I have come here and
Ishall go now as soon asyouknow the highest truth. You know
that there is only one and there is no difference in the entire
1. The text consistently rends Btu; probably a mistake for Bbhu.
2. A daily rite to please all gods performed before takii^ food.

universe. (All the things) are the manifestation of the Supreme
Being known as V&sudeva (name of Krft^a, manifestation of
Viwu).
^tu went again to that city after one thousand years. He
said to Nidagha staying at a lonely place on the outskirts of
the city, **Why do you stay at a lonely place?
Nid&gha said:
56. O Brahmin 1 There is a strong rumour that the king
would go round (the city) to see the beauty of the city. Hence
I am staying here.
^tu said:
57-60. Who is a king here and who are the other subjects?
O Excellent Twice-bom ! Tell me this. You are conversant
(with these) ! O Foremost among twice-boms !”
(Nidagha said) : **He is the king who rides that elephant in
rut rising from the peak of the mountain and others are
(those) moving around him. O Brahman ! That which is under
is the elephant and one who is above is the king.** l^tu asked
(again) : **Who is the elephant and who is the king?**
Nid^ha said (the same thing again) . B>tu made Nidigha
to lie crawling on fours and rode him (and said) , am above
like the king and you are below like the elephant."
61-62. B>tu said to Nidagha, "How shall I name you then?**
Being told thus Nidagha prostrated and said, "You are certainly
my preceptor. My mind has not been (made free from the dualistic bias by anyone else**. B-tu said to Nidagha, "1 had come
here to impart to (you) knowledge relating to Brahman. 1 have
shown to you the highest truth, verily the essence, that is one
without a second.**
The Brahmin said :
63-65. NidSgha also became converted to non-dualism by
the counsel (of Btu) . He then perceived all beings without any
difference in his own self. He attained liberation by means of
knowledge. You will also similarly obtain liberation. You and
1 and all other beingsare (lord) Vip^u from whom all has come.
Just as the single sky is percdved variedly as yellow, blue etc..

1068 Agni Pwrit^a
80 also the single soul (is perceived) as separate on account of
erroneous perception.
Fire-god said:
66. The king gained liberation by means of the knowledge
imparted by Bharata. Contemplate that the knowledge of
Brahman is the enemy of the tree of ignorance of mundane
existence.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYONE
The essence of the Bhagavadgltd
Fire-god said:
1 . 1 shall describe the essence of the (Bhagavad) gitd, that is
foremost among all the gitd-s and which Kr$na imparted to
Arjuna in olden days and which yields enjoyment and emancipa¬
tion.
The Laid said :
2. One should not feel grief-stricken by the thought that the
life is extinct or not extinct. Thejsoul within the body is birthless.
The soul neither gets old nor dies. It cannot be differentiated.
Hence one should discard (the feeling of) grief etc.
3-5a. Brooding on the objects (of senses) , man gets attach¬
ment for them. From attachment (arises) desire, then (comes)
anger and delusion (proceeds) from anger. Confused memory
(arises) from delusion and one gets ruined on account of the
confusion. Association with bad elements is destroyed by means
of association with good elements. The desire for gaining libera¬
tion destroys the desire (to enjoy pleasures) . By discarding
desire one gets firm on his own self. He is said to be a man of
steady wisdom.
5b-7a. That which is night to all beings, in that the disci¬
plined man wakes; that in which all beings wake, is night to
the sage cognizing (the soul) . There is nothing to be done by

him who feels happy in his (own) soul. For him thereis no object
to acquire by doing (an action) ; nor is there any ( loss) by not
doing (an action) .
7b.8a. O Mighty-armed ! The knower of the truth relating
to the nature of gw^as and action knows that gu^s (as senses)
merely abide with the gunas (as objects) and does not get
entangled.
8b-9a. By the raft in the form of knowledge one goes beyond
all pain. O Arjuna ! The fire of knowledge burns all the deeds
to ashes.
9b- 10a. One who dedicates his deeds to Brahman discarding
all attachment, is not stained by sins just as a lotus by water.
10b.l2a. A person united to yoga would perceive himself
in others and others in his self and would view all as equal. A
person fallen from would be born in the house of prosperous
and pious persons. O Son ! A person doing auspicious things
does not suffer.
12b- 13a. Verily this divine illusion of mine, consisting of
the qulities, is difficult to surmount. Only those who resort to
me cross over this illusion.
13b- 14a. O Foremost among the Bharatas ! Four types of
men worship, namely, a man in distress, a man seeking knowledge,
a man seeking wealth and a man imbued with wisdom. (Among
them) the wiseman (is) ever steadfast.
14b-l8. The imperishable is the Supreme Brahman. Its
dwelling in the individual body is said to be adhyatman. The
offering which causes the origin of beings is called karma. The
perishable nature is adhibhSta. The (the being) is adhi~
daivata. I alone am the adhiyajm here in this body, O Best
among the embodied ! Whoever, at the time of death, remembers
me alone, attains oneness with my state without any doubt. A
man would attain the same state which he thinks of at the end
after discarding the body. Fudng the life*«nergy in the middle
of the eye-brows (a person) reaches me uttering the onensyllabled *Om\ the Brahman, and then discarding the life, (and
knowing that) (the things) beginning with Brahma and ending
with a tuft of grass are all my magnificence.
19. All glorious and noble beings are known to be a part

1070 Agni PurS^
of Myself. One who knows that the universe is a manifestation
of me, gets released.
20. One who knows the body as the field is said to be
kfetrajfia (knower of the field) . The knowledge about the field
and the knower of the field is deemed by Me (lord) as
knowledge.
21-22. The great elements, egoism, intellect, unmanifest
(principle), the ten (organs of) senses, one (mind) and the five
objects of senses, desire, hatred, pleasure, pain, the aggregate,
consciousness and firmness — all these have been described briefly
as the kfttra (field) with its modifications.
23-27. Humility, modesty, non-injury, forbearance, upright¬
ness, serving the preceptor, purity, steadfastness, self-control,
not having desire for the objects of senses, absence of egoism,
cognizing the evil in birth, death, old age, sickness and pain,
non-attachment, non-identification (of the self) with son, wife,
home and the like, constant equanimity towards desirable and
undesirable happenings, exclusive unswerving devotion to
Me (god), resorting to solitary places, distaste for an assembly
of men, constancy in knowledge about self, viewing things in
accordance with the knowledge of truth— these are declared as
knowledge. Ignorance is the opposite of these.
28. I shall describe that which has to be known, by
knowing which one enjoys immortality. The Supreme Brahman
is without a beginning. It is said to be nether existence, nor
non-existence^.
29-31. With hands and feet everywhere, with eyes, heads
and mouths everywhere and with ears everywhere* — (He)
remains enveloping all. Shining by the functions of all the
senses, (He) is without all the senses. (Although) imattached,
(He) is the supporter of all (beings). (Although) devoid of
qualities, (He) is the person experiencing them. He is outside
and within (all) the beings. He is movable as well as immov¬
able. He is incomprehensible because of his subtlety. He is far
and near.
1. Tbe textual reading is wrong. It has been corrected as in fiG XIII.
2, The textual reading has been ccnrected on the basis of ^BG XIIL13.

32-33. He is undivided and yet He seems to be existing in
beings as divided. He should be known as the supporter of
beings. He devours and is mighty (generator). The light of
all lights, He is said to be beyond darkness. (He is) the know¬
ledge, the knowable and the goal of knowledge, remaining in
the hearts of all (the beings) .
34-35. By means of meditation some behold the self in the
self by the self. Others (see the self) by sdhkhya~yoga (deliber¬
ation) and yet others by karma-yoga (action) . Still others, not
knowing thus, worship (Him) as they have heard from others.
They too cross death quickly by their devotion to what they
have heard.
36. Knowledge arises from saltva (goodness) , greed from
rajas and error, delusion and ignorance from tamas.
37. One who simply stands composed (thinking) that the
gtufas exist in him and is not shaken (by them) and remains
equanimous towards respect and insult, friend and foe, (is said
to be) free from gunas.
38. The imperishable aSvattha (holy fig tree) is said to be
having its roots above and branches below. Its leaves are the
Vedas, One who knows it is the knower of the Vedas.
39. There arc two (types of) beings in this world, the
divine and the demoniacal. Non-injury etc.^ and forbearance
belong to one born for a divine state.
40. Neither purity, nor (right) conduct belong to one bom
for a demoniacal state. As anger, greed and sex lead to hell,
one should reject the three.
41-42. Sacrificial rites, penance and charity are known to
be of three varieties due to the (three) qualities, sattoa etc. The
food that augments life, purity, strength, health and pleasure
(is known to be) sdttvika. The food that is pungent and dry
and productive of pain, grief and disease (is) rdjasa. The food
that is impure, rejected, putrid and tasteless ( is said to be)
tdmasa.
43. The sacrificial rite is said to be sdttvika if it is performed
as laid down without desiring reward. (A sacrifice is) rdjasa.
1. See BG XVI. 2-3 for other characteriitid.

1072 Affii Pufibg^
if it is (done) for the sake of gaming a fruit. If it is for vanity
it is tdmasa.
41. Physical penance is said to be that which is accom¬
panied by faith, sacred formula and the like. Worship of
the gods etc. and non-injury etc. are said to be verbal
penance.
45. A speech that does not cause excitement, truthfulness,
practice of the study of the scriptures of one’s own school and
sacred repetition (are said to be austerity of speech) . Mental
(austerity) consists of purity of disposition, silence and selfcontroP.
46-47. The sSttvik austerity (is done) with no desire (for
any fruit), the rSjasa, with the intention of gaining an object
and the tamasa for harming others. The sattvika charity is that
which is performed at the right place etc. with a sense of duty.
Rdjasa (charity) is that (performed) with a view to receive in
return. It is said to be tdmasa (when performed) at a wrong
place and insultingly.
48. “Om tat sat {Om^ that and real)*’ has been declared to
be the triple designation of Brahman. Sacrificial rites, charity
and such other deeds confer enjoyment and emancipation to
men.
49. The threefold fruit of action — disagreeable, agreeable
and mixed— accrues after death to a person who does not relin¬
quish (karma) but never to those who renounce.
50-51. The tdmasika action (arises) from an action associated
with delusion, the rdjasa action from pain, fear etc., and the
sdttvika from non-desire. These (following) five are the five causes
of an action — ^the body, the agent, the various instruments such
as the senses, the different* functions of various sorts and the
presiding deity, the fifth.
52-53a. The knowledge that (everything is) one is sdttvika.
The knowledge that it is separate is rdjasa. That which is
contrary to reality is tdmasa. The sdttvika action is without any
1. The text has carelessly abridged BG XVII. 15-16.
2. The printed text wrongly reads trivuthS^ for vividM^t.
Cf.BGXWlllM.

desire. The rdjasa action is with desire. The idmasa (action) is
from ignorance.
53b*54. Asdttvika agent would be equanimous towards
success and failure. A rdjasa (doer) (would be) deceitful. A
tdmasa (doer would be) languid. The understanding at the begin¬
ning of an action is sdttviki. That which is only at the time of
tui action would be rdjasl. The contrary (would be) tdmasi.
55-56a. The firmness of mind (towards pleasure and pain
etc.) would be sdUuikl. The desire (of the mind) for satisfaction
is rdjasi. Grief etc. is tdmasi. There would be pleasure at the
beginning from sattva. The pleasure that comes at the end is
rdjasa. Pain at the beginning and end is tdmasa.
56b-58. All the beings had their origin from that by which
this (universe) has been pervaded. One finds success by wor¬
shipping (lord) Vi$nu by one's action. A person who knows the
world from Brahma to a tuft of grass as (lord) Vi^nu by means of
his action, mind and speech in all the states gains success
always. The devotee of the lord (would) certainly (be) a
bhdgavata.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO
The Tamagitd
Fire-god said*.
1. I shall describe to you the Tamagitd expounded to Naciketas. It would confer enjoyment and emancipation to the
pious desiring emancipation who read and listen to this.
Tama said:
2. Alas! man himself being non-eternal, desires for eternal
seats, beds, vehicles, clothes, houses etc. on account of ignorance.
3. It has been said by (the sage) Kapila (in olden days)
that always having non-atiachment for pleasures and viewing
one's own self (critically) are most excellent for men.
4. (The sage) Paficalikha has said that impartiality to

1074 A^i PurO^
wards all, attitude of non*possession, not being attached (to
worldly pleasures) are most excellent for men.
5. Gahgavi^pu has declared that a true knowledge (of the
miseries) of the stages (of life) beginning with that of embryo
and including birth, childhood and old age etc. is most excel¬
lent for men.
6. Janaka has stated that remedying the pains such as the
ddkydtmika (bodily and mental) and the like from the beginning
to the end is most excellent for men.
7. Brahma holds that the most excellent thing for men is
to perceive the oneness of the Supreme Being appearing as
different (in different beings) .
8. Jaigif avya has said that the highest good lies in dis¬
charging one’s duties as laid down in the Tajur or Sdma{veda)
without attachment and with a sense that they have to be done.
9. Devala is said to hold the view that the most excellent
thing for men would be to abandon all actions for the sake of
the happiness of the self.
10. (Sage) Sanaka has declared that the knowledge (gained)
from renunciation of desires leads one to Brahman, the supreme
place, and that those who entertain desires (do not get) this
knowledge.
11. (Lord)Hari has said that the foremost among the excel¬
lent is to transform the actions done with attachment into those
of non-attachment. This is verily non-action, the Brahman.
12. The elevated person who has gained knowledge does
not become different from Brahman, known as (lord) Vi$tiu,
the supreme and indestructible.
13. A person would gain by (doing) austerities whatever
he mentally desires such as knowledge of Brahman, knowledge
of worldly existence, faith in god, good fortune and a beautiful
form.
14. There is nothing to be contemplated equal to (lord)
Vi9nu. There is no austerity superior to fasting. There is no
fortune equal to health. There is no river equal to the (river)
Gang&.
13-16. There is no kinsman other than (lord) Vi^pu, the
* lord of the universe. A person who meditates on (lord) Hari

as (existing) below, above, in front and in the body, senses,
mind etc. and passes away would become (lord) Hari. That
which is the Brahman, from that all the things (have emanated)
and in that all the things exist.
17. (Lord) Visnu dwells in the hearts of all in the form of
higher and lower, as un-understandable, indefinable and wellestablished.
18. Some (people) invoke that lord Visnu as the lord of
sacrifices. Some (invoke) Him as (lord) Hari, some as (lord)
Kara (l§iva) and some others as Brahma.
19. Some (invoke) Him by the names of Indra etc. and
others as Sun, Moon and as the eternal time. People state that
the whole earth, from Brahma to a tuft of grass, is Vi^nu.
20-2 la. A person who has attained (lord) Visnu, the
Supreme Brahman, never returns (to worldly existence) . A man
may acquire such a state by making great gifts such as gold,
bathing in .iacred waters, meditation, austerities, worship, wealth
and listening to sacred texts.
21b-22. Know the soul as traveller, the body as chariot,
intellect as charioteer and mind as reins. The senses are said to
be horses and the objects the pasture ground for them.
23-24a. People name the soul united with the mind and
senses as the enjoyer. He who is not wise and whose mind is
not always associated (with the soul), does not reach the Su¬
preme Brahman and is bom in the world.
24b-25a. He who is wise and whose mind is united (with the
soul) always, attains the place (of Brahman) and is not bom in
this world again.
25b-26a. A person who has knowledge as the charioteer and
mind as the reins, reaches the end of his journey and (gets) the
highest region of (lord) Vi?nu.
26b-28a. The objects (of senses) are higher than the res¬
pective organs; the mind is higher than the objects; the intellect
is higher than the mind; the self (is higher) than the intellect
and (the principle of) mahat is higher than the self. The un¬
manifest is higher than the mahat. The Purufa (the spirit) is
higher than the unmanifest. There is nothing higher than the
Supreme! Spirit. It is the ultimate end and course.

Agni PurS^
28b-30. This self hidden in all the bodies does not reveal
itself. The subtle one is perceived by men having sharp intellect
and subtle vision. A wiseman should restrain his speech in the
mind, that knowledge in the self, that knowledge in the great
self and place it at the end in the self. After having known the
union of Brahman and the self by means of moral duties etc.,
one would become Brahman.
31-32. Non-injury, truthfulness , non-stealing, celibacy, re¬
fraining from receiving gifts (are known) as the yama~s (moral
abstentions). The niyamas (abservances) (are) five — purity,
happiness, austerity, study of the Veda (of one’s school) and
worship of God. The (physical) postures are such as the pad»
maka etc. Pr&ndydma (is) conquest of wind. Pratydhdra is the res¬
training of the mind in the self.
33. Dhdra^d consists of fixing of the mind on an auspicious
object. O Twice-born ! It is said to be the dhdra^d by the wise
because the mind is steady.
34. The continuous fixing-up of the mind in the same place
is known as dhydna (contemplation) . Samddhi is the state of (hav¬
ing the attitude) “1 am Brahman”.
35. Just as the space enclosed by a pitcher becomes one
with the sky when the pitcher is destroyed, in the same way the
liberated soul becomes Brahman.
36. The individual soul deems itself as Brahman by
(means of) knowledge (alone) and not by any other (means) .
The individual soul gets released from ignorance and its effect
and becomes undecaying and immortal.
Fire-god said:
37. O Vasi^tha ! I have expounded (to you) the Tamagitd
which yields enjoyment and emancipation to the readers. The
eternal union is stated to be the total occupation of the intellect
by Brahman (as outlined) in the philosophical thought.

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE
The Glorification of the Agnipura^
Fire-god said:
1-4. I have expounded to you the AgneyapurSi^a of the form
of Brahman. It with extension and without extension consists of
the two vidyiP-i, The learning consists of the Tajur^ SQma and
Atharva {veda). Vij^u is the creator of the world. Prosody,
phonetics, grammar, lexicon, astronomy, etymology, dharmaS&stra
(treatises on religious duties), mmUtfisa (inquiry), nySya (logic),
science of medicine, archery, science of music and science of
statecraft are all (known as pard) vidyd. The other one
beyond the Veda-^ is lord Hari known as apard vidyd (that which
has nothing superior to it) . Highest knowledge is the supreme
undecaying thing.
5-6. One who has the feeling that all the things are (the
manifestations of lord) Vi$nu, is not affected by the ICali (era) .
One would not incur any sin by not performing the great sacri¬
ficial rites or not offering the obsequial rites to the
manes if he worships (lord) Kfsna with devotion. One does not
get ruinedby intensive contemplation of (lord) Vi9nu, who is the
cause of all things.
7. A person whose mind has been drawn towards the
objects arising from defects due to other rituals, gets released
from sins, even after doing a sin, by contemplating (lord)
Govinda (Kr$na) .
8. It is contemplation where there is Govinda. It is a
narrative where there is Keiava. That is an action which is
devoted to Him. What is the use of others which are repeat¬
edly spoken about.
9. He is not a father who fails to describe this supreme
knowledge spoken by me to the son and he is not a preceptor
who fails to impart (this) to his pupil.
10. O Twice-bom ! One could get a son, wife, wealth, pros¬
perity, friends and other things by wandering in this world, but
not this knowledge.
1. eiq>lamed below.

Affii Pwd^
11. What is the use of son and wife? What (comes out of)
friend, land and relatives? Such knowledge is the supreme rela¬
tive, which liberates a person.
12. There are two courses for the beings — divine and
demoniac. Constant devotion to (lord) Visnu is divine and the
contrary is demoniac.
13. This, which has been expounded to you, is sacred,
healthy, praise-worthy, capable of destroying bad dreams, giving
pleasure and satisfaction and liberation to men.
14. In whatever houses transcripts of the Agneyapura^a are
kept, disturbances never approach them.
15. What is the good of pilgrimages, or making gifts of
cows, or sacrificial rites or fasting, when people hear the Agneya
{pur dm) daily?
16. A person who gives a prastha (measure) of sesamumor
a mdsa (weight) of gold, would obtain equal (merit) by listen¬
ing to one verse of the Agni (Pur&na) .
1 7. The reading of a chapter of this {Purdm) is more com¬
mendable than making a gift of a cow. A sin done in the course
of a day and night by a person is destroyed by his desire to listen
to this {Purina),
18. (The benefit) that would accrue by making a gift of
hundred tawny cows at Pu?kara^ in (the month of) Jyesfha
(June-July) , that benefit would be obtained by reading the
Agn^apurana.
1 9. The piety of two kinds — being engs^ed and being with¬
drawn — does not become equal to this sacred text of Agnipurdna.
20. O Vasi^tha ! A devoted man would get liberated from
all sins by either reading the Agnipurdna daily or listening to it.
21 ’22. Where there is a copy of the Ag^ipurdr^^ in that
house there would not be any difficulty, mishap or fear of theft,
or fear of miscarriage of foetus, or possession of children by the
spirits. There would not be the fear of the evil spirits and the
like, where there is (a copy of) the Agnipurir^,
23. By listening to this {purdna) , a brahmin would become
learned in the Veda^s^ 2^ksatriya (would be) a monarch, a vaifya
would gain wealth and a fUdra would get health.
I. A holy place of pilgrimage in Rajasthan.

24>25. O Brahmin I A devotee of Vi$9u, having equanimity
would get all his afflictions destroyed by reading or listening to
the Agnipurana. (Lord) Kelava would destroy all the misfortunes
that would be celestial, terrestrial or earthly such as bad dreams,
evil incantations and other mishaps (of such a person).
26-28. The reading or listening to the text is more merito¬
rious for a man than performing a sacrilicial rite. A person who
listens to the sacred Agnipurana in the Hemanta (early winter)
after offering worship with perfumes and flowers would get the
benefit of (performing) Agnisfoma (rite). (A person would get
the benefit of performing) the Pun^arlka (rite) in ^iHra (advanc¬
ed winter) , Aivamedka (rite) in the spring, V&jap<ya (rite) in the
summer and Rajasuya in the rainy season. (One would get) the
benefit (of making a gift) of thousand cows in the autumn by
reading this {Purana) .
29. O Vasi^tha ! He who devoutly recites the AgnipurS^a
in front of (lord) Hari, would be deemed as worshipping (lord)
Ke^ava with the rite of knowledge.
30. He who has a book of the Agnipurdm in his house would
be victorious. In whose house the transcribed (Purdna) is wor¬
shipped, (that person) has enjoyment and emancipation on his
hand.
31. Thus (lord) Hari (Vi$nu) has expounded to me in day.
of yore in the form of the destructive fire at the end of the world.
The Agneyapura^a consists of two sorts of knowledge. O Vasi^tl^al
You would impart to the devotees these two kinds of knowledge.
Vasiftha said :
32-33a. O Vy&sa ! I have narrated to you the Agneyapurdtia,
consisting of two sorts of knowledge, obtained from (lord)Vi$nu,
the Supreme Brahman, and as expounded to me by Agni (Firegod) in the presence of the celestials and sages. It makes every¬
thing known.
33b-35a. O Vyasa f He who reads or listens to or writes or
causes to write or causes to listen to or causes to read or wor¬
ships or carries this Agnipurdtfa, known as the Brahman and
expounded by Agni (Fire-god) in days of yore, would be liberat¬
ed from all sins and would attain heaven after obtaining the
desires.

Agni Purd^
35b-36. After having caused tlie excellent Purd^ to be
copied* he who gives (the copies) to brahmins, would attain
the world of Brahma and elevate hundreds of his family. He
who reads a verse (from this Pura^) would become free from
the mire of sin.
37-38. Hence, O Vyasa f This Purina making everything
explicit should always be read to the disciples in the company
of the sages such as Suka and others who are desirous of hearing.
The Agneya{purdna) read and contemplated would be auspicious
and confer enjoyment and emancipation. Obeisance to that
Fire-god who has sung the PurSiia.
Vydsa said :
39-44a. O Suta (redactor) : This Agncya(purdna) which is
of the form of pard and apard vidyd and the supreme position was
sung by (sage) Vasis^a in days of yore and it has been ex¬
pounded to you by me. The fortunate ones would attain a form
difficult to get. Those who meditate upon this Agneyapurdnay the
Brahman, would reach (lord) Hari. Those who seek knowledge
(would get) knowledge. Those who wish for kingdom would
obtain kingdom. Those without progeny get children. Those
without resort would reach a resort. Those who seek fortune and
those who desire for liberation get them. Those who transcribe
and those who cause it to be transcribed become sinless and
gain fortune. O Suta ! Think of the form of the Agneyapurdna
(expounded) by Suka, Paila and others. There is no doubt that
you would gain enjoyment and emancipation . You recite the
Purdfw to the disciples and devotees.
Suta said :
44b-47a. I have heard the Agneyapurd^ with respect by the
favour of Vyasa. The Agni {purds}^) is a manifestation of the
Supreme Brahman. You and other sages such as ^aunaka and
others had worshipped lord Hari in the Naimi^a forest. They
were steadfast. The Agnipufd^a is spoken by Agni and conforms
to the Vedas » This {Purdf^a) endowed with the two (sorts of)
brahmavidyd confers enjoyment and emancipation.
47b-51. There is nothing richer in substance than this.
Nothing is a better friend than this. There is no greater work

than this. There is no better course than this. There is no
greater treatise than this. There is no greater scripture than this.
There is no superior knowledge chan this. There is no mrti
(textbook of piety) than this. No dgama (texts dealing with
worship) is superior to this. No knowledge is greater than this.
No exposition excels this. There is nothing extremely auspicious
excelling this. No philosophic exposition is greater than this.
This is the foremost Purdna. There is no object more difficult to
obtain than this on the earth. All the lores have been expounded
in this Purdm.
52. All the manifestations (of lord Vi^nu) such as the fish
and the like, Gitd^ Rdmaydtjta ((epic story of Rdma), HarivathSa
(Account of the successors of lord Kr?na), (the legend
of the patricidal war between the Kauravas and Pandavas)
and fresh creation have been described.
53-55. The vaif^ava dgama (mode of worship relating to
Vi$nu) such as worship, initiation and installation (of the idol) ,
investiture with the sacred thread, the characteristic of the
idols and temples etc. and formulae yielding enjoyment and
emancipation, texts dealing with worship relating to 8aivite
gods and their substance, (the worship) of the goddess and
Sun, different circles, vdstu (relating to the ground) , different
types of formulae and secondary creation of the primordial egg
and the like have been sung.
56. The geography of the world with the continents,
mountain ranges and rivers and the greatness of the sacred
places of pilgrimage such as Gaya, Gahg^, Prayaga etc. have
been told.
57. The galaxy of stars, astronomy and prognostication for
victory in battle have been described. The different periods of
Manu and the duties of different classes of men have been
explained.
58. Pollutions, purffication of things and expiations have
been explained. The duties of kings, the making of gifts and
different kinds of austerities have been described.
59-60. Disputes, appeasing rites, the application (of the
fionnulans) o£theJ3!gveda etc., the Solar and Lunar dynasties.

Agni Puiil$a
archery, medical scieuce, science of music, statecraft, minMsd
(inquiry), nydya (logic) , the greatness and number of Purd{^-s,
prosody and grammar have been explained.
61. Poetics, lexicography, phonetics and rules relating to
performance of rites have been described. The casual, natural,
and absolute destructions have been explained.
62. Veddnta is said to be the knowledge about Brahman
and^o^a as having eight constituents. The eulogy, greatness of
the Purdnas and the eighteen lores have been expounded.
63. The Pgveda ttc. (are known to be) the paravidyd (that
which has something superior to it) and the aparavidyd (that
which has nothing superior to it) is the undecaying Supreme
Brahman. The form of Brahman is said to be cosmic and
acosmic.
64. This Purdt^a (having an extent) of fifteen thousand
(verses)^ is always read by the celestials in the celestial world
as having one hundred crore (verses) .
65. Fire-god has sung it here after shortening it for the
sake of the welfare of the world. O Sages, Saunaka and others I
You know that all the things (are manifestations of) Brahman,
66. One may listen to, cause to be heard, read, cause to
be read, transcribe, cause to be transcribed, worship or sing
(its glory) .
67-68. The king should take effort to honour the reader of
this Purdiia, After having honoured him by (making) gifts of
cows, land and gold and the satiating gifts of clothes and orna¬
ments, one would get the fruits of listening | to (the recitation
of) the PurdtM, At the end of (the reading of) the PmHof^t the
twice-born must be fed.
69-71. (He who does as above) would become spotless,
gain all the riches and attain heaven * along with his ancestors.
He who gives leaves (paper) for (copying) the book, thread
for stitching together the leaves and the cloth for binding
would attain heaven. He who gives (the book as a gift) would
1. But this Amftw here coatains about 8000 venes only.

reach the world of Brahma. He who has the book in his house
does not have the fear due to portents. (Such a person) would
get enjoyment and emancipation. You all remember the
Agn^apur/im as a form of the lord. After having been honoured
by them (Saunaka and others) Suta went away and Saunaka
and others reached (lord) Hari.

INDEX
Abala, a deity, installation 172
abdhi, refers to a herb, 407
abdominal disorder, remedy for, 767
abduction, of captives, punislwent
^bhauaka, a popular saying, 932
abhava, explanation of term, 1027
abhaya, one of the postures of the
hand, 837
abhaya, one of the Prai]iita>mudras,
Abhijit, an asterism, 383, 388
abhijit, a muhurta, division .of a
Abhikrti, classical metre based on,
Abhimanyu, son of Arjuna and Subhadra, 751 ; birth of, 33
Abhimanyu, one of the ten sons of
Manu and Nadvala, 42
Abhivyakti, an embellishment of
sound and sense, 942
two divisions of, Sruti and Ak;epa,
further divisions of; sub*divisions .
abscess, commendable remedy to
ripen, 756
remedy to open and heal, 756
remedy for, 767
type of food commended when one
suffers, 756
abuses, punishment for different kinds
acala, an array; optionally formed,
acamana, sipping of water, 69, 69fn.
icarya, explanation of the term, 1017
acceptance, words for, 991
actions, need for abandoning, 1074
Acyuta, denoting lord Vif^u; propi¬
tiation of, 50
Acyuta, form of Vi^^u on Mahendra
hill, 842
Acyuta, asSlagrima, 125
Adbhuta, Indra, during the period
of ninth Manu, 428
Adldiutopami, explanation 940
adha^pufpk, herb, 406
adittlta* a measure, 265
(agni ) idhtoa, a Imviryajha, 86
Adharma, married HiiiisS, a daugh¬
ter of Dak$a, 49
adhibhuta, explanation of the term,
adhidaivata, explanation of the term.
adhikarapa, four kinds of; explana¬
tion of, 971
a fifth variety of, 971
adhlivara, significance of the term.
adhiyajiia, explanation of the term,
adhvaryu, priest for Yajurveda, 429
adhyagni, a division of property of
women, 541
adhyatma, explanation of the term,
adhy&v^anika, a division of pro¬
perty of women, 541
Adigadadhara, name of Vimu,
Adigadadhara, on the worship of, 343,
Adinathas, eight, 412
Aditi, wife of Ka^yapa, 8, 85
Aditi, manifested as Devaki, 744
Aditi, wonhip of, 274, 317
Adityas, (twelve) 45
images of, 314
consecration of, 180
on the worship of, 343
ride the chariot of Sim, 356
adnta, fear known as, 1019
Adntan^ma, a form of Rudra, 252
Adf f tarupa, a form of Rudra, 252
ad^um, measure of, 313
Agastya, sage, 15, 24
reason for beiim called as *bom of
pitcher*, 536
mode of offering libation to, 535-7
should be worshipful, 339
at Gayi, 341
agent, five kinds of, 970
Aghamarifai;^a, sage of aghamarfatMt
hymn, 437
aghamarfaoa (sOkta), 53, 437
eflScscy of the repetition of, 462
Ag^asi, worshipiped, 414
Aghaora, the mantra of the weapxms
of; six constituents ofj^ 887-91
collection of formulae of; pirecedes

the appeasing rite for Siva, 891weapon of; the efficacy of repeatii^
the mantra relating to, 885
weapon of; as an excellent
formula, 892
aghor&stra, accessory rites relating
Aghoramukhi, synonym of Kubjika,
aging, tonic for, 769
ggneya, krttiki; commended for cop¬
ulation, 434
Agneyakalpa, a kalpa period, 733
kgneyakrcchra, expiation of eating
sesamum for twelve nights, 483
kgneyamantras, characteristics of and
effects of, 802-3
Agneya(Ag^)pur2b^a, spoken by
Agni, 2
extent of, 733
consists of two kinds of knowledge,
as a form of the lord, 1083
as a form of para and apara vidylL
as the essence of Vedas, 731
the greatness of, 731
greatness of hearing and reading,
merits of having transcripts of, 1078
should be copied and given as a
gift in Margaiir^a, 733
merits of making a copy and giving
as a gift, 1079
merits of meditating on, 1080
(See also Agi^ura9a)
Agneyi, wife of Uru, 42
igneyi, one of thedharai;ia8; expla¬
nation of, 1050
Agni (fire), synonyms of, 987-8
A^, progeny of Dhi^api of the
family of, 43
Agni, birth of Kumfira to, 44
and Sv&h&, sons of, 49
direction presided over by, 55
propitiation of, 176
worshipped, 51
agni (three), herb denoted by, 408
/^b&hu, sonofKingPriyavrata, 322
Agnib&hu, sage, 428
Agnidharfi, at Gay&, 344
Agnldhra, ruler of Jambtld^pa, 322
Agnidhrk, a goddess, 133
agniho^ a Mviryajfia, 86, 466
mdudeo under i?ta. 539
Agnipur&pa, Vasifdia^s request to
the Fish to narrate, 3
Agni Purdga
extent given as fifteen thousand
verses, 1082
abridgement of that in the, celestial
region having one hundred crore
verses, 1082
as a manifestation of Vi^ou, 731
as a manifestation of the Supreme
Brahman, 1080
the matters described in, 1081-1082
is more meritorious than piety, 1078
nothing greater than, 1080-1
merits of reciting the, 1079
the merits of listening to indifferent
(See also Agneyapurapa)
Agniftoma, a somasaihsthS, 86,
description of, 64
worshipped, 79
AgniftU, asonofManuand Nadvala,
Agni^v^tt^b, birth of the manes, 49
prayer to, 336
Agnivarcas, a disciple of Lomaharfatia, 730
Agnivrati, explanation of, 524
agnyadheya, ahaviryajna, 466
agrahayapi, a sacrifice, 4^
agrahayapye^tl, a haviryajfia, 466
agraya^i, a pakayajfia, 86
Ayodhya, city of, 15
Ahalya, was married by iSaradvata,
Ahaihkara, origin of, 40
ihavaniyapada, at Gaya, 339
Ahi, a karapa (N&ga), 369
ahi, a variety of seipent; remedy for
poison due to, 818
Ahirbudhnya, bom to Sati, 45
ahisafic&ri, an array; a variation of
the array bhoga, 634
Ahln&^va, son of Devinika; son of,
Ahuka, son of Punarvasu; son of,
AhuU, wife of Punarvasu, 742
Aila, Purfiravas; bom to Budha,
aindava, a kind of fire, 205
Aindri, image of^ 133
prayer to, 399
Airkvata, Indra’s elephant made
ruler of elephants, 47
worshipped, 91
aiiAnl, one of die dh&rapas; e]q>lanation of, 1050-1
Aihrara, a P&ftcar&tratantra qioken
by Satya, 106

Index
aja, denotes Brahma, 49
Aja, son of Dilipa; son of, 737
Aja, son of Raghu, 9
Ajaikapad, born to Sati, 43
Ajakasva, son ofjahnu; son of, 749
Ajaxnidha, one of the sons of Bfhat,
Ajami(^ha, had Nilini as wife; son of,
Ajamidha, father of Dhflmini
was the wife of, 750
ajapa, gayatri known as; greatness
Ajapala, son of Kala, 737
Ajina, son of Havirdhana and Dhi;-
aija, 43
Ajita, a manifestation of Visnu, 428
form of Vi^^u at Visakhayupa, 841
Ajita, goddess, 375
*ita, a stone, 269
jnarupa, a deity; worship of,
Ajyapah, class of manes; prayer to,
Akampana, a demon killed by Nila,
akar$apa, one of the acts, 403
Ak&saganga, at Gaya, 341
Ak&^matrs, goddesses, 375
Akajarevati, prayer to goddess, 399
akhandadvadasi, mode of practising
the vow of, 514-5
Akhyaniki, characteristics oft he
metre, 910
Akhyayika, narrative 992
a division of the prose kavya;
characteristics of, 919
Akfsasva, one of the two sons of
Sathhatasva, 737
Akrura, son of Svaphalkaka; son of,
the syamantaka was entrusted by
Knpa to, 743
prais^ Kffpa, 27
ak;a, herb denoted by, 407
Ak^ demon prince, 20
Akfarapankti, a variety of Paiikti;
composition of, 904
Ak^ararada, a {^dess, 133
ak^uhii^i, a unit of army, 33
Ak^ya, a year of the Hindu almanac,
Ak;aya, a form of Rudra, 252
Aksaya, image of, 138
Akfepa, a division of Abhivyakti;
explanation of; also known as
Dlivani^43
akfi, herb, lD7
AkfoUiy&, image of, 138
Alaghu, a sage born to Vasiftha and
Urji, 49
Alakanand&, a river, 325
alambufa, a vein; carries the wind
kfkara, 556
&lidha, a posture relating to archery,
alliteration, when conceived as char¬
ming. 935
Amara, a form of Rudra, 253
amara, an array; reverse of iakafa,
certain features same as mandala,
Amarakaptaka, 331
Amarisa, letter denoting, 418
Amarisesvara, a siddha; worship of,
amavasya, means near 990
Ambalik^, a daughter of KSiiraja, 31
Ambari^a, son of Nabh&ga, 736
a son of Vaivasvata Manu; son of,
was a devotee of Vift>u, 736
ambarl^a, a hell, 532
Ambik&, denotes goddess Durg5, 26,
letter denoting, 4 1 7
Ambika, daughter of Kaiiruja 31,
Ambikeya, a boundary mountain, 352
ambrosia, rise of Dhanvantari with, 6
Ambuja, one of the bandhas, 936
Ambuje^vara, a Rudra, 255
&miksa, explanation of, 1017
Amogha, a female divinity, 51
Amoghapada, at Gaya, 341
Amratakeivara, place at V&rapasI,
Smre^iita, one of the yamakas, 935
amfta (ambrosia), synonynu of, 987
amrta, one of the Franltamudr^s, 857
Amrta, a female energy, 136
Amrtadhar&. characteristics of the
metre, 909
amrtamudr&, 200
amftatmiki, one of the dh&rat>as;
explanation of, 1051
arnttividyi, description of, 870
Ariisu, one of the twelve Adityas, 45
Aih^umHn, son of Asamahjasa; son
Amukha (prologue), explanation of;
also callra Prast&vani, 922
three divisions of, 922
amulet, protective, 395
An&divii^a, one of the gods to he
worshipped, 412, 415
Anadra, <»ie of tte fbrenaost sons of
Vtdufa, 747
Anagha, different reading for Ala¬
ghu, 49fn.

Agni Purity
Anala, one of the Vasus, 44
Anala, a boundary mountain, 352
Anamitra, descendant of Dhr^ta;
Sini as bom from, 743
Anamitra, son of Nighna; son of, 737
(wrongly given as son of Anara^ya)
Ananda, a guard of the doors to be
worshipped, 93
a deity to be worshipped, 414
one of the Pahcaratra tantras, 106
one of the sons of Medhitithi, 351
anangatrayodasi, on the practice of
die vow of; for god of love, 515>6
Ananta, serpent, 50, 55, 63
image of, 137
propitiation of, 176
worshipped, 414
letter denoting, 418
Balabhadra was a form of, 37
a Rudra, 263
form of Vifpu at Saindhava, 842
name of a jalagrama, 125, 126
son of Vitihotra; son of, 741
anantadvSdaii, on the practice of, 513
Anarapya, son of Kalma^ap&da; son
Anarka, son of Vatsa; son of, 749
Anarta, a son of Saryati; Kusasthali
as the domain of, 736
son of Vibhu; son of, 749
anllsrita, a perfection, 257
AnasQya, wife of sage Atri, 8, 15, 49
anatha, a perfection, 257
ancestral rites, at Gay&, mode of
performing, 345-50
anchorite, duties of, 452
AAcita, a division of Vithl, 928
Andhaka, a demon, reference to his
attack on Siva, 746
killed by Vispu, 745
one of the sons of S&tvata, 742
Andhakaraka, a son of Dyutimat 352 ;
mountain named after, 352
Andhakas, a division of Yadavas, 736
Andhat&misra, sub-division of a hell,
Andhra, a country, 387
At^a, one of the sons of Cm and
Agneyi, 42
one of die sons of Bali , 747
linage of, 746-7
son of, 748
a country, 640
AAgada, son ofValin, 19, 20, 21
ahgamantras, details reladng to use
Ahg&raka, a planet; worship of, 52
AAg&rake^vara, atGayft, 343
AAgirft (AAgim), a year of the
Hindu almanac, 404
Ahgiras, sage, 41, 42fn, 112
married two daughters of Dak^a, 44
Angiras, progeny of, 49
Angiras, excdlence of progeny of, 45
a law-giver, 455
one of the sons of Cru and Agneyi,
Anila, one of the Vasus,
animals, words denoting different
species of, 1012
life periods of certain, 465
Aniruddha, a form of Vasudeva, 62image of, 130
installation of image of, 172
worship with the mantra of, 68
a s&lagrama, 125, 126
son of Pradyumna, fond of war, 29
fight with Bapa, 30
father of Vajra, 37
the Y&davas, Vajra and others as
sons of, 745
Aniyamopam^, explanation of, 940
Anjali, a posture of the hand, 66
a measure, 1037
Anka, a type of drama, 92 1
anka, a unit relating to elephantforce in the army, 632
afikuia, one of Ae postures of the
annapras'ana, rite of, 59
anointment, for the preceptor, mode
of doing, 74
disciple, 263-4
Antardhana, a son of Pfthu; progeny
Antika, a divine mother, 412
Anrta, born to Adharma and Hiihs&,
Anu, one of the sons of Yay&ti and
SarmisthA 25, 740
anudS.tta, a division of the sound, 917
anugraha, the eighth creation, 48
Anugraha, an energy, 112
anugraha-cakra, a mystic diagram
conferring grace, 869-70
Anugrahisa, letter denoting, 418
AnuhrSda, one of the sons of Hira^yakasipu, 46
anukalpa, that which is inferior to
mukhya, 1018
Anumati, one of the sons of AAgiras
and Smrti, 49
anumati, a digit less than die full
moon, 990
anuprgsa, an embellishment of urord,

Indtx
anuradhi, an asterism^ 360, 361, 363,
Anu$tubh, a metre, 562, 902
tawny coloured; belongs to Gau>
tamagotra, 905
the nuinber of letters in each pida
.\nyasyopama, explanation of, 941
Apa, one of the Vasus, 44
apadana, two kinds of, calam and
acalam, explanation of, 971
Apahnuti, concealment of something
conveying another sense, 944
aprina, functions of, 556
equated with the night, 557
Aparajita, one of the Rudras, 45
Apar5jita, a goddess, 375
a herb, 410
a stone, 269
characteristics of the metre, 913
Aparantika, characteristics of the
metre, 907
Aparavaktra, characteristics of the
metre, 91 0
Aparavidyi, explanation of, 2-3, 1082
Apastamha, a law-giver, 455
Apavahaka, characteristics of the
metre, 914
Apavatsa, one of the deities to be
worshipped, 108, 317
Apida, characteristics of the metre,
appetite, loss of, remedy for, 773
application, that breaks the army of
others, 394
Aprastuta-stotra, explanation of, 943
apsaras, celestial maiden, 356
Aptoryama, a sacrificial rite, 64, 79,
Aquarius — a zodiacal sign, 384, 392
Arabhati, one of thenu^es; abounds
in trickery, witchcraft, war etc. ;
three varieties of, 928
ftraij^yaka, section of Samaveda, 730
Arbuda, a sacred place, 327
archers, the units of army needed to
protect, 653
archery, description of the sciences
five different kinds of, M3
different postures relating to, 645-7
instructions rdating to the use of
bow and arrow, 646-7
debuls relating to science of, 647-8
preceptor in, 645
time imparting, 359
Ardhabhramapa, one of the bandhas^
ardhacandraka, an array; formed
from divisions of vajra, 634
Ardhajalesvara, letter denoting, 419
Ardh5ih»ka, letter denoting, 418
Ardhanarisvara, installation of image
arghak^od^t section on storing grains,
Arhata(Jaina), reference to Vi?pu be¬
coming an, 38
ari, relating to the letters in the name
Aries, a constellation, 378, 384, 385,
Arimejaya, one of the sons of Kuni,
Arifta, demon killed by Kf^pa, 27
Arista, mother of Gandharvas, 47
Aristanemin, married the four dau¬
ghters of Dak?a, 44
progeny of, 45
Arjuna, born to Kunti from god
Indra, 744
birth of. 32
son of, 751
conquest of Kurus by, 33
fought on the words of Krfpa. 34
commanded the P&pdava forces, 35
fall of, 37
Arjuna: SeeKartaviry&rjuna
Arjuna, a tree, 27
a flower, 529
Arka. denotes Sun; worship of, 215,
arka, denotes a herb, 406
arka (white), a herb; used in charm,
a flower for worshipping lord Harsi,
armoured men, duties of, 613
armours, different kinds of, 649
army, the composition of. 621
words denoting the arrangement
six divisions of, 629
six other divisions of, 630
array for a nuirching 630
different kinds of arrangemet of.
defects of, 626-7
number of vulnerable points of an.
the mode of attacking an, 634
array (s), different kinds of, 612, 633;
other kinds of, 635
five parts of, 612
seven parts of, 633
three divisions of, 633

Aff%x Pwrdi^
of army; different types of, 630
the king should never be in, 512
king should arrange the army in an,
of other kinds of different shapes, 634
structures may be modified by omit¬
ting one or two winn, 634
arrow, excellent kind of, 647
characteritic features of, 639
the materials for making. 639
ftrsa, a type of marriage, 434
artha, homa that Conors, 53
Arthkntarany&sa, one of the similari¬
ties, 939
explanation of, 941
arthapatti, explanation of the term,
arthaprakrtis, five divisions of, 922
ArthasSstra, science of, 3
artisans, words denoting different, 1023
AnuQia, bom to Vinata, 46
younger brother of Sun, T)!
a P^caratra text, 106
brahmins in Kusadvipa. 352
Arundhati, progeny of, 44
Aru^oda, a lake, 325
arvagbijas, mantras having more
than ten letters and less than twelve,
yield result in old age, 802
arvaksrotas, creation known as, 48
Arya, metre; characteristics of, 906
Arya, a name of Durga, 26
Ai^giti, characteristics of the metre,
Aryakas, a class of men in Plaksadvipa, 331
Aryaman, one of the Suns, 45, 136
offering made to, 273
requested to accept offering, 336
AsfLdharapopama, explanation of, 941
Af&i^ha, an asterism, 382
A;&4^ha, the four asterisms, 383
Afa^ha, a month, 386
Afi^hi, letter denoting, 419
asahya, a modification of the array
called dai^d&i 633
array formed by adding two flanks,
Asamafijasa, bom to Sagara and
Bh&numati by the grace of sage
Aurva, son of, 737
Asamaujas, son of Kambalabarhis,
sons of, 743
As&mayikatva, a defect of word, 947
Asambadha, characteristics the
metr^ 913
asathhata, an array; description of,
^ana, explanation of the term, 1044
asahgh&ta, an array; six units taken
from and combing (for a battle),
Asatpralapa, a division of Vithi, 928
ascetic, words denoting, 1018
duties of, 452-5
Asi, a river, 330
Asidhanya, one of the sixteen siddhas, 414
asipatravana, a forest in hell, 531
subdivision of a hell, 1039
asita, a lightning, 45fn.
A^le^a, an asterism, 359, 360, 363,
Asoka, grove at Lanka, 16
Sita found by Hanumatat, 19
Asoka, a minister of King Dasaratha,
asoka, a flower, 529
asokapOr^ima, vow on a full-moon
ass and other animak, mantra for the
removal of poison due to, 819
assault, explanation of the term, 655
assembly, words signifying member
A;taka, name of iSunahsepa, 749
a^t^ka, a sacrifice 86, 466
Astarapafikti, a variety of Pankti;
composition of, 904
A$tavakra, a brahmin, 37
curse on the nymphs made by, 37 fn.
asterisms, letters denoting, 400
words denoting, 989
actions appropriate to, 381
adverse for serving the employer, 360
auspicious for entering a new house,
beneficial for undertaking a pilgri¬
mage, 360
causing adversity, 360
causing profit, 360
commendable for marriage. 357
commended for copulation, 434
commended for taking harvest grains
inside the house, 361
commended for harvesting grains,
diagram of; relating to beginning
a journey, 400
down faced, 381
evil. 381
favourable for a person to return,
favourable for seeing asoverrign,
fixed, movable and comnoendable,.
for constructing a house, 360

Index
forbidden for entering the cow-pen,
for hoisting and lowering of banner
ofindra, 362
friendly etc., 362
good for agriculture, 361
good for sowing seeds, 361
good for gathering hay, 360
good or bad; combinations of, 380-2
good for taking out the grains, 361
increasing the heap of grains, 361
lateral faced, 381
malignant relating to snake-bite, 808
new purchases prohibited under
certain, 339
not commended for grazing the cows,
suited for giving or taking or de¬
positing, 360
to be avoided for wearing new clo¬
thes, 359
vows relating to different, 520
the names of the presiding deities
asthapana, explanation of, 267
asthma, food for a patient suffering
from, 753
A$ti, name of a metre, 905
Asti, daughter of Jarasandha and wife
of Kaihsa, 28
astrology, essence of 372-74; as the
lord Hari, 492
asunyaiayana, a vow, 498-99
asura, a type of marriage, 435
Asvalalita, characteristics of the me¬
Aivamedha, a sacrifice, 23, 36, 86,
A^vapada, one of the varieties of
Gomutrikabandha, 937
asvattha, tree, 92
Alvatth&man, killed the Papi^ava sol¬
diers, 35
survived the Bharata war, 36
isvayuji, a sacrificial rite, 86, 466
Aiv&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739
Alvina, month of, 360
A^vinl, an asterism, 338, 359, 360,
is of the shape of a horse, 384
Aivini Kum&ra, birth of Nakula and
Sahadeva through, 32
Alvins, wonhip of, 180
Atala, a nether world, 353
Ataladevi, goddess to lx invoked, 413
atarQ;ablmva, a flower, 529
Atharvsmafruti (Mupduopani^ad), 1
Atharvi9&yani, a branch of s&maveda, 730
Atharvaveda, an i^arilvidyS, 2
sacred for Soma, 93
use of the hymns of, 707-7 lO
hymns to be recited by the follower
branches of, 730
assigned on the palms, 64
atibal&, a herb, 371, 378
Atica^gika, a goddess, 132
Atidhrti, name of a metre, 905
metre based on, 914
atigapdtt, an impediment, 383
Atighora, a hell, 1038
Atijagati, name of a metre, 905
a metre to be employed in compo¬
sing a Mahfik&vya, 920
metres belonging to the class of, 913
Atikiya, demon, 22
atikfcchra, an expiation, 479, 486, 487
explanation of, 494
to be observed three fortnights after
death, 488
atilohit5. one of the four kinds of
lightmng, 4r)fn.
atimukta, a flower, 529
Atimuktaka, one of the siddhas, 414
Atirakta, a goddess, 230
Atir&tra, a sacrifice, 42, 64, 79, 86, 466
Atiiakvarl, name of a metre, 905
used in the Mah&k&vya, 920
atisAntapana, an expiation, exjdanation of, 483
ati^aya (exaggeration), an embellish¬
ment of sense, 939
Ati^ayokti, explanation of, 941
Atithi,son of Kuia; son of, 738
Utodyam, a kind of musical instru¬
ment, 994
atonements different kinds of, 474-78,
for ascetics. 455
for minor sim, 474-5
( See also expiations)
Atreya, a Paflearatra tantra 106 ^
Atreya, the infalliable composition
propounded by, 778
Atri, sage bom from Brahm&, 25, 31,
Atri, a law-giver, 455
progeny of, 31, 49
Datt&treya as son of, 8
bowed to by R&ma, 15
protected the celestials, 746
attachment, actions done with; to
be transformed as those of nonattachment, 1074
attendants, the king should choose
what type of, 619
Atyagn4toncia, a sacrifice, 79, 86, 466
Atyaffi, name a metre, 905

Agni Purdf^a
Atyukt&, a metre; number of letters
Aucitya, an embellishment of sound
and sense
explanation of, 942
audarya, a kind of Are, 205
audgStra, priest for SAmans, 429
audumbara, a tree, 92
auguries, auspicious and inauspici*
good and bad; known from sounds
of animals and birds, 598-600
AupaeSriki, a division of Abhivyakti,
explanation of, 943
Aupacchandasaka, characteristics of
the metre, 907
Aurva, a sage; was pleased by King
Sagara, 737
austerities, the gains of doing, 1 074
&v&hani, a posture made with the
hands, 898
Avalagita, a division of Vitlu, 928
Avantayas, one of the five branches
of Haihayas, 741
Avanti, a country, 387
Avantik&, a sacred place, 328, 491
Avapita, a variety of Arabhaji, 928
fivasthya, fire, 339
avastika-khadga, a type of temple, 315
Avasyandita, a division of Vithi, 928
avighn&caturthi, a vow; details re¬
lating to, 503
Avijfiata, son of Anala, a Vasu, 44
Avimukta, name of Vira^asi, 330
greatness of, 327
Avispa^txtva, a defect of word, 947
Avya)4bh&va (compound), two kinds
of; examples of, 975
AyA, a deity, 317
Ayodhy&, city, decoration of, 11
return of the people to, 1 3
Rflma's retiurn to, 23
greatness of 328, 491
destruction of, 387
fiyogava, caste, 430
duty of, 431
Ayurveda, science of, 6
Ayus, son of Viivagasva, 736
Ayus, bom from Fururavas, 25, 31
sons of, 739
Ayufmat, a son ofHrada, 46
Babhru, a form of Rudra, 252
was bom from Devavrdha; glory of;
four sons of, 742
Babhrusetu, son of G&ndhkra; son o^
Badarikfiframa, a place, 1
BAhu, sem of Vrka; son of, 737
Bahudfina, a year the Hindu alma¬
Bahyasva, son of Purujati; progeny
Bahupama, explanation of, 940
Bahuputra, married two daughters of
Dak^,
lightnings, as four daughters of, 43
Bahurupa, one of the Rudras, 43
Bahurupa, a goddess, 230
Bahuvidha, son of Sundhu; son of, 748
Bahuvrihi (compound), formation of,
Bahya, one of the four sons of, 742
Baka, demon, 32, 32fn
letter denoting, 419
a variety of beads belonging to
Jyoti class, 894
Bala, one of the seven sons of Suhotra
and Girika, 750
bala, a formula consisting of twenty
letters, 895
installation of image denoting, 172
Balabhadra, denotes Balarama; pro¬
a form of Ananta; returned to
original place, 37
merits of worshipping, 343
Baladeva (Balarama), married Revati,
daughter of Raivata, 736
Kn^a entrusted the gem to Akrura
in the presence of, 743
bAlagra, a measme, 107
Balahaka, a boundary mountain, 352
Balakalva, son of Ajakasva; son of, 749
Balakesi, image of goddess, 138
BAlakhilyas, 60000 in number of the
size of a thumb; born to Kratu and
Sannati, 49
Balapramathini, a goddess, 31, 201
Balarama, one of the sons of Vasudeva
and Rohi^i, 744
origin of; reasons for being known
as Sankar;ana, 26fn
was entrusted to the custody of
Nanda, 27
reached Gomantaka from Mathuri
killed the demon Fralamba, 30, 30fn
figme of, 130
assigned and worshipped, 56
synonyms of, 986
bfilava, a keurapa, 362, 369fn
Balavilmritp, a g^dess, 51, 201
Bilhika, one of the sons of Santanu;
sons of, 751
Bali, Indra at the time of eighth Manu,
Bali a demon, the story rdating to
Vifou’s mamfestatitm as a dwarf to

Iruiex
subdue, 8, 745
son of Virocana, 8fn;
reference to subdual of, 82
father of Batiia, 29
had hundred sons, 46
to be paid obeisance at Gay&, 341
son of Sutapa; sons of, 747
the name of a temple, 318
Balika, the spirit possessing the child
in the twelfth year; symptoms of the
child possessed by; offering and
smearing when the child is possessed
Balotkata, a female deity, 292
Bai^a, demon, 29, 30
foremost among the sons of Bali, 46
worshipped, 414
symbol denoting a herb, 406, 407,
a flower, 529
ba^alihga. 300, 301
bandha, relating to a kind of Yamaka,
bandhas, eight kinds of; description
Anu$tubh as a metre for most of
banks, words signifying, 993
banner, words denoting, 1020
erection of, 167-69
length of, 309
presiding deities of,
worship of, 284
barbara, a flower, 529
Barhifadah, manes, origin of, 49
requested to come, 336
Baskala, sarhhita given to, 429
one of the sons of Hrada, 46
bath, ingredients for ceremonial, 717
bathing, six kinds of, 436
after illness, asterism for, 358
mantras for, 436-7
procedure for, 33-34
to ward off obstacles, 718-19
known as Mahesvara; promoting
the victory of a king, 719-22
benefits of, 764
merits of; with different materials,
bathing of deities, mode of, 190-193
different kinds of, 192
to accomplish one’s desires, 716
bathing festival, mode of conducting,
battle, worship for success in, 425
things to be done after gainiiK vic¬
tory in(^ merits of endurance otpain
in; the demerits of deserting a, 614
battles, success in; means for gaining»
between celestials and demons; twelve
in number; details about, 745
battle-axe, different uses of, 631-2
Bauddhas, reference to demons be¬
coming, 36
Baudhayana (tantra), 106
Bauddhya, Villas given to, 429
Bava, a karai^a, 3G9fn
beads, made of diflerent material^
merits of, 899-900
bees and honey-bees, words denoting,
begging, five kinds of, 453
beings, two kinds of; their characteris¬
tics, 1071
bell, used in worship; greatness of, 900
belly, three-fold division of, 930
betel, time suitable for rite of chewing,
Bev&cakra, to find friendship between
two people, 392
bhadra, a variety of horses, 789
Bhadra, a type of temple, 314
characteristics of, 318
bhadra, a stone, 269
Bhadra, a female divinity, 51
a river, 325
Bhadra, name of a month, 360
Bhadrabhim^, a goddess, 376
Bhadradeha, one of the sons of Vasudeva and Devaki, was killed by
Kaihsa, 744
Bhadrakali, a goddess, 26, 376
Bhadrakan^^ahrada, a sacred place, 327
Bhadraka, one of the four sons of Sibi,
characteristics of the metre, 914
bh5drapada, an asterism, 363, 388
Bhadraratha, son of Haryangaka; son
Bhadrasena, one of the sons of Vasudeva and Devaki, was killed by
Karhsa, 744 ^
Bhadrasenaka, son of Mahimi; son
Bhadr&sva, son of Rahovidi; ten sons
country, 322, 325
Visnu as Hayagriva in, 326
a mountain, 325
bhadr&tithi, certain days of lunar
fiwtnight, 362
Bhadravir&t, characteristics of the
metre, 910
one of the Adityas, 45
Bhagavadgith, essence of, 1068-1073

bbagavan, the significance of the tenn,
Bh&gavatapurat^, containing expla¬
nation of virtues; to be given as a
gift in Pro$thapadi, 732
Bhagiratha, son of Dilipa; brought
down Ganges from heaven; son of,
Bhairava, image of, 138, 314
installation of image of, 172
to be contemplated, 404
located on the body, 414
mantra having tlic word, 41 1
Bhairavi, goddess; mantra sacred to,
image of, 1 3v>
cloth bearing the figure of, 402
Bhajamdna, one of tlic four sons of
Satvata, 742
four sons of, 742
Bhajamana, one of the sons of Babhru,
father of Viduratha, 743
Bhallata, (a superhuman being) 108
worship of, 317
Bha^a, a type of drama, 92 1
Bhai;idila, an authority in prosody;
given as Tandin in Ghandah Sutra,
bhangavidya, relating to goddess, 395
Bh^i, a type of drama, 921
Bha^ika, a type of drama, 921
Bh&nu, mother of Bhunus, 44
Bhotiumati, second wife of Sagara,
son of, 737
Bhanuratha, son of Candragiri; son
Bh&nus, progeny of Bhanu, 44
bh&ra, one of the postures of the hand,
Bharadvaja, son of Bi-haspati; was
brought to Bharata by Manit gods,
performed rituals, 749
saluted by Rfuna, 13, 23
saluted by Bharata, 14
Bharainili sm asterism, 359, 360, 361,
Bharata, reference to penance at
SrUagrUma performed by, 1062
birth of, 10
married Maod^'^l* H
Kaikeyi’s request to make heir ap¬
parent, 12
Da^aratha's wcffds about, 13
brought to AyodhyS, 14
was urged fay R5ma to return to
Ayodhyk, 15
Agni Purd^a
revered Rama after his return from
Lanka, 23
killed three crores sons of $ailu?a
and returned to R&ghava, 24
Bharata, born in the race of Puru, 3 1
country called Bharata after, 323
loss of the sons of, 749
Bharata, denotes Mahabharata, 31
story of, 38
Bh&rata, country, named after Bharata,
Vi^im as Kurma in, 326
Bharata, a mountain, 324
Bharata srama, at Gaya, 344
Bharata varsa, extent of, 350-51
divided into nine parts, 351
Bharatas, the mighty descendants of
Bharata, 749
Bharati, one of the modes; formulated
by Bharata; characteristics of; four
components of, 928
Bharga, son of Pratardana, 749
Bhargava, denotes Farasurama, mani¬
festation of Vi99u, 8
goddess earth addressed as related
Bhargavi, daughter of .^ukra, 1 12
Bhasakarna, demon, 22
Bh5si, a daughter of Tamra, 46
bhaskara, signifies a herb, 408
Bhauma (Mars), 115
worshipped, 316
bhauta, a kind of fire, 205
bhautiki (rite), 86
Bhaut>'a, fourteenth \lanu, 428
Bhava, a name of Rudra, 50
a divinity, 292, 412
worship of, 290
Bhava, a muhurta, 371
Bhava (Bhava) a year of Hindu al¬
manac, 404
bhava, change relating to the mind,
Bhavabhuti, letter denoting, 418
bhavana, a type of tenq>le, 314
Bhavavrtta, deity of aghamarsa^a
hymn; identified with Vi^t^u, 437
BhSveivara, letter denoting, 254
Bhavins, a class of people in Pu$kara,
Bhavi^yapuraijA, had its origin from
the Sun; narrated by Siva to Mann;
extent of; should be given as a
gift in Pau^ya, 733
Bhavya, son of Dhruva, 42
Bhav^, ruled Saka, 322
Bhaya, son of Adharma, 49
Bhay&nakft, a hell, 1038

Index
fihayahkari, image of, 138
Bhayotkata, a hdl, 1038
bhedani, a mudrk, 837
Bhelaki, a divinity, 41 1
Bhelakhi, sacred syllable known as,
Bbida, letter denoting, 419
Bhima, bom from Vata, 32, 32fn
stayed as a cook at V'irata, 33
Yudhisthira pacified women in the
company of, 36
fall of, 37
(See also Bhimasena)
Bhima, one of the sons of Kr$ijia and
Satyabhama, 744
Bhima, a Rudra, 50
a guardian deity, 284
worship of, 290
propitiation of, 176
Bhima, a hell, 1038
bhimadvadas'i, details relating to the
practice of, 312
Bhimaratha, son of Jimuta; son of, 742
Bhimarathi, a river, flows from Sahya,
Bhimasena, born of Kunti from god
Vayu, 755
son Pandu and Kunti; son of;
through Us wife Hidimba, had
Ghatotkaca as the son, 751
killed Duryodhana, 35
Bhimasena, sou of second;
son of, 751
Bhimasena, one of the four sons of
Jahnu, 750
bhindipala, uses of, 652
bhiru, a herb, 378
Bhi$ana, one of the ten sons of Hrdika,
Bl:u9at;i&, a hell, 1038
Bhifatp, goddess, 375, 417
Bhi^m, an evil spirit which possesses
the child on the second night after
birth; symptoms of the child pos¬
sessed by; oflering to appease;
unguent for the child possessed by,
Bhi$ma, son of Santanu and Gahg&,
as ruling the kingdom after Santanu’s death, 31
killed the soldiers of P&odavas, 34
resolve not to fight against eunuchs,
34fii
Bhifmapaftcaka, mode of practising
the vow of, 534-35
oq>lanation of, 534fn, 533
merits of practising, 532^
bhoga, a».array; description, of, 633
an array; variations of; five units
taken from and combined (for
a battle), 634
modifications of, 635
Bhop;avati, a place, 329, 330
Bhoja, region of; portent aflecting, 387
Bhoja, one of the siddhas, 414
Bhojaka, son of Pratikfetra ; son of, 743
Bhojas, one of the five branches of
Haitoyas (Y.ida\'as}, 736, 741
bhramara, auspidousness of a stone
called, 641
Bhramaravilasita, characteristics of
the metre, 912
Bhrgii, married Khy^ti, daughter of
i>ak;a, 48
progeny of, 49
a holy spot, 330
letter denoting, 419
Bhfgutuhga, a holy place, 327
Bhrgvananda, a divinity to be wor¬
shipped, 414
bhfhga, herb, 407
Bhfnga, worship of, 273, 316
bhfngar^a, a flower, 529
bhingar^a, a herb, 378, 405, 406
Bhrhgin, ima^fe of, 135
Bhfsa, personified, 316
worship of^ 273
Bhu, one of the worlds, 79
bhudhara, a type of temple, 315
bhujaga, herb symbolised by, 406, 407
Bhujaiiga, worshipped, 414
Bhujahgapraynta, characteristics of
the metre, 913
Bhujahgasisusuta, characteristics of
the metre, 911
Bhujangavijfmbhita, characteristics of
the metre, 914
Bhujafigela, letter denoting, 419
Bhuloka, (earth) 354
Bhumitirtha, a sacred place, 327
BhOri, one of the sons of B&lhika, 751
Bhuriiravas, one of the sons of Balhika,
bhu9ai;ia, a type of temple, 31 5
Bhutasantapana, a son of Hirapyakfa,
46fn
bhutasarga, creation known as, 48
Bh&tifi^ letter denoting, 418
Bhuva, one of the worlds, 79
Bhuva, son of Pratihastil, 323
Bhuvarloka, location of, 354
bibboka, a kind of gesture 929
bijamantras, on the practice of, 804
bOe, remedy for forty disesisei due
to derangra, 774
remedy to remove excess of, 773
bilva, htfb, 407

Agni Purity
bilva, flower, 529
bilvamudr&, a posture with hands, 196
bimbamudra, a posture with hwds,
Bindukofisa, a sacred place, 414
bindula, an outcaste, 465
bird^ anc^their gaits; words signifying,
birth, previous; words denoting, 991
birth and death, description of the
process of, 1031
black, words denoting, 992
bladder, remedy to remove stone in,
Blemishes, relating to poetry; seven
kinds of — relating to speaker, denoter
and denoted; further divisions of,
blindness, excellent remedy for, 778
blood and semen, discharge of; re¬
medy for, 834
blue vitriol, auspiciousness of, 641
Boar, manifestation of Vif^u as, 7 fT,
the killing of Hira^yak^a by, 745
body, description of the names and
formation of constituent parts of,
three functions of; to be paid equal
attention, 763
as the chariot, 1075
bondage, way to get release from, 464
bones, words signifying the different,
in the body, the description of their
number, 1036-37
bow, material for; measure of, 638, 639
the different characteristics relating
made of bamboo as the most excel¬
lent one, 639
excellent kind of, 647
mantra for wonshipping, 639
bow-men, task of, 613
bows, should be worshipped before
an expedition is begun, 639
bow-string, material for, 638
brahma, a flower that pleases lord
Hari, 529
Brahm&, 1, 3 etc.
bom from the navel lotus of Vi^nu,
selforiginated, 40, 40fn
tynonyms of, 986
as the charioteer of the earth, 746
stuped the celestial war, 739
mind-bom sons of; divided into
two halves, 41
presiding deity of an element, 271
Image ^ 130
worship of, 274
worship of golden image of, 498
worshipped by people of Kusa, 352
worshipped by residents of ?u$kara,
brahma, a type of marriage, 434
Brahmakesvara, one of the lingas at
Gaya, 343
brahmakurca, expiation of eating
handful of flred grain for fifteen
days, 483
Brahmajhdna, a female divinity, 413
Brahmaloka, name of Satyaloka, 354
brahmamandira, a type of temple, 314
brahma muhurta, one should get up
brahman, unknowable, 464
two kinds of, 1 , 1 060
identity of soul and Supreme, 34
as the cause of the world as held
by Saivas etc., 949
words denoting state of, 1018
description of the nature of, 1056-7
knowledge relating to, 1057-9
brahman, knowledge relating to mys¬
tic; expounded by Bharata, 1063-8
brahmand^f ^ great gift, 544
Brahmand^pur^a, in which Brahma
describe the greatness of the uni¬
verse; extent of; should be given
as a gift, 734
version followed, 44fn
Brahmani, one of the eight goddesses,
Brahmapada, at Gaya, 339
brahmapaheaka, mantras known as,
Brahmapurana, one of the eighteen
Puranas; narrated by Brsduna to
Marici; extent of; to be given as a
gift on full-moon day in Vai^akha
as destroying sins, 492
Brahmasaras, at Gay&, 338
Brahmasavarpi, tenth Manu, 428
brahmaiila, ivlating to lihga, 266
Brahm&stra, weapon, 23, 32
BrahmatuAga, a holy place, 327
brahmatva, related to Atharvan, 429
Brahmavaivartapurmi^a, narrated by
Savar^i Manu to sage N&rada;
extent of; deals with the history^ of
Rathantara and Boar manifestation
of lord Vifpu; should be given as a
gift in M&gha, 733
RrahmAvarta, a sacred place, 327
Brahmavet&li, a goddess, 424
Brahmavit^, the formula presided
over fay orahmk, 895

Index
BrShmi, a mother goddess, 139fn
ima^ of, 133
brahmin, code of conduct for, 431
breathing, remedy for trouble in, 830
Brhadasva, son of Sr&vanta, 736
Bfhadbhanu, son of. Bfhatkarman;
son of, 748
Brhadifu, one of the five bom from
B^yasva, 749
Bfhadratha, son of Jayadratha; son
one of the seven sons of Suhotra
and Girika ; son of, 7r>0
Bfhannala, Arjuna at Virata as, 33
Brhaspati, a law-giver, 435
B^haspati, a rite to appease the planets
performed by, 740
Bfhat, son of Suhotra; son of, 749
Bfhatcakra, a kind of bandha, 938
Bfhati, a son of Sisfi and Succh3.ya, 42
Bfhati, a metre; characteristics of, 902
is made up of one pada Jagati and
three pada Gayatri, 903
black coloured; belongs to Angirasa
gotra, 905
sages and gods associated with, 562
diflTerent kinds of, 903-4
Bvhatkalpa, a kalpa period, 732
Brhatkarman, son of Bhadraratha; son
Bfhatkuk^i, goddess mling over north,
Brhatmavat, son of Bfhadbhanu; son
bride, rules relating to choosing of, 434
Buddha, manifestation of Vifpu as, 38
figures of, 130
Budha, story relating to his birth to
Soma; 739, son of; saluted, 31, 52
buildings, of different people; parts of;
words denoting, 1 006
building sites for different castes; cha¬
racteristics of, 642
worship of different gods in, 642-3
burst of laughter, word for, 995
Gaidyas, name of the descendants of
Cidi, 741
Gaitra, month of, 360, 386, 388
Gaitraratha, a forest, 325
caitri, a sac^ce, 86, 466
Gakra, a lake, 325
a type of temple, 315
a posture, 85/
an array; a variation of map^ala,
one of the bandhas; two kinds of;
explanation of, 936, 937
acooinq>liiiwd with die nietr^938
3&rdulavikri(^ita class of metres, 909
Gakr&bjaka, one of the bandhas; ex¬
planation of, 936, 937
Gakrap&i^i, form of Vi^OU at K&smira,
cakrarupa, efficacy of the herb, 378-9
Gakrisanatha, a siddha, 415
Gakfu, a river, 325
Gak^u^a, the sixth Manu, 427
the devas in the period of; bom
as sons of Kasyapa, 45
Gelestial at the time of the 14th
Manu, 428
son of Ripu and Brhati, 42
one of the foremost sons of Vidu^a,
calamities, due to divine agency;
remedial steps for, 625
calling, words denoting, 992
Gampa, son of P^thuluksa: son of, 748
camumukha, a modification of the
array danda, 633
Gamui^d^f image of, 314
Garnupd^, a mother goddess, 1 39fn
request made to, 397, 399
characteristics of the image of, 134
worshipped, 412, 415
invoked, 416
Gatlcal&, a spirit seizing the child in
the twelfth month: symptoms of
child seized b)/, 824
a monstress seizing the child in
the fifth year; symptoms of the
child sazed by: offering to ap¬
pease; fumigation and bathing
when child is seized by, 824
Gaftcalak^ikli, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Gancasva, son of Mukula; had the
twins, 750
Gancer, a constellation, 36 1 , 384, 392
Cauda, an attendant of Siva; wor¬
shipped, 51, 52
mode of worshipping, 211-12^
carved on the door-frame, 1 15
Cauda, a goddess, 1 32, 375, 424
Gaud^la, a caste, 430
duties of; rules relating to dress etc.,
Gandanadundubhi, son ofTittiri; son
Gaudan^yilca, a goddess, 132
Caudarupk, a goddess, 132
Caudavati, a goddess, 132
Cauidavr9tlpi’apataka, a variety of
Daudai^; t^racteristics of, 914- 5
Gaodc^vara, a holy spot at V&rftuasi,

Agni Pitrdtfa
a mother goddess, 139fii
image o£ 132
(See also Ga^dih^)
Ga^diha, image of, 106, 132, 139
b^fit of establishing, 133
worshipp^, 412
Caodl^a, placing the image of, 106
letter denoting, 419
Gapdogr^ a goddess, 132
Gandra, a boimdary mountain, 351
Gandra, image of, 138
Gandrabh&g.^, river; rises from the
Himalaya, 351
Gandr&loka, son of Sahasraiva; son
Gandramah, herb denoted by, 406
Gandranathaka, one of the siddhas, 415
Gandraparvata, son of Tarapida;
son of, 738
Gandrapura, one of the siddhas, 414
GandrSvali, image of, 1 38
Gandravarta, characteristics of the
metre, 913
G&ndraya^a, an expiation, 328, 471,
explanation of, 494
to be observed for having done cer¬
tain sins, *189
destroys sin, 491
merits of practising, 524
Gat^ura, a wrestler killed by Kr9i;ia, 28
capa, a posture of the hands, 857
a modiheation of the array danda,
Gapala, characteristics of tlie metre
Gapricorn, a constellation, 384, 392
Garaki, a demoness, 317
materials for the worship of, 1 09
Garciki, a mother goddess, 139fn
Garma^vati, a sacred place (river),
carrier, rules relatiM to, 675
cam, a sacrificial offering, 58
G&rudespa, bom to Vasudeva, 744
G&mh&sini, characteristics of the
metre, 907
Gamka, a type of temple, 314
ca;&la, meaning of the word, 1017
case, that is rejected by another should
not be taken up, 656
cases, the employment of the seven,
casket, words denoting, 1017
castes, duties of, 429-31
duties of different, 465-7
' words denoting the fourth, 1023
Gata^, ^ a monstress aflEecting the
child in the fourth year; symptoms
of the child seized by; offerixm to
appease; fumigation and bathiiy
when the child is affected by, 824
catarrh, remedy for, 773
Gatul&devi, a female divinity, 413
Gaturbahu, form of Vimu at Pindaraka, 841
c&tunnasya, a havir-yajila, 86, 466
the period for observing, 455
Gamrthika, one of the four acts rela¬
ting to a marriage, 434
Gaturvaktra, letter denoting, 419
caturvyavasita,one of the yamakas, 935
catufpada, a karajjia, 363, 369
Gatufpatra, a varie^ of bandha, 937
cause, wor^ denoting, 991
word denoting primary, 991
cavalry, functions of; ground suitable
for; three in^try soldiers needed
to fight, 632
the units needed to protect, 653
celestial region, astcrisms belonging to,
celatial women, words denoting, 987
celibacy, eight Idnds of, 1041
censure, words denoting, 993
centi^des, remedy for poison due to,
Ghala, a division of VithI, 928
Ghandasatva, a defect of work, 947
Ghandovidhana, science of, 2
charm, of the shape of the figure of
Gamda, efficacy of, 81 1-14
charms, herbs used in, 405-7
chariot, ground suitable for; to be
protected by elephant (men), 632
chariots, (men on) functions of, 631
chariot-warriors, work of, 613
charities, merits of making, 539
Ghaya, gave birth to Savar^i, 3ani,
Tapati and Viffi, 735
an embellishment of word ; ex¬
planation of; four kinds of^ 932
Ghedani, a goddess, 424
Ghdcoktichayfi, explanation of, 932
chest, five kinds, 930
chest injury, remedy for, 754
child, in the womb of mother; des¬
cription of the stages of growth of,
period good for first feeding of. 358
children, of different ages; words
denoting, 1014
remedy for cough, vomitting and
fever oif; herbs which would improve
the speech etc. o£, 766
child*s play, word for, 995

Index
clw, seven actions of, 929
Gidi, son of Kaiuika; descendants
_ known as Gaidyas, 741
circles, mystic, 375-79
different kinds of, 870
Giteyu, one of the ten sons of
Bhadr^s'va, 748
cities, provision of places for different
people in, 320-21
vutu relating to, 320-22
citra, an embellishment of word, 932
Gitra, a type of temple, 31 5
characteristics of the metre, 907
Gitrabhtnu, a year of the Hindu calen¬
citradu$kara, a division of objects to
be struck by an arrow, 648
Gitragupta, presiding deity of place of
worship of planets, 467
Gitrakavya, dehnition of; seven kinds
Gitrakuta, name of a place, 841
a sacred spot, 328
Rima’s arrival at the mountain of,
Gitralekhfi, friend of U;a, daughter
of Baoa, 30
Citrahga, a form of Rudra, 253
Gitr^gada, a (Tandharva, 31
son of ^ntanu, 31
GitrapadS, characteristics of the metre,
Gitraratha, ruler of the Gandharvas,
son of Rufadgu; son of, 741
sou of Dharmaratha; son of, 748
Gitrasena, son of Raucya Manu, 428
cloth, words relating to different kinds
cloud, words denoting, 988
clouds, words denoting row of, 988
clouds (thunder), words denoting, 988
club, wielding of, 649
Coalescence, explanation of, 944
Colas, origin of, 747
colic, remedy for, 768, 776
intestinal, remedy for, 766
colours, words denoting different, 902
words denoting mixra, 992
commander(s), duties of, 630
instructions for, 633_
comic sentiment, origin of, 923
four-fold; description of, 931
compositions, of different kinds such
as GomGtrikS, 936
compoundi^ divided as eternal and
noneteriialr examfdes of; she kinds
uf; divided into IfiB kinds, 973
four-fold classification of; on ac¬
count of proininance of one
member, 975-76
concealing, words denoting, 989
Conceit, origin of, 923
conch-^^, a variety of, stated to be
auspicious, 641
conciliation, a political expedient, 627
two kinds of, 587
four kinds of, 627-8
method of employing, 628
conduct, codes of, 436-39, 463-65
towards different people, 618
five kinds of codes of, 465
conjecture, word fur, 991
conjugations, the important roots
belonging to the ten, 982
conjuring, a political expedient, 627
consecration, commendable time for,
of the doors of the temple, 164-69
of the idol, 152-55
of an image, 96ff, 283-84
of the images of gods, 1 80-83
materials used in, 1 50-5 1
mode of doing, 110-113
of pitchers, 149-51
preliminary, 155-<)0
of tanks and ponds, 173-78
of a temple, 307-8
of umbrella etc ; mantras for, 725-28
constellations, the things they denote,
constipation, a decoction that is a
remedy for, 775
consumption, remedy for, 767, 77fi
contemplation, of dilfercnt kinds,
explanation of the term; benefit
of practice of; mode of, 1046
contextual object, words denoting
thought related to, 993
continents, names of, 323
extent and description of, 351-3
contrivance, explanation of, 945
conventionsd, a variety of excellence
of sense; explanation of, 945
conversation, words denoting, 993
word denoting mutual, 993
cooked rice mixed with milk, words
denoting, 1017
coral, auspiciousness of, 641
coronation of a king; mode of per¬
forming, 566-68
sacred syllables ibr, 569-73
asterinn good fbr, 360
corrupted word, term denoting, 992
cough, remedy for, 830
rmoedy for five kinds of, 772

Affii Pwrib^
cough and other ailments, remedy for
counsel, five kinds of; the type of
persons with whom the king can
things which would break a secret,
counsels, words denoting chief, 1018
counter-suit, could be made when,
countries, different kinds of; based on
landscape, 758
country, description of a prosperous,
courses, for beings; two kinds of, 1078
courtiers, the qualities of and selection
of; should be neutral, 656
cows, of different kinds; words de¬
noting, 1021-22
elixir for, 801
excellence of the six items got from,
food that yields more milk from,
fumigation against evil planets for,
a great gift of thousand, 544
greatness of, 798, 799, 800
mantras for the protection of, 835
merits of making gift of different
numbers of, 547
nourishing fo^ for calves of, 801
propitiatory rites preceding the
worriiip of, 801-2
the purificatory item got from, 799
oil that removes biliousness of, 800
prescription for joining broken bones
pain in the ears of, 800
wounds of, 801
remedy for deranged phlegm of,
diseases affecting the horns of, 800
diseases of digestive organs etc. of,
diseases of the flesh of, 800
dysentery of, 800
heartaches and stomachache etc.
pain in the teeth of, 800
stiffness of, 800
swelling of the belly of, 835
toothawe and diseases of mouth
and tongue, 800
creating dissent, one of the means to
be enqsloyed by the king, 587
creation, description oC 39-41
process erf*, 1030
/primary, 48-50
•econda^, description o( 43-48
of the world, 39
cremation, cases when not done, 451
crystal, a gem; is said to be auspicious,
Cudakrti, one of the saihskaras, 59
Culik^ characteristics of the metre,
curiosity, words signifying, 995
Curuaka, a division of prose Kavya,
Cyavana, son of Suhotra, 750
Gyuta, a kind of Citrakavya, 935
definition of, 936
Gyutadatta, a land of GitrakHvya, 935
definition of, 936
Dadhi, an ocean, 324
Dadhimaododalm, ocean, 352
DadhimuLha, monkey guarding
honey-garden, 20
Dadhimukhya, a class of men at
Kumdvipa, 352
Dadhivahana, was bom from Anga,
Dadhivaktra, a monkey, 21
D^ala, a country, 387
dainandini, the creation known as, 49
Daitya, to be worshipped, 317
daityas, defeated the devas, 38
Daityasudana, form of Vi$uu at
Prabhasa, 841
Pakini, a goddess; worshipped, 415
Dak^ bom to Pracetas and M^^a, 43
made the ruler of PrajSpati, 47
Khyati and others married the
daughters of, 48
Sati discarded her life on account
of wrath of, 50
one of the guards of the doors;
to be worshipped, 93
letter denoting, 419
a law-giver, 455
Dak^avarui, ninth Manu, 428
daksiu^gnipada, at Gaya, 339
damanaka, investiture of fibres of,
Damini^, a class of men at Ku&idvipa, 352 in
D&modara, a name of Vifuu, 65
ibrm of Vifuu at Raivatidca, 842
a Salagi&na, 125
Daih$tr&^ a goddess, 375
Danavas, progeny of Danu, 47
Dapda, one of the three sons of
Dhundhum&ra, 736
the name of a tenqile, 318
one of Ae bandhas, 936
eamlanation 937
dapri*, an array; description of; other
anrayi whidi are modifications of

Index
the array called; characteristics of,
seventeen kinds of arrays could be
formed from, 634
characteristics of arrays which are
modiheations of, 633
yugorasya as a variation of, 634
valaya, an array formed by union
of two, 63 !i
a posture, 837
Dai;i4ahasta, one of the eight forms
of Gatiapati, 865
Dai;idaka, forest; as excellent, 328
Rama’s arrival at, 15
Sarngadharin form of Vif^u at, 842
characteristics of, 914
different varieties of, 15
daod^lt^i weapon to be used against
darid^ of the enemy, 634
Dapdi, an attendant of Sun, 1 95
Da^di, letter denoting, 419
Da^diOi tawny-coloured; to be wor¬
shipped, 51
beads belonging to the Savitra
class, 894
Danu, a demoness; progeny of, 46,
Darbha, one of the sons of Ayus, 739
darbha, grass, 38, 94, etc.
darkness, words denoting, 995
dar^a, union of Sun and Moon, 990
Dars'anI, letter denoting. 417
darrapaur^am^, a haviryajAa, 86, 466
dart, measurement of, 649
Daruka, letter denoting, 419
dara, denotes a herb, 407
Dasagriva, denotes RAvaqia, 20
Dasaratha, son of Aja, 9
four sons of, 10, 738
saw the angry l6ukeyi, 1 2
Hanuman’s narration of the story
praised RAma for having slain
Ravai;ia, 23
Da^arha, another name of Viduratha,
Dalanpia, die seven hunters of, 349
Dasasvamedha, at Gaya, 338
Dasyus, a class of men, 38
Datta, a kind of Gitrakavya, 935
de&nition of, 936
Dattatreya, manifestation of die Tri¬
nity of gtxis, 8
form of Vis^u, 131
bom to Atri and AnasOya, 49
Dattoli, son of Pulastya and Prlti, 49
dawn, words denoting, 990
day, wwds denoting, 990
words Menoting past, current and
futism^ 1000
dead, recipes which would revive, 772
death, the process of, 1037-8
medicines which would conquer, 779
medicine that overcomes prema¬
dcbt(s), definition of, 654
disc^rge of; astcrism governing,
rules relating to, 659-61
deceit, a political expedient, 587, 627
deeds, merits of good, 451
need for performing virtuous, 901
defect, of meaning is twofold — general
and particular, 947
Dehadhrti, propitiation of, 176
deities, names and worship of female,
presiding over the asterisnu, lunar
days etc., 805
worship of, 806
presiding over different things, 542
sacred bathing of, 716-7
deliberation, word denoting, 991
deluge, words denoting, 990
demon, words denoting, 986, 988
deposit, definition of the term; rules
relating to, 661
Depth, explanation of the composi¬
tion known as 945
depth, words denoting different, 996
desires, renunciation of; praise of
knowledge gained by, 107
Deva, form of Vif^u at Raivataka, 841
one of the deities to be locat^ in
the body, 414
Devabhoga, one of the siddhas, 414
devadatta, a life-force, 257
carried by the vein huhu, 556
functions of, 557
Devadevesa, form of Vi$9u on the
Sahya mountain, 842
Devaduti, a spirit possessing the
child in the eleventh year; sym¬
ptoms of the child possess^ by;
offering and fumigation when the
child is possessed by, 825
DevahQti, wife of Kardama; progeny
Devaka, son of Ahuka; sons of; dau¬
ghters of, 742
Devaki, one of the daughters of
Devs^; married by Vasudeva, 26,
as a manifestation of Aditi, 744
was worshipped by Kffpa, 28
Devakyetra, son of Devar&ta; son oC
DevakCita, a boundary mountain, 325
Devala, exposition made by, 1074
son of ^tyilfa, 44

Agni Pwitfa
devala, a caste, 430
Devamidhusa, bom in the line of
Dhnta, 743
Dev&nika, son of Sudhanva; son of,
Dev^ntaka, a demon, 22
Dev&ix, one of the sons of Santanu, 751
Devarata, one of the sons of Visvamitra, 749
Devarflta, son of Karambha: son of,
Dev&rha, one of the ten sons of Hfdika;
son of, 743
devas, the battle between asuras and,
benefit of worship of, 40
Devavan, son of Rudra Savarqii Manu,
son of Devaka, 742
Devavara, a manifestation of Visnu,
Devavar^ini, first wife of Visravas,
Devavrata, 333 (See Dharmavrata)
Devivfdha, one of the four sons of
Satvata; son of, 742
Dev&vi't, mountain, 352
Devayani, daughter of >*^ukra; was
married by Yayati, 25, 25fn., 740
Devi, significance of the term 994
Devika, a river, 526
a holy place, 327
Devivrata, explanation of, 525
Dhairya, son of Jyoti$mat, 352
Dhamani, image of; governs the north,
dhanafijaya, a life-force, 257
carried by the vein sankhini, 556
functions of, 557
Dhanafijaya, a divinity worshipped in
the east, 316
dhani;tha, an asterism, 359, 360, 361,
dhanuti paJe^a, an array; characteri¬
stics of, 633
Dhanus, a constellation, 367, 368 fn.
Dhanvantari, a form of Vifou, 6
was bom from Dirghatamas; son
science of medicine propounded
to Suiruta by, 75lff
Dhanya, a class of men in Krauficad%ipa, 352
dhany&ka, a herb, 407
l^iaxa, one of the Vasus, 44
dli&iw;^&, definition of, 454
caiiEf4anation of die term, 1076
(see also retehtion)
diuutaol} a stone, 269
Dharikd, a female deity, 292
Dharini, daughter of the manes and
Svadha, 49
dharma, a puru^artha protected by
Viif^u, 23
Vibhi$aria was deep-rooted in, 24
Bhl^ma’s discourse on, 36
the homa that bestows, 53
Dharma, alternate reading for Dhara,
44fn
Dharma, married ten daughters of
Dak^a, 44
Dharma, god of virtue, 32, 332
worshipped, 51
worship of^ 286
son of Gandhara; son of, 747
dharmadrona, a hymn, 349
Dharmanetra, son of Haihaya; son of,
Dharmapala, a minister of King
Dasaratha, 1 1
Dharmaruja, denotes Yudhi$thira,
Dharmaranya, a sacred spot at Gaya,
Dharmaratha, son of Diviratha; son
dharmas, the orlgion of heretics devoid
of Vedic, 38
Dharmasastra, science of, 2
Dharmasavarni, eleventh Manu, 428
Dharmatirtha, a holy place, 327
Dharma vati, wife of Dharma, 332
Dharmavrata, daughter of Dharma;
married by Marici, 332
Marici’s curse on, 333
Dharmesa, a divinity worshipped,
Dharmeyu, one of the ten sons of
Bhadrasva, 748
Dharmopama, explanation of, 940
Dharita^, race of; was from Dhrspt*
one of the sons of Vaivasvata Manu,
Dhata, a fotm of Rudra, 252
a year of the Hindu calendar, 404
Dhataki, son of Savana, 353
Dhafr, one of the Adityas, 45, 136
worship of, 176
saluted, 50, 50fn
adored, 88
Dhafr, a celestial; son of Bhrfpi and
Khyati,49
dhatn, herb, 407
Dh&tri, a female deity, 292
dhattfira, blade; herb, 406
Dhaumakalpa, a kalpa period, 733
Dhaumya, sage, 33
Dh&vani, a monstiess afiSicting the

Index
child in the sixth year; symptoms
of the child aiilicted by; offering to
appease; fumigation and batmng
when the child in afflicted by, 824
Dhenu, one of the varieties of Gomutrika-bandha, 937
dhenu, a posture of the hand, 196, 205,
Dhenuka, a demon, 27
Dhenuka, a forest, 344
Dhenumat, son of Jyotismat, 352
Dhenupada, at Gayk, 344
dhenuvrata, mode of practising, 522
Dhiman, son of Mahavirya, 323
Dhi^oa, of the family of Agni; pro*
geny of, 43
Dhr^^u, son of Kuhura; son of, 742
Dhrsfa, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 735
One of the sons of Asamanjas;
two wives of, 743
Dhf^t^dyumna, son of Drupada; son
fate of army headed by, 35
Dhfstaka, son of Kunti; son of, 742
Dhfft^kctu, son of Dhr^fadyumna, 750
Dhrstokta, one of the sons of Kartavirya, 741
Dhftaketu, son of Daksasavarni Manu,
Dhftarasfra, begot by Kf^oa Dvaipayana through the wife of Vicitraviryaka, 751
born to Ambika, 31
Pandavas’ destruction of the sons of,
resorted to the forest after the war, 36
beads belonging to Jyoti class, 894
Dhrti, a form of Hari, 91
son of Dhfs^u; son of, 742
wife of Nandi, 739
name of a metre, 905
Dhftiman, a son of Fururavas, 739
Dhruva, son ofUttanapada and Suniti,
story of, 41 fn
as a celestial star, 42
Dhruva, one of the Vasus, 44
one of the seven sons of Medhatithi; after whom the country was
named, 351
dh6li,auspiciou8ne8s of gem called, 641
Dhumini, wife of Ajamidha, 750
Dhumra, a monkey, 2 1
DhOmr^^, a demon killed by Hanfl*
mat, 22
DhQmravar^a, a name of the elephantfaced god, 866
Dhundhu^ demon killed by Kuval&-
Dhundhum&ra, name of Kuvalaiva
as he killed the demon Dhundhu;
the three sons oi^ 736
Dhuni, son of Yuyudh&na alias
Satyaki; son of, 743
dhustura, a flower for worshipping
lord Hara, 529
Dhvani, alternate reading for Muni,
44fn
stated as identical with any one of
the figures like Akfepa, 943, 944
dhvank;!, denotes the entry of the Sim
in one of the signs, 362
dhyana, definition of, 454
explanation of the term 1076
diabetes, remedy for, 753
diamond, a gem, 640
auspiciousness of and qualities of
a good, 641
diarrhoea, excellent remedies for, 754,
diction, four kinds of, 927
digestion, remedy that stimulates, 778
digestive power, remedy to restore, 775
dik, herb denoted by, 406, 407
Dilipa, son of Aihsuman; son of, 737
son of Raghu; son of, 737
Dima, a type of drama, 92 1
dipaka, a perfection, 257
Dipani, letter denoting, 4 1 7
Dipta, a female divinity; worshipped,
Diptamaya, a hell, 1039
Diptikarar^a, a Rudra, 254
Diptiman, a sage, 428
Diptimati, a female deity, 292
direction, words denoting, 988
Dirghabahu, son of Aja; son of, 737
Dirghatamas, son of Kasi (Kausika?) ;
son ofi 749
disc, uses of, 651
disciple, qualities of, 804
anointment of, 263-4
discussion, word denoting, 991
diseases, different kinds of, 83
words denoting different; words
denoting persons free from ill¬
four kinds of; description of; re¬
medies for; making gifts to get
rid of, 757
mental; hymn on Vifou for, 758
excessive eating as cause of, 760
of c^dren; remedies for, 766
cpieral remedies for all, 769
forty kinds o^ due to deranged
bile; tvrenty kinds of, due to
dersuiged phlegm, remedy for
eighty kimb due to deranged

^ caused by planets, remedy for, 829
disgus^ origin the sentiment, 923
sentiment of; is twofold; arises from
aversion, 932
dispute, explanation of the matters
dispute, the preliminary procedures
rdating to; before taking up for
discussion; termed as miscdlaneous;
being annoyed contrary to codes
is a matter for, 656
disputes, words denoting discussions
relating to, 992
four steps relating to; eighteen kinds
of and one hundred divisions of;
should be examined by the king,
qualifications of witnesses, 661-2
relating to boundaries; procedures
for solving, 670-7 1
disrespect, words meaning, 995
dissension, a political exp^ent, 627
three kinds of; means of employing,
as a means to win an enemy, 631
dissolutions, of four kinds; description
description of the absolute, 1030
Diti, wife of Kasyapa; progeny of, 45
mother of the demons, 7 fn
lost her offrpring and propitiated
Kasyapa, 47
worship of, 274
worshipped, 317
Divaspati, Indra during the period
of the thirteenth Manu, 428
Divij&ta, a son of Pururavas, 739
divine edifice, general characteristics
Diviratha, was the next king after
Dadhiv&hana; son of, 748
Divodiisa, popular name of Hemaratha; son of one of the progeny of
Gafica^va, 749
progeny of, 750
Divy&, a goddess, 375-376
Doohaka, characteristics of the metre,
dog, remedy for poison due to, 820
dog-Ute, remedy for poison due to, 756
Dc^nl, letter denoting, 418
dramas, names of twentyseven types of;
I two courses of characteristics of;
means of attaining threefold end
of life; thirty two components of, 921
explanation of opoiing in, 922
dramatic r^resentadon, four ways c^;
•c^lanation o( 930
Dhiuhi, (Aivatth&m&) a ai^, 428
survivra fhe hfrdi&boftiata iMttl^ 36
Agni Purd^
Draupadi, married by the Pm^idavas,
stayed in the forest with Pi^d^vas, 33
Asvatth^m&’s destruction of the
sons of, 35
fall of, 37
Dravarasa, son of Madhu; son of, 742
Drividi, characteristics of, 934
Draviigui, son of Dhara, 44
drdba, a division of objects to be
struck by an arrow, 648
drdfi^^> ^ modification of the array
called da^d^* 633
array formed by adding vdngs
and fianks, 634
Drdbaratha, son of Navaratha; son
Drdbasva, one of the three sons of
Dhundhum^a; the two sons of,
Drdb&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739
dreams, significance of, 595-6
recollection of the experience in
the waking state, 1056
drinks, not intoxicating, 487
Dro^, conferred weapons on Aijuna,
Arjuna’s apathy to fight on seeing,
description of the fight of, 35
Draum as son of, 36
a boundary mountain, 352
dropsy, remedy for, 752-3
Dr?advati, wife of Ufrnara, 747
dr^t^m. Sear known as, 1019
Druhya, one of the three sons of
Yayati and Devay^i, 740
Druhyu, son of Yayati and 8armi9th&,
son of G&ndhara, 747
Druma, son of Havya, 352
drunkenness, remedy for distemper
due to, 754
Drupada, son of Pr$ata; son of, 750
on whose words Sikhandi showered
arrows on Bhi^ma, 34
Dronia’s shower of arrows on, 35
drupadi, hymn, 437
drupadat, a hymn, 562
DnitamadhyA, c^racteristics of the
metre, 910
Drutavilambita, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Dugdha, an ocean, 324
Du^kha, bom to Vedank, 49
Du|]ijfisana, brother of l^ryodhana;
directed the dice-play, 33
Dundubhi, demon uain by Vklin, 17,
17fii
son of l>yutiniat, 352

Index
a year of the Hindu almanac, 405
a boundary mountain, 351, 352
dundubhi, a type of temple, 3 1 5
durdhara, a hell, 532
Durdama, one of the sons of Vasudeva
and Rohitiii, 744
durdina, denotes a bad day, 989
Durga, the other names of, 26
day of getting up, 362
ima^e of, 1 32
outlines on cloth of the form of, 402
worshipped, 50, 52
investiture of sacred thread for image
benefits of propitiating, 404
Durgasena, son of Bhadrasenaka; son
durjaya, an array; a modification of
the array ma^^^a; has eight army
units, 634
an array; made up of four valayas,
Duijaya, son of Ananta, 741
Duijaya, image of, 1 38
Durmallika, a type of drama, 92 1
Durmati, a year of the Hindu almanac,
Durmukha, a year of the Hindu al¬
manac, 405
Durmukhi, a goddess, 375
durva, a kind of grass, 94
Durvasas, son of Atri and Anasuya, ‘49
curse on celestials by, 5
Duryodhana, son of Dhrtari^tTa and
Gandh^i, 31
Kanjta became a dependent on, 32
refuses to give half the kingdom, 33
going for batde at Kuruk;etra, 34
army of, 35
seen by Yudhi^thira on the way to
heaven, 38
Du^at^a, demon, 16
commander of Khara; was killed by
RSma, 16 fn
Du^kara, an embellishment ofword,932
a kind of Yamaka; three kinds of;
explanations of, 936
du^kara, a division of objects to be
struck by an arrow, 648
Du^ptca^d^lll^ A female divinity,
Du^yanta, son of Marutta; son of, 747
one of the four sons of Taibsurodha;
wife of; son of, 749
Duti, a fSsmale divinity, 411
duties, as laid down in die Vedas;
excdlence 1074
BvSdai&tman, a iSalagrima, 126
Dviup&janas, ^Lgveda » the autho¬
rity 7^
Dvairatha, a son of Jyotifmat, 352
Ds*andva (compound), two kinds of—
itaretarayoga and sam&h5ra; ex¬
amples of, 975
dvapara, a yuga; division of Veda at
the end of, 429
Dvaravati, city founded by Raivata,
a sacred spot, 327
made as his capital by 28
Krs^’s return to, 743
Aniruddha brought to l§ot|iitapura
by U^a from, 30
solutation to the fortunes of, 50
repetition of the name of Kfftia at,
was flooded by ocean, 37
dvidvadasa, denotes the second and
twelfth houses, 357
Dvigu (compound), having a number
as the first member, 975
Dvimidha, one of the three sons of
Brhat, 749
Dvimurdhan, one of the sons of
Hirapyak^a, 46
Dvira^d^ka, letter denoting, 419
dvisthupa, an array; characteristics of,
Dvivida, a monkey that accompanied
Rama for the battle at Lanka, 2 1
killed by Krfua as he avenged the
death of Naraka, 30, 30 fn
Dwarf, Vi^tiu’s manifestation as; as son
of Kaiyapa, and Aditi, 745
alms sought from Bali by, 8
obeisance made to, 82, 83
characteristics of the image of, 129
dysentery, medicine for, 752
infantile; remedy for, 766
remedy for; remedy for long
standing, 768
of acute nature; remedy for, 777
accompanied by swelling; remedy
for, in
Dyuti, wife of Vibhavasu, 738-9
dyOta, a flower, 529
Dyutim&n, ruled Kraufica, 322
Dyutimat, a boundary mountain;
son of, 352
ear, pain in; remedy for, 755
bleeding of; remedy for 766
ear-adie, remedy to remove, 777
earth, extent of, 353
and parts of, words denoting, 1005-6
best suited for installation of an
image, 267
a great gift, 544
merits or and mode of making, 555-6

Agni Puribfa
saluted, 50
eclipse, merits of making a gift at the
time of, 362
Ekacakra, city, Pa^d^vas stay at, 32,
Ekadaihfti'a, a name of the elephanthiced ^od, 190
ekada^m, an ascetic, 454
Ekadanta, one of the eight forms of
Ga^apati, 865
Ekanetra, a Rudra, 263
letter denoting, 419
Ek&Aghri, a guardian deity, 284
Ekap&da, letter denoting, 419
Eka^dr&k^a, a Rudra, 263
Ekavira, mode of worship of Gauri
according to, 897
ekoddifta, ceremony, 459
mode of pterforming, 348
Elegance, relating to Gun^; cxplana*
tion of, 945
elephant, words denoting things re¬
lating to, 1019
ground suitable for, 632
elephant (golden) and horse, a great
gift, 544
elephantiasis, remedy for, 768
elephants, men mounted on; func¬
tions of, 631
needed to protect a chariot, 632
three cavalry (men) to be emplo¬
yed to fight with, 632
elephants, characteristics of; treatment
of their diseases, 781-83
having commendable qualities to
be possessed, 781
diseases of the legs of, 782
remedy for all sorts of disorders of,
remedy for colics of, 783
constipation of, 781
dysentery of, 782
earache of, 782
fainting of, 781
the fevers of, 781
. worms in the intestines of, 782
jaundice of, 781
the disease known as <katu’ of, 782
loss of appetite of, 782
injuries of, 783
stiffness of neck of, 782
shivering of, 782
the enlargement of spleen of, 782
numbness of trunk of, 782
'emoval of excess wind in the
bodies of, 781
propitiatory rites for curing the
ailments of, 795-98
anointment for, 783
anointment for headache of, 781
bed for, 783
excellent coUyrium for, 783
cooling agent for the eyes o( 783
for sharpening the eyesight of, 783
dried barley lor deranged humours
kind of food good for, 783
incense which makes them victori¬
ous in battle, 783
milk as a drink for emaciation due
to rutting in, 783
nails of ; cutting of; should be bathed
with oil once in a month, 783
prescription that increases the
strength of, 783
medicine for drinking in the case
of retention of urine of, 782
excellent drink for wounds of, 782
elevated thinking, word signifying, 995
embellishment, of senses; eight kinds
of both sound and sense; six varieties
embellishments, word, meaning and
both; of words, nine kinds of; ad¬
ding beauty to poetry; three kinds
embryo, words relating to, 1014
emerald, a gem, 640
qualities of a good, 641
emetic, commended in the case of
hemorrhage, 752
the best, 757
decoction which would, serve as, 769
a decoction that serves as a good, 778
emotions, eight transient, 924-6
inter-dependent on sentiment, 924
empire, seven constituents of, 585
employer, has the option to pay an
employee for overtime, 674
endeavour, the five kinds of, 922
enemies, three kinds of, 605
opiwrtune moments to win on the
sides of an array; means to win,
enemy, definition of an; ways to
conquer an, 627
in one’s own soil or another’s soil;
means to win, 631
enmity, five kinds of^ 623
epics, merits of making a gift of, 735
epilepsy, remedy for long standing, 773
remedies for, 829
era^damup^i herb, 407
erotic, origin of the sentiment; two¬
fold; subdivided into two; four¬
fold divisions of a division of, aids of,
erotic ^rt, words denotiiw, 995
eternally, words denoting, 988

Index
eunuch, words which are used in the
sense 1014
euphonic combinations, examples of,
evening, words denoting, 990
events, preliminary and later; the
strength of, 657
evidences, in a lawsuit, 657
fine for false, 663
excellence, adds charm to poetry;
exists in two forms, 944
of word ; seven kinds of, 944
of sense; six varieties of, 945
of words and sense; six varieties of,
excess, words denoting, 988
excitant, two kinds of; supportive; the
influence of the emotions asso¬
ciated with; the nature of enhan¬
cing, 926
of women are twelve, 927
exercise, rules relating to doing, 764
exertion, of the body regarded as
gestures of the body, 928
expedients, six kinds of, 606-8
the seven political, 627
expedition, deHnition of, 607
instructions relating to military, 594
propitious periods for undertaking,
expiations, different kinds of; subtle
kinds of, 482-3
different kinds of, 485
destroying sins, 490
for association with sinners, 478-82
for discontinuing the worship of
factors to be examined before lay¬
ing down, 486
expression, two forms of natural form
extraneous matter, detection of, 268,
eye, remedy for all diseases of; white¬
ness in; remedy for; ointment for
external part of, 755
eye-brow, sevenfold movement of, 929
eyesight, prescription that strengthens,
face, six Idnds^ of actions of, 929
fame, words signifying, 993
fasting, rules relating to and benefits
as superior austeriw, 1074
ferry charges, words for, 996
flestivals, celebrations 184-86
feet, manifold action of, 930
feudatorkfh duties of, 626
fever, medicines for, 752
due to deranged wind; remedy for
due to deranged wind and bile;
remedy for, 772
due to tumour; remedy for, 774
fever and other ailments, decoction
of herbs for, 772
fever with other ailments, remedy for,
fevers, remedy for all, 772
fevers and other ailments, remedy for,
fine arts, sixtyfour varieties of; two
divisions of, 926
fines, different kinds of; for different
for various offences, 682-3
fire, as the best sweating agept, 757
a prescription which would enable
one to walk on, 770
fire, spark of; words denoting, 988
sphere of; asterisms belonging to,
words denoting flames of, 988
words denoting submarine, 988
mode of installation of, 205-1 1
Fish, Visnu’s manifestation as, 3 ff., 9,
image of, 116
fisherman, words denoting, 996
fistula, remedy for, 775
anointment for wounds in, ointment
which arrests its spread, 767, 768
flagstaff, material for making; length
consecration of, 308-1 1
floods, words denoting overflow o^
flowers, eight kinds of gestures re¬
ferred to as; eight dil^ercnt things
as scat etc. referred to as, 530
words which mean arrangement
food, two parts: one getting secreted
and the other getting absorbed, 758
forest, words which mean, 1006
formula, for conquering the three
worlds, 396-7
for success in battle, 397-400
formulae, presided over by different
gods, and their characteristics, 895
having more than five letters fruit¬
ful always, 802
fort, defects td*, 626
fortress, to be built on hills, 620
forts, construction of, 576-7
the situation of; the six kinds of, 620
fragrance, word tor; word for attra¬
ctive, 991

Agm FufiOia
word denoting object having good,
Friday, for first feeding of a child, 358
for first shave of a cmld, 359
should not enter the cow-pen on, 361
causes death with certain asterisms,
causes afflictions with certain aster¬
isms, 377
inauspicious if coincides w'ith se¬
cond day, 381
R&hu rules in the east on, 409
friend, the three gains got through a,
friends, four kinds of, 62 1
friendship, qualities of men with
whom king should make; means
of acquiring, 621
flight, origin of the sentiment, 924
fruits, asterism for eating, 358
fruits of action, three, 1072
fumigation, herbs used in, 583-4
fundamental principles, worship of,
Gabhastika, a name of the Sun, 136
Gabhastimdn, one of the territory,
Gabhastimat, a nether world, 353
Gad&, a demon killed by Vi^nu, 334
gada (mace), used for acts such as
&hata etc., 651
gad& (mace), methods of using of, 652
gad&, a posture, 857
a type of temple, 315
Gad&cmara, form of at Gaya,
killed Heti and other demons, 334
merits of worshipping, 337
Gad&loka, sacred place at Gay4, 340,
Gad&prakfiUana, sacred place, 340
G&dhi, Indra; was bom from Kufika;
son and daughter of, 749
Gadini, a goddess, 376
Gagana, a deity assigned on the body,
Gagan&nandadeva, worshipped, 414
Gaganilnandan^tha, a deity, 413
gahana, a posture relating to the riding
of horses, 787
Sija, a type of temple, 31 5
ajavaktra, an appellation of elel^nt-faced |[od, 190,865
magan^a, a disease; remedy for, 766
lAlan4a» letter denoting the divinity,
Gftlava, a Pftficar&tra tantra, 106
Gansanopamfi, explanation ol^ 941
Gftmbhlrya, an excdlenoe word;
(see also droth) , 944
gambling, different types, 653
rules relating to, 675
evil results of, 627
Gapa, worship of, 197
obeisance to, 51
Gapacchandas, description of, 905
Gapadhipa, one of the eight forms of
Ga^apati, 190, 865
Ganakriijki, one of the names of
Gape^, 190
Gapanayaka, one of the names of
Ganesa, 190
Gai^apati, elephant-faced god to be
worshipped, 190
different names of, 877
of the form of prapava, 412
mode of worship of, 876-78
Ganapati, eight forms of; worship of,
Ganas, worshipped, 51
gapas, relating to metres, explanation
Gap^a, a division of Vithi, 928
gantja, an adverse period, explanation
period of, 383
gapd^mal^, a disease, remedy for, 766
gapd^nta, an adverse period, des¬
cription of, 382
Gandham&dana, a monkey, 21
a mountain, 324, 325
a forest, 325
G^dhara, son of Gapdira, sons of,
the descendants of, 747
Gindharas, origin of, 747
G^dhari, one of the wives of Kr;pa,
one of the two wives of Dhr$pi, 743
wife of Dh{tarastra, 31
accompanied her husband to the
forest, 36
g&ndhari, a vein, carries the wind
ud&na, functions ol^ 556
Gandharva, located in a square for
worship , 108
worslupped, 316
G&ndharva, the science of, 3
a territory, 350
g&ndharva, a type of marriage, 435
Gandharvas, bom to Arista, 47
names of, 987
Gitraratha made the ruler of, 47
Kf^a married the daughter of, 28
milking of die cow in the company
tide on the chariot of ^e Sum 356
parayer to destroy evil forces o^ 84
Sindhaiasyaka, a gem (?), 641
andhavad, spirit possessing die

Index
child in the seventeenth year,
symptoms of the child possessed
by, offering to appease, 826
of Varutha,son of, 747
G&t^diva the bow got from Fire*god, 32
Gandhivftta, a division of prose kavya,
Gai^tesa, other names of, 190, 987
establishment of image of, 116
mode of worshipping, 189-90
obeisance to, 1
Ga^esvara, one of the eight forms of
Gai^apati, 865
Gariga (Ganges), words denoting
celestial, 987
brought down from heavens by
Bhagiratha, 737
had Bhi$ma as the son from ^antanu,
excellence of, 1074
greatness of, 328-29
greatness of its confluence with
Sarasvati, 327
greatness of its confluence with
Gomati, 328
always meritorious, 436
greatness of land adjacent to, 329,
water at the time of eclipse getting
the sanctity of, 362
purifies the bather, 331
purifies one by mere remembrance,
Vifnu to be contemplated at the
confluence of the river with the
ocean, 841
worship of, 197
adored, 50, 88
worshipped, 5 1
Gangadvara (Haridvara), not easily
accessible, 330
Gangavisnu, exposition made by, 1074
gafij^, said to be auspicious, 641
gara, an astral combination (kara^a),
Garbha, one of the five sons of Vitatha,
GarbhidhSna, a rite, 59, 71, 86, 95,
garden, words for, 1006-7
GSrgya, a Paficaratratantra, 106
girlmpat^pada, at Gaya, 339
iru^a, an array, 612
aruda, bom from Vinat& and Ka£-
yapa 46, 63fii
was made as the chief of the birds,
KnQA.a4 riding 28, 30
installation fsi me image o( 173
benefit of worshipping, 343
worshipped, 5 1 (l^also Vainateya)
Garudamaodapa, a shed in a temple,
Garudapura^a, narrated by lord Vifpu
in the Tark^akalpa, describes the
birth of Garuda from the Univ'ersal
Egg, should be given as a gift, 734
Garudi, name of a herb, efficacy of,
garutman, a type of temple, 3 1 5
Gathii, definition of the metre, 915
Gatra, one of the sons of Vasi$tha and
Una, 49
Gaudiyd, a variety of diction, cha¬
racteristics of, 927
Gauii (Parvati), renounced by S^iva, 6
seen by Ufa as sporting with 3iva, 29
image of, 1 39
installation of image of, 1 72, 302-3
at Gaya, benefit of worship of, 343
to be worshipped, 1 33
different modes of worship of, 896-99
characteristics of the metre, 91 3
gaurinavamivrata, mode of practising,
Gautama, a law-giver, 455
Gavak;a, a monkey, 2 1
G^a, given as one of the sons of,
Uru and Agneyi, but 3ibi according
to VifpupuraJtiia, 42
a demon, legend relating to, 332-35
son of Dhisapa of the family of
Agni, 43
a son ofSudyumna, mled over all
the quarters, 735
one of the five sons of Vitatha, 749
son of Nakta, 323
a monkey, 21
Gaya, a sacred place, 350, 491
ruled by G^a (Gayapuri’), 735
extent of, 334
Brahms’s curse on the brahmins
mode of pilgrimage to, 335-44
mode of performing sraddha at,
Janardana as ancestors at, 342
merits of performing ancestral rites
significance and greatness of, 332-35
Gadadhara to bw contemplated at,
sacredness of image of Brahxn& at,
Gay&ked&ra, at Gayi, obeisance made
Gay&n&bhi, at Gay&, one should ofier
piodt^ at, 342

Agni Puritoa
Gay&^iras, at Gay&, 337,342
extent of, 338
GSyatri, a metre, 562
number of letters in, 902
the number of letters in a quarter oC
white coloured, belongs to Agniveiya^otra, 905
appropriate time for recital of, 916
mantra, name of the gods presiding
over the letters uf the colours
associated with, 560-1
mode of reciting, the greatness of,
use of, 87, 87fn
should be recited, 437
destroys sins when repetition is
made, 491
merits of doing oblations with, 561
explanation of, 563-4
that is known as ajapS, 557-8
mantra personified as goddess,
white m complexion, born in
the Katyayani gotra, 561
letter denoting, 418
gem, in the serpents, auspiciousness
Gemini, commendable for marriage
when ruled over by certain asterisms,
relating to worship of Vi^^u, 361
good for agriculture, 361,
a special designation of, presence
of Sun in, 362
time taken by the Sun to cross, 384
friendly with Sagittarius, 392
gems, words denoting the place of
origin of, 996
eight kinds of, 283
characteristics of, 640-641
good characteristics of, 641
asterisms suitable for wearing, 359
to be worn by a kin& 640
genealogy, words whi^ mean, 1017
germ (in a play), explanation of, 922
gestures, eight kinds of, 530
twelve kinds of, explanation of
five of, 928-9
Ghana, a Rudra, 254
Ghankntasthfi, a female energy, 136
Ghan&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739
Gha^^, a female divinity, 375
g^aota, one of the postures of the hand,
GhatjLtadevi, a female divinity, 379
Ghaptkkar^a, image of, 1 35
Ghaotali, an evil spirit which possesses
a child on the third night after
birth, 821
syznt>toms of the child possessed by,
offering to appease, unguent for
the child possessed by, 821
Ghatakacakra, a mystic diagram to
know victory etc., 388-9
Ghatotkaca, son of Bhimasena and
Hi^imba, 751
Ghora, a form of Rudra, 253
located and worshipped, 292
ghora, signifies the entry of the Sun in
one of the constellations, 362
Ghora, a female divinity, worshipped,
located on the left tooth, 417
a hell, 1038
Ghorarupa, a hell, 1 038
Ghofa, born to Dharma and Lamba,
Ghfdrika, one of the daughters of
Tamra, 46
Ghfta, son of Dharma, son of, 747
Ghfteyu, one of the ten sons of,
Bhadra^a, 748
Ghftoda, an ocean surrounding the
Kusadvipa, 352
gifti^a political expedient, three kinds
five kinds of, 628
mode of making, 544
suitability of a person to receive, 541
injunctions on the recipient of, 542
to be made to poor and greedy for
winning them, 629
efficacy of making a, 463
becomes futile if made expecting
return, 541
gift of a cow, mode of making and
merits of, 545-46
merits of giving cows as, 547
ofiering grains as a best, 544
of earth, merits and mode of making,
gilb, sixteen great, 544-46
different Idnds of, merits of giving,
proportionate to one’s possession, 546
as a means to be employed by the
king, 587
which confer the desired fruits, 552-55
rules relating to making, 538, 539-43
certain rules rriating to making, 549
rules reladng to acc(q>ting, 543
common procedures in making all,
the words to be said while making,
mode of making, for different
yugas> 543
greatness of making different kinds

Index
merits of making different kinds of,
merits of giving on certain days, 550
meritorious than performing sacri¬
fices, 551
girdle, time for tying of, 359
Girika, queen of Suhotra, propitiated
Vasiftlm and had seven sons, 750
girikar^ka, flower not to be used in
worship, 529
a herb, 371
girivajra, auspiciousness of, 641
Giti, characteristics of the metre, 906
Gityarya, characteristics of the metre,
glance, three-fold, divided into thirtysix lands, 929
goad, words for, 1019
Gobhanu, son of Varga, son of, 747
goblins, worshipped, 30
remedy for defects due to, 756
gocarma, (a measure of surface)
merits of making a gift of, 547
Godavari, flows from Sahya, 351
Janasthana on the banks of, 1 5
greatness of, 328
sacredness of, 330
goddesses, names of different, 420-23
mode of worship of, 23-4
godhika, an array, consists of five
units of army, 634
God of Death, synonyms of, 988
gods, forms of, represented by the
vowels and consonants, 873-74
worship of different, 273-75, 952-3
consecration of the images of^ 180-83
merits of worshipping different such
as Rudra, Vi9iju etc., 900
gods and goddesses, comprising the
part of a mantra relating to Brahma,
comprising the part of mantra
rdating to Vi$nu, 420-21
comprising the part of mantra
relating to Siva, 421-22
installation of images of, 1 7 1 -3
goitre, a remedy to be used as an
unguent in, 776
gokar^a, a flower, 529
gok9urak5, a herb, 407
Gokula, a place, 27
Gomantaka, a place, 28
Gomati, river, confluence with Gafigi
Gomatlvidyi, a sacred formula, effi¬
cacy of mpeating the, 799
reputed' as an atonement 475
gomeda, a gem , said to be auspicious,
Gomedha, a boundary mountain, 351
Gomukhi, a spirit possessing the
child in the third month, symptoms
of a child possessed by, offering
to appease, bathing the child
possessed by, 823
gomutrika, an array, a variation of
array called bhoga, 634,
an array, modification of bhoga, 635
Gomutrika, one of the bandhas, two
kinds of, description of, 936.7
bandhas, composed in all the metres,
gonasas, serpents known as, 807
treatment of poison due to, 818
good deeds, words denoting, 990
good people, commendable acts of,
Gopala, beads belonging to Jyoti
class, 894
Gopisvara, form of Vi^^u to be con¬
templated on the shore of Sindhu
ocean, 842
Gopracara, at Gaya, 341
gorak$a, a herb, 406
gosava, a sacrifice, 474
Go;thl, a type of drama, 921
gout, of acute nature, an extraction
of oil of herbs as a remedy for, 775
remedy for, 755, 767
Gfovardhana, a mountain, 841
govatsadvadasi, mode of practising
the vow of, 512
Govinda, a name of Vi^nu, 65
characteristics of the form of, 1 28
auspicious day for making an image
saluted by Indra, 27
govindadvadafl, mode of practising the
vow of, 512
govisa^amudra, a posture of the hands,
govrata, definition of the austerity
termed as, 799
graceful, a mode, explanation of, 933-4
graha, herbs denoted by, 406, 407
gr&havlf one of the pratdta mudr5i,
grilhyakai:ttakap&yana, a posture
relating to riding of horses, 787
grains, eight kinds of, 283
words denoting, and related things,
guidelines for storing and selling,
grkmapl, ride the chariot of Sun, 356

Agni Purdm
grammatical incorrectness, a defect of
word, 947
Gramyatva, a defect of word, 947
Granthika, beads belonging to the
Siva class, 894
grazing, rules relating to, 671 >72
G|dhresvara, at Gayk, to be wor¬
shipped, 342
Gfdhrakuta, at Gaya, balls of rice to
be offered at, 342
Gfdhravata, at Gayil, balls of rice to
be offered, 342
green, words denoting, 992
greying of hair, herbs to be used as
sternutatory to arrest, 774
grharaja, a type of temple, 314
grief, need to discard, 1068
group of gods, words denoting, 986
ground, period within which owner¬
ship can be claimed, 657
Grtsapati, one of the two sons of
Kapila, brahmins, warriors and
tradesmen as descendants of, 749
guardian deities, names and worship
gudap&ka, a hell, 532
^d^rtha, a defect, 944
gudavrata, merits of practising, 523
guduci, a herb, 371, 407
Guha, image of, 106
hunter chief entertained R&ma, 13
Guhyakubjikn, a goddess, 423
Guhyaiaktini, a female divinity, 416
Gulma, one of the siddhas, 414
gumphanS., an embellishment of word,
explanation of, three kinds of, 933
gutJias, in poetry, the place of, 944
(see also excellence)
Gupta, a kind of Citrakavya, defini¬
tion of, 935
Guijara, (region of), 387
guru, an array, description of, 633
Gufika, beads belonging to the Savitra,
class, 894
haemoptysis, cause of, 760
haemorrhage, medicines for, 752
remedies which arrest, 776-777
Haihaya, one of the sons of Satajit,
son of, 740
I^hdhayas, descendents of TalajaAgha,
hlUiUiala, poison, 5
a deadly poison, Vi^u's tenth
manifestation referred to, as for
the conquest of; took the poison
firom Maheivara, 746
Halamukh!, characteristics (ff the
idetre,911
Halliiaka, a type of drama 921
Haihsa, beads belonging to SikhS.
clars, 894
haihsa, a type of temple, 315
haihsa bija, mantra, efficacy of locat¬
Haihsadhika, a monstress possessing
the newly bom child on the fifth
night, symptoms of child possessed
by, unguent for the child possessed
by, offering to appease, 821
Haihsaruta, characteristics of the
metre, 911
Haihsatirtha, at Gaya, 344
hand, employed in two ways — folded
and unfolded, thirteen actions of
the folded, twentyfour actions of
the unfolded, 930
Hanumat, Rama taken to Sugriva by,
searched the southern direction, 18
crossed the ocean, 19
words spoken to Sita by, 20
accompanied Rama to Lanka, 21
killed Dhumrak?a, 22
bore Laksma^a to Nikumbhila, 22
brought Sita to Rama as directed, 23
figure of, 1 37
accomplishes all acts, 379
Hara, poison retained by Siva, 5
one of the eleven forms of Siva, 45
made as lord of the goblins, 47
letter denoting 418 (See Siva)
harem, words denoting superinten¬
dent of, 1018
Hari, a manifestation of Vijriu, 428
manifestation in four forms, 10
form of Vi^riu on Govardhana, 841
different forms of, 47
to be contemplated at Sillagrama,
cause of creation etc. 39
showing the feminine form to Siva, 6
reference to fight with Siva, 30
conferred supreme position on
Dhruva, 41
manifested with four hands before
being bom as Kff^a, 26
day of waking of, 361
installation of image of, 1 72
Kr;pa referred to as, 28, 31, 36
sages conducting a sacrifice to, 1
mantra having the name of, 52, 56
to be contemplated, 37
should be adored, 61, 67, 68
remembered, 58
uttering die name of, 71, 73
meditation on, 53, 53
worship eff, 75ff
a female divinity to be invoked, 91

htdtx
baTkdra, a herb, 407
Haridv&ra, a sacred spot, 327
Harihara, form of Vi^ou, 131
Hari^apluta, characteristics of the
metre, 910
Hariri, characteristics of the metre,
haripi, a nerve, 316
Harisaila, a boundary mountain, 352
Harifeandra, son of Satyaratha; son
a place at Varanasi, 330
Harita, a celestial at the time of the
12th Manu, 428
a country, 352
haritS, a herb, 372
HSrita, a lavvgiver, 455
haritaki, a herb, 407
Havis, one of the sons of Rukmakavaca, 741
Havisya, a sage, 428
Havya, sons of, 352
Havyavaha, (fire) to be worshipped,
hay, asterisms good for gathering of,
Haya, one, of the sons of Satajit, 740
Hayagriva, form of Vi^^u, 326
image of, 115
Salagrama called, 125
a demon killed by Vif^u, 4
Hayagrivesa, prayer to, 82
Hayanana, a female divinity: image of,
Hayaura, daughter of Vnaparvan, 46
Hayas'iras, form of Vi^^u, 131
Hayasir;atantra, a Pancaratrigama,
105, 117 fn. (saihhita)
Hayasya, image of; instmlation of, 172
head, thirteen ways of movement of;
diseases relating to; sternutatory for,
Harivar;a, a mountain, 324
Naisadha given by Priyavrata to,
harsh, a mode; explanation of, 933-4
Haryahgaka, son of Campa; son of,
Haryana, one of the two sons of
Dfdhasva, 736
son of, 737
haste, words denoting, 988
hasticdikya, definition of, 463
hastijihvi, an occult nerve, 253
carries the wind vyina: functions,
Hastin&pUra, a dty, 37
Jayanta to be worshipped at, 841
Hataka, a male divinity worshipped,
hkva, the collective word for beha¬
viour of women, 995
Havirdh&na, son of Antardhana and
Sikhaodini; sons of, 43
haviryajha, one of the domestic
sacrifices, 7 kinds of, 86, 466
head, ointment for, 755
remedy for fall of hair from, 834
headache, remedy to remove, 777
health, no fortune equal to, 1074
heart, location of, 760
heart, disease, purgatives to be given
heat, words denoting excessive and
little heat, 990
heaven, synonyms of, 986
heaven and earth, interspace between;
words denoting, 988
hell, words denoting, 995
hells, the names of different, 1038-39
the nature of different, 530-32
hemajihva, rite called, 86
hemak^a, rite called, 86
Hemakuta, country, 322
location of, 324
Hemalamba, a year of the Hindu
calendar, 405
hemaAga, rite called, 86
Hemaparvata, mountain, 350
Hcmaratha, son of Ketum&n; well
known as Divodasa, 749
Hema^aila, a boundary mountain,
hemasutraka, rite called, 86
herbs, eight kinds of, 283
symbolical numbers denoting, 406
hot and cold, the two kinds of
strength of, 762
tastes and qualities of, three fla¬
general rule for making a decoction
purpose for which used, 406
used in charms, medicines etc.,
which give good complexion, 763
which would subjugate the partner,
which would bring happiness and
prosperity to the married couple,
that should be used for getting a
heroes, four kinds of; four different
kinds of; the three minor compa¬
nions of, 926
heroic, orq;in of the sentiment 923

threefc^d; accomplished by enthu¬
siasm, 931-2
heroines, different types of, 926
Heti, a demon, 334
hetu (cause), an embellishment of
senses, 939
explanation of; produced in two
ways, 942
Hetuka, a guardian deity, 284
hiccough (hiccup), rem^y for, 753,
Hidimba, wife of Bhimasena, 751
hill, word denoting; word denoting
earth near and above, 996
Hima, country, 322
life in, 323
Him5dri, (Himalaya) 350
Himalayas, mountain, 37 fn., 351
Himav&n, location of, 324
Himavat, (Himalaya) 47, 50
HiihsS, wife of Adharma; progeny
Hira^vat, son of Agnidhra; region
given to, 322
Hirauy^, a female divinity, 230
Hira^yagarbha, denotes Brahm5, 40
creation made by, 40 fn
hira;^yagarbha, a great gift, 544
Hirat^yaka, a mountain, 324
Hirauyakasipu, a demon; bom to
Kas'yapa and Diti, 45
brother of Hira^yak^a, 7, 7 fn.
performed penance at Sriparvata,
reference to his destruction of
Vi?nu, 745
sons of, 26
becoming embryo in the womb of
Devala, 26fn
the four sons of, 46
Hirauy^;a, demon; son of Kaiyapa
and Diti, 45
killed by VisQu in his manifest¬
ation as a boar, 7, 7fn, 745
five sons of. 46
progeny mixed with that of Danu
in the text, 46fn
hiraoy&k^a, a rite, 86
hiraiityamitra, a rite, 86
hirapy&Aga, a rite, 86
hirattydAghri, a rite, 86
hin^yapi^i, a rite, 86
Hira^yaromaka, son of Parjanya Praj&pati, 48
hbra^ySsya, a rite, 86
hinmyavarpk, a hymn, 436, 562
hiraayavat, a rite, 86
hole, words signifying, 995
horses, four varieties of; methods to
train, 789
four different varieties of; such as
brahmin etc, 789
certain kinds of gaits <ff, 788-89
auspicious physi^ features of, 790
inauspicious features of, 790
having certain physical features
to be avoided, 789-90
rider should make good the bad
qualities in, 785
management of; treatment of the
diseases of, 784-89
taming of, 788
means of control, 788
instructions relating to keeping
of vicious, 794
four political expedients relating
to; and appropriate time for
using them, 786
qualities of men expert in hand¬
ling, 786
preparatory steps before riding, 785
asterisms and seasons commendable
for first ride on, 784
seasons forbidden for riding, 784
ability without instruction to ride
names of different postures rela¬
ting to riding, 787
instructions relating to riding of,
instructions relating to riding in
the morning and evening, 786
places unsuitable for riding on, 784
should not be whipped soon after
mounting, 786
should not be whipped at improper
places, 784
censure of a person not knowing
how to manage a, 786
praise of a person who knows both
the good and bad qualities of, 786
food for different breeds of, 788
the food and the quantity of food
to be given for,' 793-4
drinks for, 792
instructions relating to bathing of,
substitute drinks during different
seasons for, 793
consecreation and location of gods
on the bodies of, 784-5
characteristics of, treatment of the
diseases of, 789-94
propitiatory rites ter curing ' the
ailments of, 794-5
bitten by flies; ronedies for, 788
a curative for harassing cough of,
emetics for all kinds of diarriioea

Index
an oily emetic that makes com¬
fortable, 791
remedy for dysentery of, 790-1
remedy for eye diseases of, 792
a potion that removes the fatigue
rem^y for haemoptysis of, 792
remedies for deranged hiunours of,
remedy for itching of, 792
af&ict^ by fever should first be
treated with water, 791
remedy for pain due to whipping
prescription to remove pain in the
stomach of, 790
beneficial remedy for paralysis of the
tongue of, 792
remedy for swelling due to stiffthroat of, 791
anointment for swollen (limbs) of,
remedy for ulcers of, 792
remedy for passing of blood in urine
remedy for a wound of the tendon
or of an ear etc. of, 792
horse (golden), a great gift, 544
horse (golden) and chariot, a great
gift, 544
horticulture, science of, 764-5
hotra, priest for ^ks, 429
house, good time for building, 360
good asterisms for entering the new,
months good for entering, 360
householder, duties of, 431-32
houses, the trees which should be
grown around, 643
Hrada, son of Hrada, 46
Hrada, one of the sons of Hirai^tyakafipu, 46
Hriihk&ri, a female divinity, 424
Hflilm, son of Bhoja; ten sons of, 743
Hnfiteia, a form of Vi^^u, 65
form of Vif^u at Kubjanora, 841
at Gaya worshipped, 343
invocation to, 52, 82
huhu, a vein; carries the wind
devadatta, 556
humility, as cavise of statesmanship,
need for practising, 618
humours, t^ qualities of the three,
get increased or abated in the diff¬
erent seasons, 759
characteristics of men having in
excess £ne of the three, 1033
the nattm of people haWng in
excess one kind of, 760
get increased or abated according
to the quality of the food, 759
as capable of coursing through the
entire body, 760
cause and symptoms of the deran¬
gement of different, 760
the defects due to, 758
certain practices which would re¬
move each one of the three, 764
remedies for diseases due to derange¬
ment of, 761
Hunkara, one of the Yogiids; image of,
Hutahavyavaha, one of the sons of
Dhara, 44
Hutasa, one of the Yoginis; image of,
Ibhasya (Gane^a), worship of the
image of, 215
Iccha, a female divinity, 292
Ida, a female energy, 136
ida, a vein; carries the wind prava;
functions of, 556
established on the left side of the
idol, conservation of, 152-55
ignorance, words denoting, 991
ihamfga, a type of drama, 921
Ik?u, an ocean, 324
Ik^vaku, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 9, 735
descendants of family of, 738
Ila, one of the Yoginis; image of,
Ila, daughter of Manu; later changed
as a male, 735
Ilavfta, Mcru given by Agnidhra to,
Ilavfta, a mountain, 324
illusions, different kinds of, 629
image, consecration of, 283-94
preliminary, consecration of, 155-6
image of Siva, installation of, 294-302
image of Visudeva, installation of, 161images, renovation of decayed, 1843
p^estals of, 123
impartiality, commended, 1073-4
impure, wo^s denoting, 996
impurities, five kinds of general, 947
incantations, description of, 409-1 1
of five kinds, 896
of different kinds; appropriate
period for practising, 896
effects of evil; means of getting
relief from, 843-5
incessant rain, words denotii^, 989

Agni Puribfa
incident, as the body of the drama
two varieties of, 922
indeclinables, the different meanings
of the various, 996«1000
Indication, explanation of; five kinds
indifference, a political expedient, 587,
explanation of, 629
indigestion, remedy for, 776
Indra, synonyms of, 987
the word Parjanya denotes, 40
name of the mansion of, 987
words denoting the club of, 987
name of the chariot of, 987
brought the chariot for Yudhi;thira,
name of the charioteer of, 22 fn
Diti’s desire to get a vanquisher of,
Indrajit as the conqueror of, 24
revived the monkeys, 23
conquest of Kr^na over, 28
Arjuna*s obstruction of rain caused
Maruts as allies of, 47
festivities for, 27
' day of waking of, 361
restored to status by Raji, 740
kingdom restored by Vi$i;iu to, 745
Vifuu worshipped by residents of the
world of, 37
praised the goddess, 26
praise of 8ri made by, 49
Indra, image of, 137
pervades the limbs, 65
worship of the image o^ 215
obeisance made to, 1
worshipped, 51, 52, 66
offering made to, 274
herb denoted by, 406
herto made use of by, denotes the
asterism Purv&^dl^a, 407
Indradvipa, one of the territories in
Bh&rata, 350
Indradyumna, son of Tejas, 323
Indrajit, a demon; Hanflmat searched
Ae house of, 19
Rima and Lak^ma^a fainted on
account of the weapon used by;
was killed by Lakfmaua, 22
known so on account of the con¬
quest of Inchra, 24
Indri^, other names of, 987
image of; worshipped on the mar¬
riage day, 435
one of the goddesses, 415
indr&i^i, a herb, 371
a herb worn on the body for protecdoa, 378
Indrapramiti, ^gveda imparted to, 429
Indravajra, diaracteristics of the
metre, 912
Indravajra, mixed varieties are for¬
med fro^ 912
Indravaih^^ characteristics of the
metre, 912
Indu, one of the female energies, 136
infantry, functions of; ground sui¬
table for; to protect each foot of
elephant (men), 632
infants, recipes for the diseases of,
inference, word for, 991
inflammation, of the glands of the
neck; remi^y for, 776
of anus; remedy to remove pain in,
inflections, two kinds of — sup and tih,
use of the different, 971-73
Ihgudi, a tree, 13
initiation, mode of performing, 67-74
purificatory, 235-37
that secures nirvana, 257-62
of principles, 262-3
injiuy, ten kin^ of, 1041
inquiry, word denoting, 991
insani^, five causes for, 826
remedy for removal of, 773
insects, remedy for venom due to all,
installation, of the deity, 87ff
installation, five kinds of, 266
of deities, 116-118
of an image; five divisions of, 147-49
of images presiding over five ele¬
ments, 27 1
of a linga, 278-83
suitable period for, 278-9
of the image of Gaurl, 302-3
of the image of Siva, 266-72, 294of the image of Sun-god, 303-4
of an image of V&sudeva, 161-64
instrument, two kinds of — external
and internal, 970-71
insult, wmds denoting, 993
intellect, words denoting; retentive
power of; word for, 991
interest, rules relating to period o^ 673
intoxication, remedy for removal of,
investiture o^ fibres of damanaka, 225investiture of sacred thread, for the
deity, 87 ff
time for, 359
for all pxls, 100-101
for VifQU, 98 ff

Index
invocation, that routs the enemy, 394-5
Ir&, grass and other things as pro¬
duction of, 4G
lia, propitiation of, 176
worshipped, 316
iia, a herb denoted by, 407
I ^na, a name denoting Rudra, 50
worshipped, 51
a form of :§iva worshipped, 51
worship of the image of, 116
l»ni, worshipped, 317
i$ta, explanation of, 539
l^vara, presiding deity of an clement,
Isvara(!^iva), adored, 1
Isvara, a year of the Hindu Calendar,
iivara, a herb denoted by, 406
isvari, name of a herb, 378
itch, dry spreading 755; remedy for,
itih^a, definition of the term, 992
Jagati, a metre, 902, 905
white coloured; belongs to V^i;lhagotra, 905
the number of letters in a quarter
appropriate time for recital of, 916
metres belonging to the class of, 912
Jagatipankti, composition of, 904
Jagatprabhu, form of Vi^nu at Vimala,
Jaghanacapala, characteristics of the
metre, 906
Jahnavi, (river Ganges) crossed by
Rama, 13
image of, 133
Jahnu, son of Ajami<;lha and Ke^ini;
son of, 749
names of the four sons of, 750
Jaigisavya, exposition made by, 1074
Jaimini, disciple of Vy^, 429
Jajali, represents a branch of Atharvaveda, 730
Jala, an ocean, 324
Jalabandha, one of the varieties of
Gomutrika bandha, 937
Jalada, son of Havya, 352
Jaladhara, a boundary mountain,
J&landhara (region of), 387
Jalandhara, mountain, 412, 414
Jalaiayin, form of Vifau at Nandi,
Jaloddhatagati, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Jamadagni, Vi9i;iu*s manifestation as
Bh&rgavs^ son of, 8, 9
oonqueaned by Rima, 1 1
Jamadagnyaka, image of, 115
Jimbavat, name of a person who
accompanied Rima, 21
killed the lion that killed Prauena,
Jambavati, daughter ofjambavin, 743
one of the wives of 744
birth of Samba to Kf^^a and, 29
Yadavas dressed up Samba, son of,
36fn
Jambha, a demon, 6, 317
Jambhaka, a demon; offering made to,
Jambu, a river, 324
jambCi, a tree, 324
jambfi, fruit; dvipa gaining the name
on account of, 324
Jambudvipa, one of the seven con¬
tinents, 323
given by Priyavrata to Agnidhra,
location of, 324
an appellation on account of jambO
fruits, 324
extent of, 351
division of, 322
jamitra, the seventh sign of the zodiac,
Janaka, king of Mithila, 10
exposition made by, 1074
Janaki (Sita), married by Rama, 11
Rama’s search of, 17
monkeys sent in directions other
than the south could not find, 18
words spoken by HanOmat to, 19
Rama’s reaction on seeing the
jewel as if he has seen, 20
Angada’s advice to Ravaija to
return, 21
Janaloka, distance of, 354
Janamejaya, son of Purafijaya; son
son of Puru, son of, 748
a descendant of Parik^it, son o£^
two other sons of, 750
Janardana, epithet of VifQU, 84
form of Viftliu at Kubj&mra, 841
at GayS, 337
a ialagr&ma, 125
Janas, one of the worlds; worshipped,
Janasthibia, on the banks of river
Godivari; R&ma’s stay at, 15
janma, one of the t&r&balas, 359
Janm5;tttmi, merits of practising, 506
Jantu, son of Puruhflta, son of, 742
son of Somaka, son of, 750
japi, a flower, braefit of wordiipping
with, 529
Japyeivara, at V&rft^asl, 330

Agni Purda^a
JarSsandha, son of Sambhava, son of,
Mathura was besieged by, 28
J&rukhya, one of the sons of Vasudeva,
and Devaki; was killed by Kaihsa,
JarS, one of the progeny of Mrtyu, 49
j&ta, a posture relating to archery,
posture advocated, 646
Jatadeva, a spirit possessing the
child in the eighth year, spnptoms
of a child possessed by, ottering to
appease, bathing and fumigation
for child possessed by, 823
Jat^hara, form of Vi^^u on Ganges,
j&takarma, rite after the birth of a
child, 432
done for purification, 481
as a Vedic rite, 59
oblation made for purification with,
a rite to be performed, 8G
Jatayu, a vulture wounded by Rava^a,
told Rama about Rava^a’s ab¬
duction of Sita; death of, 17
words spoken by Sampati, brother
Jathara, a boundary mountain, 325,
Jati, a division of Padya; characteris¬
tics of, 919
jdti, greatness of the herb, 378
jaundice, remedy for removal of, 767
javanika, one of the herbs, 407
Jaya, a year of the Hindu almanac,
one of the eight forms of Ga^apati,
form of Vi99u at Jayanti, 841
jaya, a pitcher, 270
Jay&, one of the female divinities, 51,
one of the wives of Kf^oa, 744
jay&, a stone, 269
a nerve, 316
Jayacakra, a diagram for finding
victory; description of, 389-90
Jayadeva, a muhOrta; deeds to be
done in, 371
Jayadhvaja, one of the sons of Kartavirya; was great among Avantyas; son of, 741
Jayadratha, son of Bfhatmavat; son
^yanta, a male divinity, 107
woi^p oC 273
form of Vi^ou at HastinSpura, 841
a minister of kin^ Dasaratha, 1 1
Jayanti, letter denoting, 417
image of, 138
name of a place, 841
Jayantika, a female divinity, image
Jejovati, a female divinity, 424
Jimuta, son of Vyoma, son of, 742
a country, 352
a variety of Dandaka; formation
Jiraka, a herb, 407
Jiva, denotes Jupiter, worshipped, 52
Jiiilna, a female divinity, 292
— letter denoting, 418
Jfianamudra, a posture made with
the hands, 73
Jfi&nasagara, one of the Paficaratra
Sgamas, 106
Jrmbhana, a missile, 30
judges, swerving from codes are
punishable, fine for swearing double
that of a quarrel, 656
junctures, the five kinds of, importance
Jupiter, words denoting, 989
image of, 137
is contemplated as yellow, 828
chariot of, 356
distance of Mars and Saturn from,
letter presided over by, 374
characteristic of a p>erson bom in
the house of, 392
period (years) of influence of, 363,
the part of a day presided over by,
a period called mahajymsfi on the
basis of location of, 362
occupying certain constellations
should be avoided for building
houses, 360
not recommended for marriage
when set or retrograde or transit¬
not commended for Upanayana
uHben set, 359
in the ten^ house to be avoided,
in the second and seventh houses
indicate hsq>piness, 383
gives success, 377
justice, its four feet, four places and
four means; eight parts of; three
sources of; two sorts of statements
Ibr; two parties of; two kinds of
issues for, 653

Index
administration of, 633-58
jvala, an occult nerve, 316
jv&lagardabhaka, a disease, 84, 84fn.
jvMini, one of the pra^ita-mudras, 857
Jvara, penonified and worshipped,
Jyamagha, one of the sons of Rukmakavaca; a hen-pecked husband;
names of the wife and son of, 741
Jyejtha, month of, 360, 362, 386
Jye$tha, a female divinity, 51, 201,
jye^thasaman, a hynm; a pahktipavana
should know, 349
Jyoti, one of the four kinds of rosary
beads; the four divisions of, 894
characteristics of the metre, 907
jyotirasa, a gem (?), 641
Jyoti ^a, science of, 356-63
four lightnings according to, 45fn
Jyoti;mat, rulra Kus'a, 322
names of the sons of, 352
Jyotifmati (Jagati), a metre; compo¬
sition of, 904
Jyotistoma, a sacrihce, 64fn
Jyotsna, a female divinity, 292
Kabandha, a demon killed by Rama,
Kaca, fulcra’s curse on, 25fn
Kaccha, a region; installation should
not be done by men from, 106
kacchapa, one of the treasures, 1 1 1
Kadamba, a tree, 324
a flower, 529
Kadru, progeny of, 46
Kaikasi, wife of Visravas; progeny of,
Kaikeya, one of the four sons of Sibi,
Kaikeyl, birth of Bharata to, 10
was informed abou^ the coronation
of Rama by, 11, 12
Da^ratha’s words to, 13
reproached by Bharata, 14
was paid respects by Rama, 23
Kailasa, mountain, 325
kaiUsa, a class of temple; circular
^aped, 314
the temples belonging to the class
Kaka, beads belonging to Jyoti dass,
kakapada, an array; consists of four
units of army, 634
KkkaSla, at Gay&, S41
Kaki, a daughter of Tamr&, 46
K&kinI, a fisaude divinity, 415
K&koli, a evil spirit which possesses
a newly bom child on the fourth
night, symptoms of the child pos¬
ses^ by; offering to appease;
unguent for the child possessed by,
Kakub, a variety of Ufuik; the number
of letters in each p&da of, 903
Kakudmat, a boundai^ mountain, 352
Kakudmati, composition of the metre,
Kakudmin, an alias of Raivata, 736
Kakutstha, born in the line of Ikijv&ku,
from Vikuk;u, 736
Kala, a female ^vinity, 52
kali, a measure, 134
KMa, death; Dro^a compared with, 35
a guardian deity, 284
son of Dhruva, 44
son of Dlrghabahu, 737
K&la, a monstress seizing the child in
the ninth year; symptoms of child
seized by; offering to appease, 825
kaladhya, one of the kinds of mantras
of l§iva, 873
description of, 875
Kalahaihsi, a spirit possessing the
child in the tenth year; symptoms
of the child possessed by; offering to
appease; fumigation when the cwld
is affected by, 825
Kfllaka, presiding deity of place of
worslup of plwets, 467
Kalaka, one of the daughters of Vaiivanara, 46
Kalak&nti, a female divinity, 202
Kalakar^I, a female divinity; image of,
Kalan&bha, one of the sons of
Hirauyak^a, 46fn
Kalanala, a divinity; worshipped, 414
son of Sabhanara; son of, 747
Kalafijara, mountain; sacredness of,
Kalapa, division of poetry called, 919
nature of; employs Kaiiiki vftti, 920
K&larktrl, night of destruction, 13fn
personified as a divinity; offering
made to, 395
Kala&^ a type of temple, 315
KalasaihjAaka, a Rudra, 255
Kilasutra, sul^ivision of a hell, 532,
Kalavikariui, a female divinity, 51
K&lavikari^i, a goddess, 201
Kfilayavana, a demon, 28, 28fn
K&Iayukti, a year of t^ Hindu calen*

Affii Purd^
K&leia, a linga, 343
K&li, rq>etition of the name of the
godden, 411
wordupjpedy 51, 201 ^
name of Satyavati, wife of Santanu,
K&lika, a river; greatness of confluence
K&lindl, one of the wives of KffQa, 744
Kalihga, country of; asterisms indi¬
cating destruction of, 387
installation rite should not be done
by one bora in, 106
one of the sons of Bali, 747
K&l^a, a serpent subdued by Kr^^a,
Kaliyuga, 8iva as presiding over all
the r^ions of, 337
conduct of the people at the end of,
Kalki, Vi^i^u’s manifestation as, 38, 39
figure of,130
Kalmifapada, son of ^-tupar^a; son
Kalpa, science of, 2
Kalpa(s), significance of the term,
manifestations of Vi^J^u, innumer¬
able in the different, 39, 39fn
reference to Baca’s propitiation of
the goddess in the previous, 46
dissolution at the end of, 3
Kalpalata, a great gift, 544
Kalpavrk$a, a great gift, 544
Kalpavyk^vrata, m^e of practising
the vow of, 522
Kaly^Qa, a form of Rudra, 253
K&ma (god of love), synonyms of,
Kflma, Pradyumna identified with,
reborn as Pradyumna, 29, 29fn
one of the siddhas, 414
kama, one of the puru;arthas protect¬
ed by Rama, 23
mantra which bestows, 53
Kimadhenu, divine cow in the
possession of Jamadmi, 9
water on earth identifi^ with, 337
K&madhenu, golden, a ^eat gift, 544
Kamala, a female divinity; worKam&ngadraviiji, Kubjika addressed
K&marupa, augury foreboding des¬
truction of, 387
• installation should not be done by
Aose b^ in, IM
a mountain; woeshtpped, 412,414
Ickpuittayodafi, see anangatrayodafl
JKambalabariiii, one of the sons of
Babhru, 742
son of Devarha; son of, 743
Kambalabarhif, son of Marutta;
son of, 741
Kaiiisa, the eldest amoi^f the sons of
Ugrasena, 742
the destruction of the children of
Devaki by, 26, 26fn
reference to killing of Pralamba, an
asura friend of, 30fh
attempts made to kill by, 27
iSambara as a companion of, 29fn
was killed by Ky^ria, 28
Kanaka, son of Durgama; sons of, 740
Kanakk, a female divinity; wor¬
shipped, 230
Kanakeia, at Gaya, 339
Kanakhala, a sacred place; glory of,
location of, 336
kaficanara, flower not to be used in
worship, 529
Kafici, installation should not be done
by ^ose bora in, 106
kaiiciyamaka, one of the Yamakas,
Kandarpa, god of love; worshipped,
Kandarpanatha, a male divinity; wor¬
shipped, 415
Kattdu, a sage, 43
Kanka, Yudhi;thira disguised as, 33
a boundary mountain, 332
kankola, given as an offering, 94
Kanku, one of the sons of Ugrasena,
kanta, a herb, 372
a nerve, 316
kai^takari, herb, 407
Kanti, a form of Hari, 91
an embellishment of sound and
sense; explanation of, 942
Kantotpida, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Kattva, son ofPratiratha; son of, 748
Ka^vas, a branch of Yajurvedins, 429
Kai^vasrama, glory of, 327
Ka^vi, a bran^ of Yajurveda, 730
Kanyk, a constellation, 367
(See also Virgo)
kanySdana, one of the four acts re¬
lating to a marriage, 434
kanyasa, a variety of prkttkykma, 1044
Kapal^ocana, a sacred place, 328
Kapklin one of the eleven (Rudras),
Kapalini, a female divinity; worship
m; letter denot&ig, 417
Kapard^ matted hair of Siva, 987
Kapardin, benefit of wtnshiiqMng, 343

Index
Kapardin, one of the eleven forms of
(Rudra), 45
Kapila, form of Vi$9u on the banks
of the eastern ocean, 841
enunciation made by, 1073
a class of men in the Salmaladvipa,
one of the sons of Jyoti^mat, 352
one of the three sons of Dhundhumara, 736
two sons of, 749
Kapila, a fen^e energy, 136, 424
at Gaya, 341
a class of cow: mode of worshipping,
kapila, one of the lightnings, 45fn
Kapila, a Pahcaratra agama, 1 06
Kapota, beads belonging to the ]§iva
class, 894
Kapotaroma, son of Dhfti; son of, 742
kara, a measure, 107
karaka, explanation of the term, 970
Karakabhraih^, an impurity, 947
kar^a, a hell, 532
Kar^li, a goddess; worshipped, 375,
karili, a mudra, 857
Karalika, a hell, 1038
Karalin, a guardian deity, 284
Karambhaka, son of Sakunti, son of,
Kara^a, a measure of time; correction
Karandhama, son of Traisani; son of,
Karahkii^ii, image of, 138
Karatoya, a river, 328
karavira, a flower, 529
Karaviraka, one of the sons of Kanaka,
Kardama, Prajapati, father of
Sahkhap^ 47
two daughters of, 41, 41fn
Kramap&dika given in Agnipura^a
instead of, 49fn
Kardamala, at Gaya, 342
Karka, a serpent; image of, 137
Karkaii, a water jar, 68
Karka^^hgi, an array; consists of three
units of army, 634
Karkataka, a constellation 367, 368
(See also Cancer)
karkati* a herb, 406
a flower; not to be used for Siva,
karketana, a getn, 641
Karkotaka, one of, the eight chief
serpents, 415
the Erittnber of heads of, 807
ICannadhftraya (compound), seven
kinds of; examples of^ 974-75
Karpa, born of Kunti; became a
dependent of Duryodhana, 32
aided Duryodhana in his dice play,
killed the warriors of Paiji^avas and
was killed by Arjuna, 35
son of Visvajit; son of, 748
a type of drama, 92 1
Karriaditya, at Gaya; worshipped, 339
Kari;^amotani, goddess; incantation
Kar^ati, characteristics of, 934
kari;iavedha, time for, 359
karoikara, a flower, 329
kar$a, a measure, 408
karsika, a weight, 209
Kartaviryarjuna, son of Kftavirya
greatness of, 740, 741
had thousand arms and was valorous,
the names of five foremost among
himdred sons of, 741
Jamadagni killed by the sons of, 9
Karttika, benefit of purchasing grains
in the month of, 386
Karttikavrata, for Vi^nu; mode of
practising, 522-3
Karttikeya, name ofKum&ra, as he
was son of Kfttika, 44
benefit of offering homa to, 339
benefit of worshipping, 343
Karusa, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 735
Karusas, were bom from Karu$a;
were of warrior caste, 736
kaila, a flower, 529
Kaseru, one of the nine territories, 350
an advice to stay at, 330
Paundf^ka' u the ruler of, 28fn
Kasi, a sacred place, 491, 841
Ka^raja, Sutanu as daughter of, 28fn
Ambika and Ambalika as daughters
kasmala, a hell, 532
Kasmira, name of a region, 387, 841
installation not to be done by those
born in, 1 06
Kastatva, a defect of a word, 947
Kasyapa, a sage, son of Marici, 9, 735
married thirteen daughters of Dak^a,
father of Sun, 735
proTCny of (through Diti), 7fn, 45
Rudras as sons of Surabhi and, 44fh
Danu's propitiation of for oflspring,
Garuda bom to Vinati and, 63fli
Fulomft and K&laki as wives o^ 46
earth given by Paraiurama to, 9

Agni PurS^
goddess earth addressed as related
Visijiu’s manifestation as a dwarf
as a son of Aditi and, 74')
manifested as Vasudeva, 744
his view relating to a metre, 91 3
KathS, a division of the prose k&vya;
characteristics of, 919
Kathknik&, a division of the prose
k&vya; definition of, 919
Kafhi, a branch of Yajurveda, 730
Kathc^hita, a division of Amukha;
explanation of, 922
Katimukha, one of the sons of Vi jvamitra, 749
Kafisa, letter denoting, 418
katukanda, a herb, 372
Katyayana, sage, 345
jr5ddha rite as narrated by a law¬
giver, 455
kaulava, a karana, 362, 3G9fn
Kaule^a, a male divinity, 413
Kauli, prayer made to g(^dess, 413
Kauliianatha, a male divinity, 413
Kaum&ra, the ninth creation known
Kaumari, a mother goddess, 139fn,
image of, 133
KaumodakI, a mace, 128
kaumudavrata, mode of practising
and merits of, 524, 537
to be practised in the bright fort¬
night of asvayuji, 537
Kauntali, characteristics of, 934
Kaunti, characteristics of, 934
Kauravas, origin of, 31
Kau&ilya, Rama’s birth from Da iaratha and, 10
was informed by Rama about the
coronation, 11
bowed to by Rama before leaving
for the forest, 13
Da^aratha's narration of the past
curse on him to, 14
was saluted by Rama after returning
from the forest, 23
one of the wives of 744
Kauiika, one of the sons of Vidarbha;
son of, 741
one of the two sons of Kapila, 749
Kau4ik1, one of the modes, 928
Kauthuma, a branch of Samaveda,
Kautsa, sage for the hymn eitnm
deviMm, o63
Kaverl, a river; greatness of, 328
installation should not be done by
those bom in the region near, 106
river, confluence with Narmada, 331
Kavi, one of the sons of Manu and
Nadvaia, 42
Kavya, a of drama, 921
kavya, definition of; three kinds of;
definition of prose; three divisions
five divisions of prose, 919
Kedara, one of the holy places, 330
a liAga; benefit ofworsMpping, 343
Keralas, origin of, 747
Kesaracala, group of mountains, 325,
325fn
have abodes of gods, 326
Ke^ari, a monkey that accompanied
Rama to LaAka, 21
a boundary mountain, 352
Keiava, a name of Vif^u, 65
characteristics of the form of, 127
killed the demon Hayagriva, 4
form of Vi$9u at Mathura, 841
Keii, a demon in the form of a horse;
killed by Krs^, 27
Kesini, wife of Ajamidha, 749
Ketaki, a flower, 529
not to be used for worshipping
Siva, 530
Ketu, form of, 137
the form that is to be contemplated,
chariot of, 356
worshipped, 52
Ketumala, a mountain, 325
a country, 325
Vi;nu as Varaha in, 326
Western countries given by ^nldhra to, 322
Ketuman, son of Dhanvantari; son of,
Ketumat, son of Rajas; was made the
protector of waters, 48
Khadga, a male divinity; worshipped,
khadga, a posture, 857
Khadgadeva, one of the siddhas, 414
Khadgefti, letter denoting, 419
khadira, a tree, 407
khalikSra, a posture of the horse, 787
khamsdafikfta, one of the kinds of
mantras of Siva, 873
description of, 875
KhandakathA, a division of prose
kslvya; contained in the Kath& in
the catu$padi, 919
KhSttdava a forest, 32
KhAodtlcya* & MithilA, 1060

Index
Khaflja, characteristics of the metre,
Khara, demon brother orSurpaQiakh^;
ruled Janasthana, 15, 15fn
a year of the Hindu c^endar, 405
Khasa, Yak^as and demons bom from,
khataka, an array formed by modi¬
fication of da^i^a, 634
Khati» a place worthy to be seen, 640
Khattara, a place worthy to be seen,
khavrksa, a type of temple, 315
Khecara, a goddess, 424
Kh^ari, a goddess, 424
Khihkhim, a female divinity to be
worshipped, 412
Klwati, one of the sons of Dm and
Agneyu, 42
a daughter of Dak;a; married
Bhrgu, 48
progeny of, 49
Kicalm, brother-in-law of Virata; was
killed by Bhimasena, 33, 33fn
kilakiiicita, a kind of gesture, 929
killer, definition of, 485
killing, definition of, 485
words denoting, 1017
Kimpuru$a, Hemakuta was given by
Agnidhra to, 322
characteristics of the region called,
country; no misery in, 326
a mountain, 324
kithsuka a flower, 529
Kindama, a sage; cursed Panidu, 32fn
king, wor^ denoting, 994
mode of performing
the coronation
should be endowed with modesty,
the qualities of, 619
the seven qualities of, 683
code of righteous conduct for, 588
vices of, 627
vices which should be avoided by
aggregate of six things to be given
compand to the sun, moon etc., 588
stratifies to be employed by, 606-7
the six expedients used by, 607-8
general duties of, 579-81, 584-6
daily duties of, 608-9
duties in the harem, 581-82
should protect hims^ and the king¬
should firotect the pecmle, 674
means df ^tectin^ 577
guidelines for employing men of
good conduct and ability by, 573-5
to make treaties with whom, 623
twelve circles of friends and enemies
relating to, 605, 622
details relating to payment of share
of gains to, 674
the four obligatory acts of; relating
to wealth, 617
should worship those who carry
banners and weapons, 639
when should a battle be begun by,
the sixteen kinds of war to be
avoid(^ by a, 623
rites preceding the march of, 609-12
kingdom, the seven constituents of,
sovereignty as the most important
means for, 619
kings, rites to be performed in a year
kinnaras, synonyms of, 988
image of, 137
Kintughna, a karai^a, 363, 369
Kirti, a female energy; worshipped, 90
wife of Jayanta, 739
Kirtiman, one of the sons of Vasudeva
and Devaki; killed by Kaiiisa, 744
Ki^kindha, Sugriva made ruler of, 17,
a place; form of Vi^pu to be wor¬
shipped at, 841
kitchen, words related to, 1021
knots, on the sacred thread, names of;
number of, 216
knowledge, word for, 991
relating to science; word for, 991
relating to unreality of world; words
doubtful; words referring to, 991
false; words denoting, 991
conclusive; words for, 991
two kinds of— -pari and apara, 2
the foremost, 455
relating to Brahman; the great¬
ness of, 1059
the different virtues considered as,
state of persons who had gained,
as means for realizing the identity
of soul and Brahma, 1076
merits of gaining, 1077
Kodraka, a boundary mountain, 352
Kol&hala, a demon; was subdued^ by
Vifpu in his eleventh manifestation,
Kol&hala, a hell, 1038
Kolas, origin of, 747

Agni Puribfa
Kolbagiri, a sacred place, 328
KomaJa tva (softness), an excellence
of sense, 945
KoiUca^a, installation not to be done
by people born in, 106
auguij indicating the destruction
Ko^, contains eluant verses of great
poets, 920-21
two divisions of, 921
Kosala, installation should not be done
by people bom in, 106
augury indicating the destruction
Kotacakra, mode of drawing etc, 383-6
kofihoma, mantras and materials for;
mode of performing; merits of
performing, 42G
Kotisa, at Kofitirtha; worshipped, 341
worshipped, 414
Kotirirtha, a sacred spot, 327, 330
Kotitirtha, at Gay4, 341
offering to be made at, 344
Kiakaca, a hell, 532
Krama, a form of Rudra, 252
Kramap&dika, son of Pulaha and
Krama, 49
Kr&nti, a female divinity, 91
Kratha, one of the sons of Vidarbha;
son of, 741
Krathana, a monkey that accompanied
Rama to Lanka, 21
Kratu, a sage; a mind-born son of
Brahm&, 41, 42rn
BUlakhilyas were born from, 49
one of the sons of Cm and Agneyi,
Krauflca, a continent, 323
given to Dyutiman by Friyavrata,
mlers of; ocean around, 352
a mountain, 352
Krauftcapadi, characteristics of the
metre, 914
Krauftcapada, at Gaya, 342
Krau^tulu, an authority in prosody,
kfcchra, an expiation; explanation of,
an atonement for eating food from
certain people, 471
for officiating as priest for degraded
person, 479
for mendicants, 481
period of observance for kings and
others, 486
to be observed at the six-monthly
rite, 488
to^be observed for having commit¬
ted sins, 489
as a means of testing one*s strength,.
kfcchra candr&yana, an expiation, 477
kjcchra santapana, an expiation, 477
ki^chr&tilq'cclna, an expiation, 479
explanation of, 482, 799
Kriya, a female divinity, 292, 424
Kriyabhrarh^, an impurit;', 947
Kriyasakti, letter denoting, 418
krkara, a life-force carried by the vein
alambu;^, 556
functions of, 557
Krmi, one of the four sons of Bhajamilna, 742
wife of Usinara, 747
son of Krmi and Uiinara, 747
Kfmila, one of the five kings born
from Bahy5ifva, 749
Krodha, bom from Mftyu, 49
Krodha, animals were born from, 46
Krodhana, a year of the Hindu Calen¬
Krodhanfi, image of, 1 38
Krodhisa, letter signifying, 419
Kro^tu, one of the sons of Yadu, 740
the race of; in whose race Lord
Hari himself w'as bom, 741
son of, 741
Krpa, one of those who survived in
the (Bh4rata) battle, 36
one of the pairs bom from Satyadhrk, 750
KrpaQ§, image of, 138
Kfpi, one of the pairs bom from
Satyadhfk, 750
Kriasva, the celestial weapons as the
progeny of, 45
Krfeyu, one of the ten sons of BhadraKr^^n* manifestation of Viftiiu as, 25appeared for the destmction of
demons, 745
bom to Vasudeva and Devaki to
remove oppression on the earth,
entrusted to Nanda by Vasudeva, 27
reference to Pralamba approaching,
30fh
came to Gomantaka from MathurS,
destruction of Kalayavana by, 28fo
story relating to A9t5vakra*B bless¬
ings on the nymphs to becdme
wives of, 37fn
some naines,among the sixteen thou¬
sand wives ctf /44
married Satyabh&ma, 743

Index
killed Satadhanu and recovered the
gem and entrusted to Akrara, 743
recovered the syamantaka gem
from Jambavan and married
J&mbavati, son of, 743, 744
exoneration of, 743
story relating to Aniruddha, grand*
son of, 30
story of Bharata, describing the
greatness of, 31
became the charioteer of Arjuna, 32
birth of a son to Subhadra, sister
encouraged Aijuna to fight, 34
survived the Mah&bharata war, 36
in whose absence the chariot etc. of
the Paud&vas were lost, 37
the mark on the chest of, 51
letters denoting, 63
name of the conch of, 63 fn
form of Vi;9u, 841
name to be repeated at Dvaraka, one
of those assigned on the body in
worship, 414
Kt^a, one of the six sons of Dhisai:ia, 43
Krfpa, one of the sons of Kirtavirya,
Knpa, a class of men in the Salmala
Dwpa, 352
Kr;pa, one of the female divinities
invoked, 230
Kr^^a, a flower, 529
Dvaipayana, begetting sons
through the wife of Vicitraviryaka,
KrfoiftamI, mode of practising the
Krs^avetp, a river; flows from Sahya,
Kfta, an attendant of Siva, 201
Kftagni, one of the sons of Kanaka,
Krtamala, river; flows from Malaya,
story relating to Manu’s libation
krtam^a, a herb, 407
kftafijali, a herb, 406
i^anta, god of death; worshipped,
Krtaujas, one of the sons of Kanaka,
Kftavarm^ one of the ten sons of
Hrdika, 743
Krtavarman, one of those who survived
after die Bhirata war, 36
Kftavirya, one of the sons of Kansflca;
son ofi 7M
KrtavrataTa disdifle of Tjomaharsana,
Kitayuga, repeats in a cyclic order, 39
worshipped, 50
creation of Manu relating to, 323
Kfteyu, one of the ten sons of
Bhadrasva, 748
Krti, son of Iximapada, 741
name of a metre, 905
classical metres based on, 914
kfts, the primary affixes added to
verbs, 985-6
Kfttika, asterism; belongs to the
sphere of fire, 387
an asterism; mother of Karttikeya,
commended for first feeding of the
child, 358
commendable for sowing seed, 361^
occurring on a Saturday as auspidous, 377
not to wear new clothes on, 359
misery caused by Sun’s presence in,
categorised u evil, 381
located in the east in kftacakra, 385
located in the third column in the
diagram to find period for
Journey, 400
Kfttivasas, image of, 138-9
Krura, letter denoting, 419
K$ama, wife of Pulaha; progeny of, 49
image of, 135
K^ami, an energy, 292
k;apanaka (mantra), description of,
K^ara, an ocean, 351
k$ara, a medicine, 407
ksatriya, synonyms of, 1018
kfaya, one of the kinds of mantras of
Siva, 873
K;ay&, image of, 138
Kfema, one of the sons of Medhatithi, 3.51
kfema, one of the tarabalas, 359
K$ema, image of, 138
K$emaka, son of Anarka; son of, 749
K^emakari, a goddess, 424
Kfemahkari, image of, 135
Kfemyft, a name of Durga, 26
k$etra, things denoted by the term,
ki^trajfia, meaning of the term, 1070
K^etraka, son of Svahya, 743
Kfirabdid, ocean around Sakadvipa,
kfiri, a herb, 371
kftre^a, an ocean, 351
KfobhsiQi, a goddess, 424
K^udra, a Ruora, 254
Kubera, lord of wealth; son of
Vi iravas, 24

synonynu of, 988
was made king of kings, 47
image of, 137
propitiation of, 176
worshipped, 51
kubjaka, a flower, 529
KubjSmra, a sacred place, 327
greatness of Hrfikeiia to be con¬
templated at, 841
Kubjikk, goddess;, 41 Iff
mode of worship of, preliminaries
for worship of, 41 2
mode of worship of, 413
mode of contemplation of, 416
worship of the sandals of, 415
a charm in a cloth may have the
outlines of, 402
Kudamala, sub-division of a hell, 1039
Kuhu, a son of Ahgiras and Smirti, 49
wife of Havi^m^n, 739
kuhu, denotes the moon a digit less
on the new moon day, 990
an occult nerve, 257
Ktihura, one of the sons of Babhru;
son of, 742
Kukfi, a daughter of Kardama and
Devahuti, 41
kuk;i, a modification of the array
dag^a, 633
Kulalm, division of poetry called, 919
has many couplets, 920
Kulata, a fem^de divinity; mode of
worsUpof, 412
Kulav&glfi, goddess Kubjika addressed
Kulesvari, female divinity; contem¬
plated, 404
Kulika, one of the eight chief ser¬
pents; the number of heads of, 807
presides over the junctions of
periods; duration of the rule of,
assigned on the ears in the worship
of Kubjika, 415
Kumira, denotes Skanda bom of Agni
in a clump of reeds, 44
Kumara, son of Havya, 352
Kumkra, river; rises from l§uktimat, 351
Kum&rakod, a sacred place; great¬
ness of, 327
Kum&ralalitk, characteristics of the
metre, 911
kumkrl, a herb, 406
Kumbha, a demon; Hanumat searched
for Sit& in 6he house of, 19
killed by Rama, 22
Kumbha, a constellation; correction
victory or deads indicated by, 377
Kumtdia, name of a pitdier, 270
Agni Purd^
Kumbha, a posture made with the
Kumbhaka, a variety of prapayama;
reason for its name as, 557
Kumbhakarna, a demon; Hanumat
searched for Sita in the house of, 19
was always sleeping, 24
battle of; killed by R&ma, 22
Kumbhakangu, a spirit afflicting the
child in the ninth month; symptoms
of child affected by; offering to
appease, 823
Kumbhand^» a minister of Bapa, 30
Kumuda, worshipped, 51
Kumuda, a divinity assig^ned on the
body, 414
Kumuda, a deity presiding over the
banner, 148
worshipped, 284
Kumuda, a gate-keeper; adored, 93
Kumuda, a boundary mountain, 332
kumuda, one of the treasures, 1 1 1
KumudSksa, a deity presiding over
the banner, 148
worshipped, 284
Kund^l^Suii, goddess Lak^mi at the
middle of sacrificial pit, 95
kuo^alini, nature and location of, 558
Kut^di> A goddess, 133
Kuni, a son of Manu and Na^vala,
Kunti, son of Kratha, 741
son of, 742
Kunti, wife of Papdu, 744
sons of, 751
birth of Yudhi$thira, Kartjia and
others to, 32
went to the forest after the Bhirata
war, 36
Kuraiige^ one of the siddhas; wor¬
shipped, 415
kurcha, used for worship, 94
Kurma, form of Vi^^u, 326
saluted, 50
salagrama representing, 125
kiirma, a life-force carried by the
vein Ya^, 556
functions of, 557
a posture, 55
Kflrmacakra, to find the victory etc.,
description of, 370
Kurmaka, letter denoting, 419
KilrmapurS.t]t&> narrated in connection
with the story of Indradyumna;
narrated by tortoise form of lord
Vi9nu; extent of; should be given
as a gift, 734
Kuru, name of a king, 322
bmnintfae &mily m Aila FurQiavaa,

Index
son of Saihvara^; migrated from
Pray&ga and founded kingdom
of Kuruk^etra: the four sons of,
Kuru, a country on the western part,
Kuru, Uttara, a mountain, location
Kuru, Uttara, a country; river Bhadra
passes through, 323
Kuruk;etra, one of the sacred places,
five pits made by Farasurama at, 9
armies of and Kauravas
met at, 34
greatness of, 350
greatness of even the dust parti¬
cles of, 327
liberation conferred by stay at, 335
certain men and species of beings
born as brahmins at, 349
auspiciousness of image of Brahma
at the centre of, 106
Vamana form of Vi?ou worshipped
Kurus (Kauravas), enmity between
Papdavas and, 32
Kurus, recognised the Paod^vas in the
Virata, 33
description of the battle between
Pattd^vas and, 34
Kurus, a class of men inPlak^advipa, 351
Kurus, country; location of, 323
Visi^u as Matsya in, 326
Kuruvinda, nature of rubies got from,
KuSa, born to Sita in the hermitage
of Valmiki, 24
bom in the family (of Raghus) as
son of Rama; son of, 738
Kuia, one of the seven sons of Suhotra
and Girika, 750
Kusa, a continent, 323
given by Priyavrata to Jyotifm&n,
rulers of, 352
ku^a (grass). Vena was killed by the
sages, with, 42, 42fn
the name Pradnabarhis associated
with, 43
Kuia, a flower, 529
Kui&gra, bom from Bfhadratha; son
Kuiala, country ruled by a son of
Dyutimat, 352
Kuiala, one of the siddhas, 414
Kuiasthali, as the domain of Anarta;
kingdonf^of; got by Raivata, 736
Kufe&ya, a boundary mountain, 352
Kuiika, son of Balak&jva; son of^ 749
Kuiottara, son of Havya, 352
KQ$manda» ^ attendwt of 6iva;
image of, 135
worship of, 310
kfi^mand^, a flower, 529
not to be used in worship, 530
ku$tha, a herb, 372
KusumamMa, letter denoting, 418
Kusumavicitra, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Kusumitalat&vellita, characteristics of
the metre, 914
kutaja, a flower; not to be used in
worship, 529
not to be used for Siva, 529
Kutika, beads belonging to the
Savitra class, 894
KutUa, beads belonging to Sikh& class,
Kuttala, a hell, 531
Kuvalaiva, son of Brhada^va; got the
name Dhundhum&ra, 736
Kuvalayapida> n demon, 27
lagna, denotes the rise of a constel¬
lation, 989
laguda, uses of, 652
la^&luka, a herb, 406
laksahoma, mode of performing, 425-6
Laksmana, born to Sumitra, 10
marri^ Urmila, 11
accompanied Rama to the forest,
cut the nose of Surpanakha, 15
Sita*s words to; R&ma’s words to,
comforted Rama, 1 7
Hanumat recounting to Siti the
story of Rama and, 19
killed Indrajit, 22
reference to killing of the demons by,
Lak^mat^, one of the wives of Kffpa*
Lakfmi, consort of Narayapa (Vifou),
synonyms of, 986
origin and greatness of, 6
characteristics of the image of, 131,
characteristics of certain forms of
Vift]ku in the company of, 131
installation of image of, 169-70
worshipped, 51, 52, 197
mode of worship of^ 19, 849-51
lakynu, a nerve, 316
Lakfmin&r&yaQa, a i&lagrama, 125
Laktfl, inu^ of, 138
Lalan&, a spirit leudng the child in

Agni PuTibfa
the fifth month; symptoms of the
child seized by; offering to appease,
Lilas&, image of, 1 38
Lalita, characteristics of the metre, 909
lalita, a kind of gesture, 929
Lalita, another name of Gauri, 133
characteristics of the image of, 139
Lalitg, daughter of king of Vidarbha,
Lilitya, an excellence of word 944
(See also smoothness)
Lamb&, wife of Dharma ; progeny of, 44
Lambaka, a division of prose l^vyas,
Lambakuk$i, a name of Ga^esa, 190
Lambana, a son of JyoU>mat, 352
Lambodara, one of the eight forms of
Gairiapati, 865
Lambodari, letter denoting, 417
Lkngali, letter denoting, 419
language, explanation of abusive, 655
LaAk&,8uipauakh4*s arrival at;
8it& carried byRavai^t to 16
Sampati’s words about Sita’s presence
HanOman’s search for Sita at, 19
burning of city of, 20
Vibhi^i>a anointed as ruler of, 21
entrusted by R&ma to VibUi^t^a, 23
goddess addressed as builder of
bridge to, 379
lapis lazuli, a gem, 640
qualities of excellent variety of, 641
Lktas, the names of towns given to, 31 5
L&tiy&, a variety of diction; charac¬
teristics of, 927
Lauhitya, a sacred place, 328
Lava, bom in the family (of Raghus)
as son of Rima, 738
bora to Sita in the hermitage of
Vftlmiki, 24
Laval!, characteristics of the metre, 909
Lavaca, an ocean, 324
Lavat^a, a demon killed by Satrughna,
law codes, stronger than sciences of
wealth, 657
procedure if there is conflict bet¬
ween two, 657
laws, code ofi 455-7
laws, code of criminal, 588-93
law-suit, rests on the witnesses, 654
as protecting the four institutions
of life, 65?
as encompassing four persons, 634
die four items acctnnplished by
meuis of, 654
accessories cff, 654
; die three causes fttr, 654
two other causes of; the six things
associated with each one of die
the three evidences in, 657
laya, explanation of, 994
Laya, image of, 138
layers, of the skin; description of, 1034
lead, auspiciousness of, 641
leg, diseases of; remedy for, 769
Lra, a fixed sign; acts of fixed nature
to be done in, 384
the time taken by the Sun to cross,
rite to determine the sex of the
child to be done in, 357
building of a house to be avoided
when Jupiter is in, 360
the day of getting up of Indra when
Sun is in, 361
banner of Indra to be lowered in,
friendly with Gemini as also Libra,
leprosy, remedy for, 753, 767, 773-4,
letters, are either sixtythree or sixtyfour; classification of, 915
oripn of, 916
division into five groups on the
basis of place of articulation etc.,
places of articulation of, 916, 917
merits or demerits of sticking to or
shifting the places of artic^ation
instructions in using the, 916, 917
in the name of a votary; the four¬
fold classification of, effects of, 895
in the name, as aid to prognosti¬
cation, 409
indicating victory and prosperity,
group of; denoting the planets, 378
libation, mode of offering, 535-37
merits of offering, 450-51
liberation, words denoting, 991
got by means of knowled^, 1059
Libra, a constdlation commendable
for marriage when Sun is in, 357
known as the waking day of Hari
if Sun is in, 361
time taken by Sun to traverse, 384
friendly widi Aries, 392
lightning, words denoting, 989
LikhitSL, a law-giver, 455
likhya, a measure, 107
LUi, ima« of, 138
lily, worcb denoting, 996
limbs, words denoting die diffbren^

Index
eight kinds of; associated with
exertion, 929
lihga(s}, different varieties, dimen¬
sions, of, 141-145
movable variety, mode of fixing,
classified into groups of; on the
basis of doorway etc., 142
description of, 143
made of earth; merits of worship¬
movable, 321
characteristics of, 139-41
measurement of eyes proportionate
mode of installation of, 1 72, 278-82,
rites relating to installation of, 289old or broken; repair of, 311-13
mode of worshipping, 299
benefits of worshipping different,
contemplation of; as in one’s own
body, 60
lihga, a posture made with the hands,
Lifigapura^a, in the Agneya-kalpa;
extent of, 733
contains description of virtues by
lord Siva in the form of fiery
linga, 733
merits of making a gift in Phalguna,
Lion, manifestation of Vif^u, 9
lip, lower; six actions of, 929
lipta, a measure of dme, 370
loan, rates of interest relating to, 658
loan-bond, rules relating to writing of,
lodhra, a herb, 372
logical reasoning, word for, 991
Loha, name of a demon, 639
cut by lord Vif^u, 639-40
Loha, a hell, 532
Lohabhara, subdivision of a hell, 1039
Lohasahku, subdivision of a hell, 1039
Lohita, a divinity; letter denoting, 419
Lohita, a country known by the name
of a son of Vapu^m&n, 352
LokabhSvaIU^ form of Viypu at
Nepala, 841
Lok&kula, a place; Ripuhara to be
worshipped at, 841
LokSloka, a peak; extension of, 353
lokana, a posture relating to ridii^
horses, 787
lokokticclilR[&, that which follows die
proverb, 932
Lolupil, a female divinity; imarc of, 1 38
Lomahar^a, ^t the Vedic lore
from Vy&sa; disciples of, 730
LomapAda, one of the sons of Vidarbha; son of, 741
Lomap&da, son of Satyaratha; son of,
long life, a mixture that would give,
prescription to get, 777
lotus, words denoting different kinds
words denoting the root of a, 996
worship of gods in, 79fn
efficacy of worshipping with, 529
merits of worshipping lord Hari
with, 529
diagram of; for daily worship etc.,
Lunar race, description of, 738-40
lunar days, the names of the presid¬
ing deities of, 805
lustre, words denoting, 989, 990
lute, words denoting different kinds
machine, uses of, 652
madanadvadaS, mode of practising
the vow of, 512
Madhava, a name of Vifuu, 65
characteristics of the form of, 128
Madhav!, characteristics of, 934
Madhu, Vifuu as the killer of the
demon, 65
Madhu, son of DevakMtra; son of, 742
Madhuhara, a name of Vi^pu, 65
madhuparka, offered at the time of
worship. 55
madhura v;rtti, explanation of, 933
madhu rlts, recitation of; as a paAktipavana, 349
Madhurya (tranquility) an excel¬
lence of sense, 945
Madhusudana, Vi^^u as the destroyer
of demon Madhu, 746
form of Vi^itu on Mandara, 841
to be contemplated everywhere, 842
Madhusravas, at GayA, pii^d^ to be
offered at, 344
Madhyi, a metre; number of letters
Madhyadesa, location of, 351
Madhya Jyotis, composition of the
metre, 904
Mkdhyaikathi, a branch of Yajurveda,
madhyama, a variety of pr&pkykma,
Mftdhyandinl, a branch Yajurveda,

PwSffa
M&driy one of the wives of 744
M4dri» one of the two wives of Dhffttt;
progeny of, 743
M&dri, other wife of P&p^u, 32, 744
progeny of, 7r)l
death of Pan<jlu while hnving union
with, 32
Maga, a dass of men at Sakadvipa, 352
Magadha, a class of men at the
^dkadvipa, 352
Magadha, a forest; the name Vaikuntha to be repeated at, 842
m&gadha (s), a caste, origin of, 42, 430
duty of, 431
Magh&, an asterism known as down¬
faced, 381
comprises the sphere of wind, 387
comprises the sphere of fire, 387
effect of Sun’s transit in, 363
harvest of grains to be done in, 361
auspidous for administering medi¬
cine, 358
known as blunted; its effect relating
to journey, 382
not commendable for attending on
the employer, 360
not conunended for wearing new
clothes, 359
affliction caused by its occurrence
on a Tuesday, 376
fatality indicated by its conjunc¬
tion with Saturday and full
moon, 377
Magha, a month; a commendable
day for first shave in, 359
benefit of purchasing food grains
inauspicious for first entry into a
house, 360
Mahab^u, one of the sons of Hiraoyaksa, 46fn
Mah&bhadra, a lake in the JambQdvipa, 325
Mahabhairava, obeisance to, 379
Mah&bharata, story of, 34ff
mode of honouring a person redtmode of making gifb after the
redtation of, 734
mahabhdtaghata, a great gift, 544
Mah&bja, a serpent; image of, 137
Mah&bMhi, tree at Gay&; merits of
worshipping, 338
Mahabrhati, constitution of; another
name of, 904
Mah&ca9<jl&, a hell, 1038
Mah&capsd&, characteristics of the
metre, 906
MahlUleva, a form of Rudra, 50
fovour extended to Sati by, 45
worship of, 290
Mah&ghora, a hell, 1038
Mah&jvala, ahdl, 532
mahajyaiffoi, the presence of Jupiter
and Moon in the asterism Jyeftha,
Mahakala, image of, 135
letter denoting, 419
to be worshipped, 51, 197, 283
Mahak&li, a female energy; colour of
letter denoting, 417
contemplation on, 413
mahakali, a medicinal plant, 378
Mah&kavya, characteristics of poetry
called, 919-20
Mahakoti, at Gaya; pioda' to be
offered at, 342
Mahakoti, a goddess, 375
Mahakrura, a yogini ; image of, 1 38
Mahak^obhakarini, Kubjil^ addressed
Mahalaksmi, characteristic features
of the form of, 134
worshipped, 52, 415
benefit of the worship of, 343
Mahalaya, a holy spot at Varanasi,
Mahamanas, son of Mah&iala; son of,
Mahamail, goddess; image of, 401
a formtda affecting enemies; des¬
cription of, 401-2
Mahamaya, cloth containing the
figure of, 402
Mahamoha, one of the gods to be
located and worshipped, 292
mahamudra, a posture with the hands,
Mahanabha, one of the sons of
Hirany^sa, 46fn
Mah&nadi, river at Gaya; bathing
Phalgutirtha on, 337
Mahanani, image of, 138
Mahananta, worshipped, 414
Mahanaraka. sub-division of a hell,
mah&nila, a kind of sapphire, 640
Mah&nta, son of Dhimihi, 323
Mahilpadma (Mah&mbuja), one of
the eight chief serpents; the number
of hes^ of, 807
forms the eyebrows of the goddess,
mah&padma, a type of temple 315
a treasure, 111, 269
mah&parSka, an expiation; explana*
tion of 494

Indtx
Mahaparfva, a demon killed by
Mah&puftipravardhana, a goddess
staying in a particular circle, 376
Maharamyas, images of, 135
Mah&raurava, sub-division of a hell,
Maharloka, distance of, 354
worshipf^, 79
Mah^la, son of Janamejaya; son of,
mahds^tapana, an expiation, ex¬
planation of, 482, 494, 799
Mah^cna, letter denoting, 419
Mahat, origin of, 40, 48
Mahatala, a nether world, 353
Mah&t&misraka, a hell, 531
Mahatanura, a hell, 532
Mahavajra, a hell, 1 038
Mahavici, sub-division of a hell, 531,
Mah&^drya, a form of Rudra, 253
Mahavlrya, son of Virat, 323
Mahavita, son of Savana, 353
Mahayoga, form of Vi$nu at Kan, 841
form of Vi;nu at Salagrama, 841
Mahendra, a name of the elephant¬
faced god, 190, 866
Mahendra, lord Indra; worship of 176
offering of gems made to, 273
Mahendra, mountain in Bh^atavarfa,
rivers originating from, 351
Farasurama’s final stay at, 9
Mahendra, a female energy; to be
worshipped, 91
M^endra, hill the name of Acyuta to
be repeated at, 482
Mahendraka, a divinity worshipped, 414
M&hendii, one of the eight goddesses,
Mahesvara, worship of, 290
Kr$pa’s conquest of the fever re¬
lated to, 30
M&hesvari (Mahesi), one of the eight
Mahidhara, offering made to, 109
Mahima, son of Saihhana; son of, 740
Mahiman, son of Janamejaya, 750
Mahipila, beads belonging to the
Siva class, 894
Mahi^, a boundary mountain, 352
Mahodara, one of the forms of
Ga^apati, 190, 865
Mahodara, a demon killed by RAtna, 22
mahodari, denotes the entiy of the
Sun in one of the sigi^ 362
Mainaka, a mountain; rise of, 19
Mainda, monkey; accompanied
RSma TO Lank&, 21
whose brother Dvivida was killed
by Balar^ma, 30fn
Maithila, denotes King Janaka, 10
Maitra, a muhOrta; de^ to be done
Maitra s Anuradha
Maitrayam, a branch of Yajurveda,
Maitreya, priest of king of Sauvira,526
Maitrera, son of Divodisa; son of, 750
Maitrisi, one of the goddesses, 41 3
Makara, a constellation; correction
for 367
(See also Capricorn)
makara, a treasure. 111, 269
makara, an array; a variation of the
array called bhoga, 634
Makar&k;a, a demon killed by R4ma,
Mala, characteristics of the metre, 913
malamantras, have more than twenty
letters; yield results in youth, 802
on the practice of, 804
malati, a flower, 529
Malaya, mountain, 350, 351
Malayagiri, as a sacred place, 328
malayamaka, one of the yamakas, 935
Malinl, characteristics of the metre,
Malinimantra, rite relating to, 418-9
mallik&, a herb, 371, 378
a flower, 529
Malopama, explanation of, 940
Malyavat, mountain, 325
Rama’s stay on, 18
manabsila, used as an unguent, 372
M&nasa, a manifestation of Vi^^u, 428
M&nasa, one of the sons of Vapu^mat;
denotes also the country ruled by
M&nasa, as an excellent place, 330
Manasa, a boundary mountain, 333
M&nasa, a lake, 325, 349
Manasya, son of Mahanta, 323
Manasyu, son of Pracinavkn; son of,
M&nava, a missile, 10
Ma^avakakriijitaka, characteristics of
the metre, 911
manda, a variety of horses, 789
mandi, a name of the entry of the
Sun in one of the signs, 362
Mandaga, a class of men in the
Skkadvipa, 352
Mandkldni, river; as excellent, 328
Riima’s stay on the banks of, 14
mand&kini, a name of the entry of
the Sun in one of the sigm, 362
Mand&krknta, diaiacteristics of the
metre, 913-4

Purd^
nuuci^ala, an array; description of, 633
an array; two units taken from
and combined (for a battle), 634
an array; modifications of, 634
some variations of, 633
certain features of amara same as,
ma^dalfi* a posture relating to archery,
maptjiala, baked flour, 108
maqigalesvara, meam*ng of the word,
ma^d^i* a class of serpents based on
excess of one humour, 807
Mandara, a boundary mountain, 324,
made as the churning rod to chum
the ocean, 3, 745
the name Madhusudana to be
repeated at, 841
mandara, a type of temple, 3*4
mand&ra, a flower; us^ in the wor¬
ship of Vifpu, 99
us^ in the wonhip of Siva, 101, 529
Mandavi, married by Bharata, 1 1
Mandeha^, a class of men in the
Ku^advipa, 352fn
Mkndhktf, son of Yuvanasva; sons of,
father of Mucukunda, 28fn
mandira, a type of temple, 314
MaAgal&, benefit of worshipping the
goddess, 343
mangala, a stone, 269
MatMgupanikaril, characteristics of
the metre, 913
mat^ika, a class of temple; oval-sha¬
ped; the temples belonging to the
class of, 315
Mapivaka, son of Hayya, 352
Mafijari, characteristics of the metre,
mafijifthi, used for making an
unguent, 372
Maftja$a, a hell, 532
Man-lion, form of Vi$ou> 129
Manmatha, a year of the Hindu
calendar, 405
Manohara, wife of Dhara; sons of, 44
Manojava, different reading for Purojava, 44fn
ManomanI, a female divinity; wor¬
shipped, 51
Manonraana, a form of Rudra, 253
Manonman!, a goddess; an envoy of
goddess Tvarita, 424
Manonuga, one of the sons of
Dyutimat, 352
manoramk, a nerve, 316
snanojathadv&dafi, mode of practi¬
sing the vow of, 512
Manthara, an attendant of Kaikeyi, 1 1
words of, 12
Mantra, a form of Rudra, 253
mantra, eight-syllabled, 53, 56
known as ari; destmetive nature of,
which accomplishes all the desires,
for conquest of evil influences of
pauspa, 835
propitiation of the letters compos¬
ing a; benefit accruing from,
of five syllables sacred to Siva;
mode of worship with, 837-40
mantras, forming base of all mantras,
different kinds of, 265-66, 358, 416their nomenclature, 802-806
narration of different kinds of;
effects of, 872-3
for worship; description of, 50
collection of; the five parts of, 830
of different kinds; application of,
classification as agneya and saumya,
should begin with prattava, 805
the six accessory acts relating to,
instructions relating to repetition
to be repeated facing east or looking
downwards, 805
means of acquiring perfection in and
the efficacy of, 804
whose letters are governed by
baneful asterisms to be avoided,
number of repetitions of; inversely
proportional with the number of
letters in, 804
sleeping and waking states relating
method to find the aumidousness
which remove the baneful influences
of planets, 826-30
eight kinds of benevolent, 874
for making (Bering to the spirits, 826
relating to six kinds of acts such as
paralysing, 871-2
that would sttmefy the three worlds,
three parts of; relating to the three
rela^l to wonhip of different gods.

hdtx
of Siva; different kinds of, 873-75
relative merits of different methods
of repetition of, 805
Manu, the term denoting the period
of, 39fn
— Svayambhuva as the first, 41fn
creation of, 322-23
bom to G&k$u$a and Pu^karit^i;
progeny of^ 42
— Vaivasvata; born to Sun and
Saihjiia, 735
wor^ spoken to the Fish by, 4
— a law-giver, 455
— herb denoted by the term, 406, 407
Manus, names of different, 427-9
reign in a day of Brahm^ 429
periods of different, 427-9
names of Indra and the sages during
the periods of, 427-9
Manvantaras, periods of Manu, 39fn
manifestations of Vi$9U innumer¬
able in, 39
Marga^ir^a, month; increased return
of certain food articles in, 386
marica, a herb, 407
Marica, a demon ;s tupefied by Rama’s
missile, 10
words spoken to R&va^a by, 16
imitated the voice of Rama and
cried aloud, 16fn
Marici, a sage; mind-bora son of
Kasyapa bora from, 9
had Pauraamiba through Sambhuti,
Marina, daughter of Ka^du ^>^<1
Praimloca ; offered by Soma to
Piacetas, 43
mark, words denoting, 989
Markai^deya, bora to Mfka^du ^nd
Vedaiira, 49
imparted knowledge to Vajra, 30
Mirka^dcyapuraij^i, contains discus¬
sion on righteousness; extent of, 732
to be given as a gift in Karttika, 732
M&rka^d^ycsvara, at Gaya; worshipp^, 342
marriage (s), foiu* kinds of acts relating
rules relating to, 434-36
eight kinds of, 4^5
time for performing, 357 ^
commendable constellations and
planets for, 435
asterisms commendable for, 435
prohibited periods for performance
Mars, distaara oi^ 354
chariot o^- 356
period (years) of influence of, 363,
presides over a part of day, 381
letter presided over by, 374
the effect of occupying die second
house by, 383
confers good in the (tenth house),
indicates defeat if battle is begun
when it leaves its asterism, 386
bad luck indicated by, 400
causes riot, 377
the days which are to be avoided
if associated with, 410
is for victory, 389
nature of person born in the house
image of, 1 37
the form of that is to be contem¬
plated, 828
Martaod^ (Sun), the day for the in¬
stallation of^ 87
Marut, Maruts came into being from,
Maruta, Wind-god; worship of, 274
Maruti (Hanumat), crossing of the
ocean by, 19
words spoken to Ravana by, 20
Rama and Lak^ma^a were made
secure when ^e mountain vras
brought by 22
attacked R&vaoa, 23
Maruts, were bora from Marut, 44
V^va was made the cUef of, 47
brought Bharadvaja to Bharata, 749
Marutta, son of Titikyu; son of, 741
— son of Karandhama; son of, 747
maruvaka, leaves, 529
masi, oil of, 372
mSsika, ceremony; parkka to be obser¬
ved at the time of, 488
massaging, method of; benefits of,
M&tali, charioteer of Indra, 22, 22fn
Matahga, at Gay5, 338, 343
Matang&lrama at Gay5, 337
Matangavapi, at Goya, 337
Matahgeia, at, Gaya; worshipped, 337
Mathur5, Lavaca killed by Satrughna
Kf^^a rode a chariot and reached, 27
Krma came to Gomantaka leaving,
Keiava to be worshipped at, 841
MatinSra, one of tlw ten sons of
Bhadralva; the three sons of, 748
Matrasamaka, characteristics of the
metre, 907
in&t|k&-mantras, denote the monosyl¬
labic winds; ^des goveming, 952

Agni Purd^
Matiya, form of Vi^u, 326
— name of a silagrama, 125
Matsyakaliy one of the seven sons of
Suhotra and GirikS, 750
Matsya*pur&]jA, narrated by lord
Vif9u in the form of a fish to Manu,
should be given as a gift at the time
of the equinox, 734
Matt&y characteristics of the metre,
MattUkri^a, characteristics of the
metre, 914
MattamayOra, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Mattoktichay^ explanation of, 932
mature, a mode; explanation of, 933,
Maturity, explanation of, 945
Maukulyas, were descendants of
Mukula, 750
Mily&, a female energy, 292, 417
— ^wife of Bhaya, 49
m&y& (mantra), denotes certain group
of letters, 888
no divisions in, 895
M&y&vati, Rati born as; maid of
3ambara; married Pradyumna, 29,
29fn
Mayurasaripi, characteristics of the
metre, 912
mayGraiikh&, a herb, 406
M&y&vin, son of Dundubhi, 17fn
means, seven kinds of, 587
measures, table of, 1022
Medh&, a female divinity; worshipped,
~-one of the sons of Priyavrata, 322
MedhStithi, ruled Plakfa, 322
names of the sons of, 322, 351
son of Kat]iva, 748
medicine, asterism good for taking, 358
dosage of; the factors to be noted
in deciding, 762
medicines, falling under six heads
and accompli^ng two kinds of
effects, 770
conferring longevity and curing
diseases, 778-80
meditation, on Brahman; mode of
practising, 1055-6
Meghan&da, was bom from R&vaoa,
Meghan&d&, image of, 1 38
Meghap&laka, one of the seven sons
of Nuufa, 740
memory, herb for improving, 773
men, different classes of, words de¬
noting, 1013
ha^dfig different deftwmities or
abnormalities; words for, 1014
moimted on elephants, work of, 613
Mena, a daughter of the manes and
Svadha, 49
mental change, word denoting, 995
Meru, mountain; extent of, 324
— is in the shape of a lotus, 325
— a region, 322
R^abha was bom to N&bhi through,
mem, a type of temple, 314
Mercury (a planet), distance of, 354
chariot of, 356
period (years) of influence of, 363,
presides over a part of day, 381
the form that is to be contemplated
gives realisation of desire, 377
letter presided over by, 374
characteristics of a person bora in
the house of, 392
good for truce, 389
occupying second house confers
good, 383
beneficial in the twelfth, 384
indicates defeat in battle begun
when it is leaving its asterism, 386
memdana, ten kinds of, mode of
making, 544-5
twelve varieties of, 553-5
mode of oflering (goddess), 554
Me$a, a constellation; letter denoting,
correction for, 367
causes victom if full and death
otherwise, 377
good and bad effects of planets in,
me^lrngi, a herb, 406
messenger, qualification of; three
types of, 625
metals and chemicals, words denoting,
metres, Vedic; mles relating to, 902
having different numbers of padas,
of other kinds formed from Utkrti,
the gotras of; the deities of, 905
colours of different, 905
classical, 905
the three^ divisions of, 908
characteristics of equal, 908
calculating the number of half«qual
on the calculation of the number of
unequal, 908
classical, based on Vedic metre
Abhil^, 914

Indix
based on Atikfti, 914
based on Krti, 914
classical; based on Fral^i, 914
classical; based on Vedic metre
Sankfti, 914
classical; based on the Vedic metre
Utkrti, 914
classical; based on V’'edic metre
Vikrti, 914
tabular representation of, 915
to be employed in a Mahakavya,
midnight, words denoting, 990
military expedition, instructions relat¬
ing to, 594
Mimaihsa, science of, 2
Mina, correction for 367
(See also Capricorn)
letter denoting, 419
mind, words denoting, 991
mind, two divisions of exertions of;
one of them relating to men divided
further into eight, 927
as the reins, 1075
minerals, eight kinds of, 283
minister, words denoting, 1018
ministers, qualities of, 619
how the king should examine the
worthiness of, 619-20
defects of, 626
mire, words denoting, 995
miscarriage, in women; remedy for
arresting, 777
miseries, true knowledge about; com¬
mended, 1074
Mithuna, a constellation; correction
for 367
( See also Gemini)
Mitra, one of the twelve Adityas; son
of i^syapa, 45
as one of the names of Sun, 136
— a divinity to be worshipped, 317
worship of, 274
— one of the Adin^thas, 412
mitra, one of the tarabalas, 359
Mitradev!, one of the daughters of
Devaka; married by Vasudeva,
mi tram, explanation of, 1019
Mitravinda, one of the wives of Knhtt,
Mitrayu, a disciple of Lotnaharfat;^,
mocaka, a perfection, 257
Mod&ki, son of Havya, 352
mode, fourfold; uneven in the actions
of a drama, 928
modes (v^tti), five kinds of; produced
by rqj^tion of a single letter^ 933
Moha, an ttaergy, 292
mohalata, a herb, 406
mohini, a herb, used for subjugation,
Mohopama, explanation of, 940
mok^a, one of the purufSrthas, 53
mokfatti, one of the prai^itamudrds,
Monday, rite of chewing betel leaf to
be done on, 358
first shave commended on, 359
one should not do agriculture on,
inauspicious nature of eleventh day
falling on, 381
month, lunar, solar and astral, 495
Moon, only one in the world, 376
synonyms of, 989
orb of; words denoting, 989
lustre of; words denoting, 989
sixteenth digit of; words denoting,
distance of, 354
period (years) of, 363
influence of, 393
periods over a part of a day, 381
form of, 1 37
appeases defeat, 377
benefits caused by different positions
death caused by investiture of thread
when Moon has set, 359
its presence in asterism jye9th&
known as mahajyaisthi, 362
when holes are noticed in the disc of,
eclipse of the head known by the
presence of, 388
characteristic of a person born in the
house of, 392
ceremonies to be done when it is
pure, 362
moon-stone, a gem, 641
moral observance, five kinds of, 454
mortgage, rules relating to different
types of, 660-1
motana, a posture relating to riding
horses, 787
mountains, words denoting, 1006
midafiga, synonym for; dinerent kinds
Mrdava, a division of Vithi, 928
Mma, a divinity; worshipped, 108,
mrga, a variety of horses, 789
Mrgaiirfa, one of the fixed asterisms,
oqmi>rises the sphere of wind, 387
location in adiagram,385
located in the second oolunm in
a diagram, 400

an asterism; good for discharging
debt, 358
commendable to b^in the con¬
struction of a house, 360
good for harvesting grains, 361
good for taking harvested grains
inside the house, 361
mahijyai^thi caused by, 362
eifect of Sun’s transit in, 363
commended for all acts, 381
MfgavySdha, one of the eleven forms
of Rudra, 45
Mrkai>du> son of Vidhatr; son of, 49
Mftyu, father of Sunitha, 42fn
— born to Bhaya and Maya, 49
— an energy, 292
mrtyu, one of the groups of letters, 390
to be rejected in all undertakings,
Mftyuhjaya, a form of l§iva; mode of
worship of, 899
worshipped, 374
mrtyufijaya, a formula known as; des¬
cription of, 395
Mucukunda, son of Mandhatf, 28, 737
obtained a boon of long sleep, 28fn
mudgara, usta of, 652
mudra(s), posture of the hands for
worship, 53
different kinds — formation of, 66-67
for worship of Sun, 1 96
— an embellishment of word, 932
explanation of, 932
Mudrasphota, one of the siddhas, 414
Muhurta, Muhurtas were born from,
Muhurtas, bom from Muhurta, 44
muhurtas, different names of, 371
Mukhamapdi, a female force, 84
MukhapOrvika, characteristics of the
metre, 906
mukhavyavartana, an action of the
horse while moving, 788
Mukhya, a divinity vv^orshipped, 317
offering made to, 274
mukhya, denotes first injunction, 1018
Mukhy&, a division of Abhivyakti, 943
Mukhyaka, one of the sons of Bali, 747
mukhyasarga, the fourth creation, 48
Muktaka, division of poetry called, 919
consists of single verses, 920
describes different incidents, 920
Muktakeii, a monstress possessing
the newly bom child on the seventh
night, 822
symptoms of child pouessed by, 822
material for fumigation when^possessed by, 822
unguent for the child afflicted by,
Agni Puribfa
Mukula, one of the five bom from
Bahyksva, 749
Gancasva as son of, 750
whose descendants were known as
Maukulyas and were brahmins,
Mukuta, the female spirit possessing
the child two months old; symp¬
toms of the child possessed by,
offering and fumigation to appease,
Mula, an asterism; belongs to the
watery region, 388
marriage is commendable m,357
discharge of debt to be done in, 358
commendable for beginning the
construction of a house, 360
good for doing agriculture, 361
good for harvest of grains, 361
commended for all acts, 381
one of the blunted asterisms, 382
misery caused by Sun’s transit in,
has face downward, 381
location in ko(acakra for forecast,
occupies the first column in a dia¬
gram, 400
mulagaurivrata, for. Goddess Laksmi,
miilakrcchra, an expiation, 483
mulamantra, bathing of the deity
done with, 53
mundane existence, three kinds of
afflictions in, 1040
Mundapjstha, at Gaya, 336-7, 338
worshipped, 342
Mupdika, a spirit possessing the
child in the fifteenth year; symptoms
of the child possessed by, 825
Muni, the nymphs were bom from, 47
one of the sons of Dyutimat, 352
one of the sons of Apa, 44
muni, herb denoted by the word, 406,
munipu^pa, a Bower, 529
munja, a lake in Jambfidvlpa, 325
MuAjake^, represents a branch of
Afflarvaveda, 730
MuOjavata, an excellent spot, 328
Muraja, one of the bandhu; explana¬
tion of, 936
murder, without witness; precau¬
tionary steps for passing judgement,
musall, a herb, 371, 378
musicsd instruments, four kinds of,
Qoa
words denoting different, 994

Index
mustard, used in a paste to give suc¬
cess against enemy, 372
Mu$tika, a wrestler killed by Krf^^a, 28
mustimudra, a posture of hands used
in worship, 96
mystical diagrams of different kinds;
for worship, 879-83
mystic syllables, used in consecration,
Nabha, son of Nala; son of, 738
Nabhaga, one of the eight sons of
V aivasvata Manu,735
had two sons who were vaisyas and
became brahmins later, 736
— son of Bhagiratha; son of, 737
Nabhi, was gpven country Hina by
his father Agnidhra, 322
^sabha born to Meru and, 323
Naciketa, 6rc; merits of worshipping
thrice a day, 349
nadt-s, the three being present in the
goddess, 374
( See also veins)
Nadvala, wife of Manu; ten sons of, 42
Naga, a hill at Gaya; excellence of, 337
Naga, image of, 106
investiture of sacred thread for;
to be done, 215
naga, a vital wind, 253
a life-force carried by the vein prtha,
functions of, 557
Nagadvipa, one of the nine territories,
nag^, herb denoted by the word, 406
nagakarna, a flower, 529
Nagananda, sandals of; should be
worshipped, 414
NSgapa^, weapon used by Indrajit to
bind Hanumat, 20
nagapufpa, used as an unguent to
control others, 372
Nagas, V^uki was made the ruler of,
Nag^tra, weapon used by Indrajit, 22
(See also NagapS^)
NagavithI, was bom from Y&mi, 44
N&gesvari, location of the letter re¬
present^ by, 417
Nagigayatri, the number of letters in
the three feet of, 903
N&gnajiti, one of the wives of
Nagodbheda, greatness of the sacred
place ol^ 327
N^ufa, son of Ayu, 25, 31
one of the sons of Ayus; seven sons
of, W9
Naigameya, brother of Kum&ra, 44
Naimifa, Saunaka and other sages at, 1
a sacred place, 491
merits of, 328
naimittika, one of the three kinds of
creation, 48
ceremony should be done, 98
Naimittiki, a division of Abhivyakti,
Naii'rta, propitiation of, 176
worshipped, .5 1
Nai;adha, a country, 322
nai$thika brahmacari, should stay with
the preceptor till death, 433
Nak^atra-Yoga, constants, 365-6
Nakta, son of Pfthu and father of Gaya,
Nakula, bom to Madrl and Pundu,
son of 751
fell on the way of the march, 37
bom through Asvinikumara, 32
Nakulisa, letter denoting, 419
Nala, a monkey; building of a bridge
in the ocean by, 21
accompanied Rama to LahkH, 21
— son of Nii^dha; son of, 738
— a year of the Hindu calendar, 405
Nala, a goddess, 424
Nalakubara, son of Kubera, 90
Nalika, a division of Vithi, 928
Nama, location of the letter denoting,
nSmadvadasi, merits of practising the
vow of, 512
namakarai]ut, one of the Vedic rites
to be performed, 59
namask&ra, use of the term, 403
name, words denoting, 992
Nanda, a cowherd chief; Balar&ma
and Kf^na left in the custody of, 27
nanda, one of the treasures, 1 1 1
Nanda, a place; Jalasiyin to be wor¬
shipped at, 842
nanda, name of a stone, 2G9
—a nerve, 316
nandaka, description of the sword
called, 639
Nandana, a guard of the door; to be
worshipped, 93
— a year of the Hindu Calendar, 405
— a forest, 325
Nandarupa, worshipped,
nandasaptami, a vow; details relating
Nandi (n), conquered by Tirk^ya, 30
worship of, 197, 283
to be worshipp^, 51
Nandigr&ma, Bharata's return to, 15
RSma's arrival at, 23
nandika, a type of templ^ 314

Agni PufSifa
Nandin, a muh&rta; deeds to be done
Nandiia, image of, 135
nandivardhana, a type of temple, 314
Nara, son of Gaya, 323
— son of Ufinara and Nar&, 747
Nara, wife of Ufinara, 747
Naracakra, to find failure etc., 389
N&rada, story of R&maya^a described
by V&lmilu to, 9
V&lnuki’s composition of R&m&-
yatjia after hearing from, 25
Krspa’s action after hearing from,
methods of worship of Visijiu as told
—a botmdary mountain, 351
N&radiya, a Pincaratra %ama, 106
N&radlyapurapa, narrated by Nirada;
extent of; to be given as a gift in
Asvina, 732
Naraka, demon; Kffna as killer of, 28
the story relating to Dvivida,
friend of, 30 fn
called Rauraka, Vedana as wife of,
NarakanSyikS, a hell, 1038
Nara-N&r&yaoa, prayer to cleanse the
votary, 85
Norantalm, a demon killed by R&ma, 22
Narasiihha, man-lion form of Vis^u
to kill Hiraipiyakafipu, 7
basic syllables of; used for con¬
secration, 67
obeisance made to, 62
an image of, 130
benefit of worshipping, 343
outlines of; on a cloth, 402
(See also Nrsiiiiha)
Narasiihha, a Paficaratra agama, 106
N&rayana, one of the names of Vi;i;iu,
the reason for being called as, 40
image of, 130
characteristics of the form of, 128
basic syllable ending with, 67, 68
mantra used in religious rite, 53
obeisance made to, 62
benefit of worshipping, 343
syllable of; for foM oftering, 68
6&lagr5ma denoting, 125
N&rayaoiyaka, a Pdficarfttra agama,
Nftr&yapi, location of the letters
denoting, 416
Narin^anta, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 735
Narmada, wife of Purukutsa, 737
NarmadS, (river) flows ftom Vindhya,
greatness of, 327, 331, 350
purifies by mere sight, 331
6riya|^ pati to be contemplated on,
nasal diseases,' beneficial remedy for,
Napika, a type of drama, 921
Nathaka, one of those worshipped, 414
Natika, a type of drama, 921
Natyar5saka, a type of drama, 921
Nafyesa (6iva), image of, 314
Navamalini, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Navaratha, son of Bhimaratha; son
navairaddha, the rites after the death
of a person, 468
Navavyuha, a ialagrama, 126
navavyuharcana, for Vi^riu, 527-28
nayana, herb denoted by the word,
neck, nine actions of, 929
Nepala, a place, 841
nerves, names of the ten, 316
nether world, words denoting, 995
nether worlds, extent of; names of, 353
netra, a herb, 407
— a measure, 124
neva, another name of Asamayikatva,
Nicf t, composition of the metre, 904
nidhana, one of the tarabalas, 359
Nidhfti, son of Dhfstaka; son of, 742
night, words denoting, 990
endowed with darkness; word
denoting, 990
with moonlight; word denoting, 990
Nighna, son of Anarai^ya; son of, 737
son of Anamitra; sons of, 743
Nikfti> daughter of Adharma and
Hiihs^, 49
Nikumbila, a place where Indrajit was
doing homa, 22
Nikumbha, a demon killed by Rkma,
son of Haryaiva; son of, 737
Nila, a monkey; accompanied R&ma
to Lafikk, 21
killed Akampana and Prahasta, 22
Nila (Nil&cala), mountain; was given
by Agnidhra to Ramya, 322
a var$a-parvata on the north, 324
as a boundary, 325
Nilakaptha (6iva), reason for being
called so, 5
NU&mbari, a female energy; colour o^
NUafijika, one of the stms of Yadu, 740
nimfa^ herb, 407
flower not to be used in worship, 530

Index
Nimi, one of the four sons of, 742
nipa, a flower, 529
Nirah&r^ a spirit possessing the
child in the seventh month; symp¬
toms of the child seized by;
offering to appease, 823
NiraAjandkara, a Rudra, 234
Nirmoha, a sage, 428
NiiTti, image of 137
Nirucchvasa, a hell, 531
nirudhapasubandhaka, a haviryajna,
Nirukta ^etymology), science of, 2
ni^, a herb; used to make an unguent,
Nisadha, mountain; location of, 324,
son of Atithi; son of, 738
Niranatha, worship of the sandals of,
Ni^tha, son of Balarama and Revati,
Ni^ara, a sage at the time of the
eleventh Manu, 428
Niscayopama, explanation of, 940
Niscira, at Gaya, 342
ni^kala, one of the kinds of mantras
of Siva, 873
description of, 875
Ni$kampa, a goddess, 376
Ni^kubha, salutations made to, 52
Nissvara, different reading for Ni^ara,
428fn
Ni^tba, an energy, 292
Ni$thur^, a goddess staying in the cir¬
cle of smell, 376
name uttered in worship of Siva, 202
Nisiimbha, a demon; gained favour
from Brahma and was later killed
by the goddess, 26 fn
Nitala, a nether world, 353
nitya, one of the three kinds of crea¬
tion, 48
explanation of, 49
nivatakavaca, a term denoting the
progeny of Prahrada, 46
niyama, relating to a Idnd of yamaka,
explanation of the term, 1017
niyamas, five kinds of, 1076
Niyamopama, explanation of, 940
nominal bases, examples of forms
after inflection of, 9w-66
primary; formation of, 980-81
non-attadhment, for pleasures; com¬
mended, 1074
noose, materials for the thread of,
method jof using, 649
dIeven ways of manipulating a, 651
five ways of casting a, 651
nose, bleeding of; remedy for, 766
six actions of, 929
nouns, inflections in, 957
Nrga, son of Uflnara and Nfga, 747
Nrga, queen of Uslnara, 747
Nfsii^a, image of, 115
mantra for the v«rorship of, 117
(See also Narasithha)
s&lagrama designated as, 1 25
Nrhari, installation of the image of,
Nyagrodha, one of the sons of
Ugrasena, 742
Nvankusarihi, a metre; composition
of; different name o(^ 903
nyasa, in the worship, 90
Nyaya, science of, 3
Oath, when prescribed, 657
objects, seven kinds of, 970
as the pasture ground, 1075
oblation, mode of doing, 92fr, 467
observances, different kinds of, 1041
Oceans, surrounding the continents,
a great gift of (seven ) 544
Odhra, region of; Puru^ottama to be
worshipped at, 842
Odi^, an Adinatha, 412
offences, of different kinds, fine for,
offering to god, mode of making, 107no
ofiiciating priest, injunctions for, 680
oil, as an excellent diuretic, 757
old age, remedies to rejuvinate in,
Om, syllable of; consecration to be
done with, 58
oblation begun with, 59
as the first term in the different
formulae, 62
repeated with different formulae,
omens, knovm from birds, 600-603
ordeals, five kinds of divine, 664
instituted for great offences, 664
of five kinds instituted for different
persons, 664
procedure relating to, 664-6
ornaments, of different kinds; wofds
denoting, 1016
oysters, word for, 996
Padacatur&rdhvam, characteristics of,
p&didi-yamaka, one of the yamakas,
p&dakfcchra, an expiation, 483

to be observed at the annual cere¬
mony, 488
F&dakulaka, characteristics of the
metre, 907
P&danic^, a variety of Gayatri, 903
padantayamaka, one of the yamakas,
Fadaparikti, a variety of Pankti; com¬
position of, 904
Padma, a deity ; located on the body, 414
— one of the eight chief serpents; the
number of heads of, 807
forms the eyebrow of the goddess,
image of, 137
— beads belonging to Sikha class, 894
padma, an array; a variation of
mai]id<tla, 635
— a type of temple, 315
padma (m), a posture made with the
Padma, a hell, 1038
padmaka, a posture of sitting, 454, 1076
(See abo padmasana)
Padmahastaka, measure, 107
admanabha, one of the names of
Vi^iju, 65
Padmapurana, extent of; to be given
as a gift in Jyestha, 732
padmasana, a posture of sitting, 70
(See also padmaka)
Padmavati, a hell, 1038
Padmini, a goddess; invoked, 112
padmini, a treasure, 1 1 1
Padya, definition of; two divisions of
(See also poetry)
Paila, disciple of Vyasa, 429
paid respect to Vy^, 1
— son of Rusadratha; son of, 747
pains, such as Sdhyatmika; need for
remedying, 1074
Paippalada, disciples of Sumantu, 429
pai^ca, a type of marriage, 435
p&ka (ripeness), an excellence of
word and sense; explanation of;
four kinds of, 946
Pakayajfia, a domestic sacrifice, 475
Pakayajfias, the seven kinds of, 86
pak$a, the herb denoted by the word,
pak^ini. night with preceding and
succeeding days, 990
pala, a measure, 408
— a measure of time, 370
P&lita, one of the sons of Prthu, 43
pallava, explanation of, 403
Panmft lake, lUma's arrival mid stay
Agni Ptarihfa
Panasa, a monkey; accompanied
Rama to Lanka, 21
Panava, characteristics of the metre,
Paiicabrahman, six formulae; acces*
sories to, 890-891
one of the forms of; worshipped, 51
paficabhadra, remedies known as, 772
paficadhanus, son of Sfhjaya; son of
paficagavya (five things got from a
cow), efficacy of taking, 488
as a purificatory for stealing, 489
Pancajana, a demon conquered by
Krspa, 28
Pancajanya, letters for the worship of,
Pancaka, one of the seven sons of
Nahufa, 740
Paficakonika, a hell, 1039
PaAcala, a country, 351
the visit of the P&ndavas to, 32
Pancalas, killed by Asvatthaman, 35
— the five kings known as, 749
PaAcali, a variety of diction; charac¬
teristics of, 927
pancamrta, offered in the course of
worship, 98
Paftcanga (Almanac), 364-69
Pancantaka, letter denoting, 419
PaAcaratra, the names of the differ¬
ent texts of, 105
reference to siihhavidya in one of
the, 117fn
PaAcasikha, exposition made by, 1073p^catiktaka, remedy known as, 774
PaAcavad, on the banks of river
Godavari, Rknoa’s stay at, 15
P&pd^vas, collective term for the sons
ofPati^u, 751
taken as the instrumental cause for
VisQu’s manifestation, 31, 37
escape from the lac house, 32
stay at Ekacakra, 32fn
were recognised by the Kurus after
the deadi of Kicaka, 33
Sikhaudi became commander of the,
Aivatth&Daa*s destruction of the
sleeping army of, 35
the five; as the survivors of the
battle, 36
worshipped lord Vi sou, 335
ascendance to heaven of, 36-38
PAudu, b^t by Kfsoa^ Dvaipayana
through the ofVicitraviryaka;
married Kunti; sons oC 32, 744
M&dri was the othm wife 744

IwUx
story relating to curse of sage
Kindama on, 32fn
P^V^ujila, at Gaya; food to be offered
PaodyaS) origin of, 747
panikacchapikd, a posture, 198
Pankaja, a spirit seizing the child in
the sixth month; symptoms of the
child possessed by; offering to
appease, 823
Pankti, a metre, 562, 902
composition of, 904
blue coloured; bclong;s to Bhargava
gotra, 905
panktipavanas, explanation of the
Papa, a demon to be worshipped, 317
Papaghna, one of the sons of Rukmakavaca, 741
Papamok^a, at GayS; one should
bathe at, 342
Papini, the name of an evil spirit
whidi possesses the child on the
first day after birth; symptoms of
the child possessed by, 820
offering to appease; unguent for the
child possessed by, 821
Para, a goddess, dwelling in the es¬
sence, 375
Para, a celestial at the time of the
ninth Manu, 428
paraka, an expiation; explanation of,
destroys sin, 491
for purification, 479
to be done at masika after death,
parama, a ray of the Sun, 195
Param&, a g<^dess; worshipped, 413
letter denoting, 417
Paramak^ara, a form of Rudra, 252
paramamitra, one of the tarabalas, 359
Paramanandadeva, worshipped, 414
paramanu, a measure, 107
Farame;thi, son of Indradyumna, 323
Paramesthi, salagrama called, 125
Paramesuka, one of the foremost sons
of Vidu^a, 747
parardha, explanation of the term,
Parasara, a law-giver, 455
Parasparopama, explanation of, 940
Parasurama, manifestation of Vi^tiu, 8
son cd* Jamadagni, 9
narration of duties of castes to, 429
Paravidyl, as superior knowledge, 3
explanation of the term, 1082
P&ribh&fikjU a division of Abhivyakti,
parigha, aperiod of obstacle; all under¬
takings to be avoided in, 383
Parijata, divine tree, 6, 28
Parikatha, a division of prose
kavya; has the combined charac¬
teristics of Katha and Akhy&yikk,
Parik;it, one of the sons of Kuru, 750
Janamejaya as a descendant of, 750
son of Abhimanyu, 751
embryo saved in the womb of
Uttaril was born as, 36
was established in the kingdom by
Yudhisthira, 37
Pariplavangaka, a variation of the
array bhoga, 634
Paritapa, a hell, 532
Pariyatra, mountain, 326, 350, 351
Parjanya (Indra), creat^ by
Prajapati, 40
worshipped, 107
one of the different names of Sun,
Parjanya Prajapati, Hiratty^tromaka
as son of, 48
parpata, a herb, 407
par^mgraha, explanation of the tenn,
Partha (Arjuna), words spoken by
Kr-si^ to, 34
obsequies of Yadavas performed by,
purthi, a rite to be performed, 86
Parthiva, a year of the Hindu calendar,
parvan, the p^eriod between first and
fifteenth lunar day, 990
parv'atiasraddha, a domestic sacrifice,
Parvatl, synonyms of, 987
was, seen sporting with !§iva by
worshipped, 50, 51
Faryabandha, division of poetry called,
Paryayokta, saying in a different way,
pa£a, a posture of the hands, 857
passive, examples for the formation
pasture land, location of; extent of,
pasubandha, one of the haviryajhas, 86
Palupati, Rudra was calleds as, 50
worship of, 290
weapon of; appeasing rite employ¬
ing the mantra of, 885-87
p&tala, a flower, 529
P&t&la, a nether world, 353
P&taUl^ characteristics of the metr^

path, words having the sense of, 1006
padi of action, two kinds of, 453
p&tha, a herb, 410
pathos, origin of the sentiment, 924
three kinds of, 931
Pathya, a variety of the Ary a metre;
number of ^t^as in, 906
characteristics of the metre, 908
Pathyapankti, composition of, 904
Pathyavaktra, characteristics of the
metre, 908
patrakrcchra, an expiation, 483
pattiia, uses of, 652
paunarnavfi, a herb, 407
Paui^draka, conquered by Kf^pa, 28
story relating to, 28fn
Pauroamasa, son of Marici and Sam*
bhuti, 49
Pau^a, month of; auspicious to enter
a house in, 360
Pau^kara, a P&hcaratra agama, 106
paufi^a, explanation of the period
known as, 835
Pavaka, son of Agni and Svaha, 49
was made the king of Vasus, 47
Pavamina, son of Agni and Svaha, 49
pavamani, a hymn, 562
pavanti, a flower, 529
pavilions, building of different kinds
pavitra, of darbha grass, 58
Payo;];u or Payo;t^ika, a river that
flows from Sahya, 351
as a bestower of fruits, 328
payovrata, mode of practising, 522
pearl (s), a kind of gem, 640
from oysters are pure, ^1
other excellent kinds of, 641
pedestal, characteristics of, 146
pedestals of images, characteristics of,
peel of thunder, words denodng, 989
percussion instruments, different kinds
perfecdons, eight kinds of, 257
perfumes, mrae of preparadon of;
eight acts in, 582-3
perils of the day, good or bad, 383-4
phalacaturda^i, on the praedee of, 517
phalakfcchra, an expiation, 483
rhalgucat^dl* st Gay&; obeisance paid
Ph&lguni^ benefit of purchasing per¬
fumes in the month of, 387
—denotes Aijuna; fallen on the way
of inarch, 37
nialguni, an asterism known as
blunted, 382
(PCirva) ph&lguni, as asterism; loca¬
tion in Kofacak^ 385
Agni Purdifa
Phalgutirtha, at Gay&; merits of
bathing at, 337
Gayasiras has been made the hermi¬
tage at, 338
Phalgviia, at Gaya; obeisance made to,
phaoif a class of serpents based on
excess of one humour, 807
— herb denoted by the word, 406
Phaidrahu, a method to find the
results of a batde, 380
Phai^irahu, the effect of its posidon
in various direcdons, 409
phaidsvara, diagram of, 400
phat, use of the term, 403
Fhatkari, a goddess, 424
a monstress possessing the newly
bom child on the sixth night;
symptoms of child possessed by;
offering to appease, 821
undent for child possessed by,
Phetkari, letter denodng goddess, 418
phlegm, remedy for th^e removal of
excess of, 775
remedy for twenty kinds of disea¬
ses due to deranged, 774
phlegm and wind, a purgative for
deranged, 775
phonetics, descripdon of, 915-17
physician, fine for giving wrong medi¬
cal treatment, 679
physiognomy of men, indicadons of,
piety, two kinds of; not equal to
Agnipur&na, 1078
piles, beneficial remedies for, 754
remedy for, 767, 776
pil^mage, benefits of, 326
Pilipiccl^ a demon, 317
Pilipi6ja, a demon; appeasing off¬
ering to, 109
offering made to, 275
pilu, auspiciousness of, 641
Pinaka, bow of 8iva, 987
pi^^a (?), auapiciousness of a gem
called, 641
P^id&raka, a great place, 327
CaturbS^u to be worshipped at, 841
Ping&k$i, image of, 138
Pihgala, an attendant of Sun, 136,
— a divinity; to be worshipped, 414
— a year of the Hindu calendar, 405
Piugalft, afflkdng the child in the
fourth month; symptoms of the child
afflicted by, 823
pifigali, a vein; carries the wind ap&na,
functions o^ 556

Index
is established on the right side of
the body, 557
F^gal&caki^ description of, 377
Pin&ld, a divinity worshipp^, 414
letter denoting, 419
Pipilik&, a goddess, 376
Pipilikamadhyama, composition of
the metre, 904
pippala, a tree, 324
Pippalada, represoits a branch of
Atharvaveda, 730
pippali, a herb, 407
Pisaci, image of, 138
Pisces, the time taken by the Sun to
transit, 384
the rite to determine the sex of a
child to be done in, 357
the first feeding of the child to be
done in, 358
friendly with Virgjo, 392
Pisitasa, image of, 138
P!ta, a class of men at ^almala, 352
pita, name of a lightning, 45fn
pitchers, of different Idnds; words
denoting, 1019
consecration of, 149-51
worship of different, 277
Pitrs, worship of 317
pits, in the dry bed of rivers; words
place and time, the role of, 923
plaintiff, to be examined first, 657
Plak^a, a continent, 323
about the people of, 351
given by IViyavrata to Medhatithi,
the rulers of and the oceans sur¬
rounding, 351
plaksa, a tree, 47, 92
planets, metals for making images of,
propitiatory rite for, 461-2
offerings for, 462
mantras for propitiating, 462
three kinds of propitiation of, 467
propitiatory rite for, 467-70
benefits of propitiation of, 469-70
effect of presence in nativity sign,
character of an infant known from,
good or bad depending on the
positions of, 383-4
symptoms of those possessed by evil
iimuences of, 827
plants, medicinal, 378
of different l^ds; words which
Flava, a ytex of the Hindu calendar,
[Measure, proceeds from conceit, 923
plou^unan, injunctions for, 680
ploughs (five), a great gift, 544
poet, the five items to lx indicated by,
creator with reference to poetry, 924
poetic convention, definition of; two
kinds of; further divisions of, 949
poetry, different kinds of, 919
the nature of matter treated in, 920
poison (s), words denoting, 995
two kinds of, 81 1
the three pungents which as a drink
or unguent or collyrium would
remove, 817-18
use of white pepper and sir'isa flower
against, 818
of different kinds; remedy for, 818-9
remedy for removal of all, 773
of different kinds; effective remedy
the different remedies against, 577due to an ass etc; mantra for the
removal of, 819
due to gonasa and other snakes;
treatment of, 818-20
due to a scorpion; remedy for, 819
due to a spider etc. ; rem^y for, 819
remedial mantra for the removal of,
mantra to be recited to destroy
the vegetable, 820
due to a dog; remedy for, 820
due to sixteen kinds of rats; remedy
twenty ways of treatment for, 819
polestar, location etc. of, 35')
Svargaloka as lying between the
Sun and, 354
pollution, instances when there is no,
periods for different kinds of, 444-50
different kinds of, 444-50
pollution and purification, 440-44
portents, relating to images, 711
foreboding the death of the king,
appmsing rites for 710-713
worship of gods to destroy the
effects of, 713-16
possession, desire for; referred to as
due to ignorance, 1073
Prabha, one of the wives of the Sun,
— wife of Sagara; bore sixty s(»is, 737
—wife I^bh&kara, 739
Prabh&kara, a son of Jyodtfmat, 352
prabandha, imaginary story, 992
prabhai^ana, a viud wind, 253

Agni Pwritott
Flrabhasa, a sacred place, 330
Daityasudana to be contemplated
Hari (as Kf^pa) discarded his body
greatness of, 327, 491
— at GayS; merits of oflfering pi^d^ tit
the pretakuoda at, 342
— one of the eight Vasus, 44
Prabhusesa, at Gaya; obeisance to be
. made to, 342
Prabhita, born to Sun and Prabha,
Plrabhava, a Rudra, 234
— a guard, 93
— a year of the Hindu calendar, 404
— a type of temple, 314
PrabhAvati, a female divinity; wor¬
shipped, 52
Prab^hani, a female energy; invoked,
Prabhu, a form of Rudra, 232
Pracai;ida, a male divinity; figure car¬
ved on the door-frame, 1 15
Pracai^da, a goddess, 132
Pracai^dogra, image of, 138
Pracetas, (lord of waters) worship of,
— name of the sons of Pracinabarhis,
—son of Vidu?a; names of foremost
among hundred sons of, 747
Pr&cinabarhis, son of Dhi^ana; sons
Pracinavan, son of Janamejaya; son
Fracita, a \'ariety of Dandaka, 915
Pracyavrtti, characteristics of the
metre, 907
pradara, a modification of the array
called dat^da, 633
— a disease of women; remedy for, 777
prad^aka, an array; formed by two
wings to daoda, 634
Pradhlna, a son of Dyutimat, 352
Pradh&nam, significance of, ^1
prado^, period preceding night, 990
pr&dviv^lm, meaning of the word,
Pradyumna, one of die sons of Krs^a
and Rukmi^i, 744
son of; wife of, 745
story relating to, 29, 29fn
accompanied Kf^^a, 30
image of, 130
worship of; formulae relating to, 62
worship with the basic syllable cd*,
wonhif^ied, 91
a j^agr&ma, characteristics of, 125
marks of six discs on, 125
Praghasa, a demon killed by Rkma, 22
Praharai]uikalitS, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Prahar^u!, a female energy, 136
Prahar$ioi, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Prahasana, a type of drama, 921
a component of the mode Bh&rati;
ridicules the ascetics ana vhe like,
Prahasta, a demon killed by Nila, 22
Praheliki, a kind of citrakavya;
definition of, 935
Prahl(r)ada, son of Hira^yakafipu;
story of, 7fn
a devotee of Visi;;iu. 46
made the king by Visriu, 47, 745
story relating to Bali, grandson of,
8fn
a Paficaratra agama, 106
Prajapati, creation of time etc. by, 40
sage for the vyah^tis (of Gayatri),
name of a metre; number of letters
Prajapati (Prajotpatti), a year of the
Hindu calendar, 404
Prajapatis, Dak$a made the king of,
prajapatya, an expiation; eating food
once a day for three days, 483
explanation of, 494
for having eaten garlic etc., 472
for doing an act of an outcaste, 476
for the fourth class for purification,
for having caused the death of a
for having taken urine, excreta
for drinking wine and eating flesh,
destroys sin, 491 ^
merits of practising, 524
a rite penormed Wore becoming
an ascetic, 452
a type of marriage, 434-5 _
beads belonging to the Siva class,
Prakara^a, a type of drama, 921
Praldr^aka, a division of Ko4a, 921
pr^rtasarga, explanatitm of, 48
prakrti, relating to a state of being, 991
Prakj^, Vijtju’s entry into, 39
classical metres based on, 914
Pralamba, a demon kiUed by Balarftma, 30
story relating to^ 30 fh

btdsx
Pralay^tika, image of, 138
PramaQi, characteristics of the metre,
Pramardini, a female energy, 136
Pramathi, a year of the Hindu
Calendar, 404
Pramitak^ara, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Pramloca, mother of Marina, 43
Pramoda, a year of the Hindu calendar,
Pramodaka, one of the two sons of
D^hasva, 736
Praihsu, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 735
prat^a, a life force carried by the vein
ida; functions of, 556
equated with the day, 557
Prai;ia, a son of Dhara and Manohara,
— son of Dhatr, 49
pranava, explanation of the signifi¬
cance and greatness of, 1042-3
the first syllable, 559
precedes all the mystic syllables, 52
a formula; no divisions in, 895
equated with the soul, 1056
Ga^apati as representing, 412
equated with lord 8iva, 374
used for consecrating a child, 60
used in worship, 415
repeated, 63
destroys sins, 491
prariavahini, a nerve, 316
pratn&y&ma, two kinds of, 454, 557
meaning of the term, 1076
(agarbl^) three kinds of, 454
(sagarbha ) three kinds of, 454
difierent varieties of; merits of
practising, 1044
as an atonement, 455
as dispelling sins, 487
pra^ta, a vessel, 58, 94
five mudr^ known as, 857
shown in worship, 857, 869
PrapaficA, image of, 138
Prapitamaha, a linga, 343
Prapti, one of the two wives of Kaihsa,
?rAsa, a weai^n that is cast off, 645
'rasada (lucidity), an excellence of
word and sense; explanation of, 946
pr&sada, significance of the mantra
known as; three kinds of, 558
description, 874
with parts and without parts, 874-75
no division in, 895
Ptaianta, a form of Rudra, 252
praiaia, a*1dnd of citrakavya; defi¬
nition o4'd35
Prasastata (praiseworthiness!, an ex¬
cellence of word and sense; explana¬
tion of, 946
Prasasti, an embellishment of sound
and sense; explanation of; two
kinds, 942
Prasenaka, son of Nighna; was killed
by^ a lion, 7‘13
Prasiddhavimala, one of the vimalas
Prastara, son of Pratiharta, 323
Prastarapankti, a variety of Pafikti,
composition of, 904
Prastavana, another name of Amukha,
— a component of the mode Bharati,
rastha, a measure, 95, 1078
rasthana, a type of drama, 921
Prarardana, son of Divodasa; two
sons of, 749
Prathama, a goddess, 375
Pratihara, son of, 323
Pratiharta, son of Pratihara; sons of,
Pratiksetra, son of !^ami; son of, 743
pratiloma, relating lo caste, 430
Pratipa, son of Bhimasena; son of,
pratipadika, explanation of the term,
Pratiratha, one of the three sons of
Matinara; son of, 748
prati^tha, a modification of the array
danda; characteristics of, 633
Prati^tha, a metre; number of letters
Pratistha (gayatri), characteristic of,
Pratisthana, a place; described as the
mule of Brahma, 329
got by Sudyumna; given to Pururavas, 735
Prativindhya, son of Yudhisthira and
Draupadi, 751
Pratoda, a hell, 532
Pratyagraha, one of the seven sons of
Suhotra and Girika, 750
pratyah5ra, explanation of the term,
significance of the word, 1076
to be done only by those who re¬
peat mantras, 454
pratyah&ras, the fourteen notations in
grammar; explanation of, 953
praty&lidha, a posture relating to
archoy, ^5
Praty&pi^ characteristics of the
metre, 909
pratyari, one the t&rkbalas, 359

Agm Purd^
Pratyiifa, one of the Vasus; father of
Devsila, 44
Prau^lhi (maturity), an excellence of
aense, 943
Pravira, one of the four sons of
Taiiisurodha, 749
Firavrttaka, characteristics of the metre,
a division of Amukha; explanation
Praydga, a sacred place, 350
greatness of, 328, 329-30
destroys sins, 491
R&ma’s arrival at, 13
Bharata’s visit to, 14
Frayoga, a deity; location of, 414
Prayogdti^ya, a division of Amukha;
explanation of, 922
preceptor, characteristics of, 8Cashould be respected, 618
preceptors, word denoting persons
having same, 1017
Premokti, a variety of FrasasU, 942
Freiikhana, a type of drama, 921
present time, words signifying, 1019
presiding deities of elements, location
and worship of, 290-91
presiding deity, worship of, 316-19
presiding deity of a ground, mode of
worshipping, 272-6
Fretaiila, at Gaya ; merits of offering
pi^da at, 342
pnde, wor^ denoting, 995
priests,associated with different Vedas;
wor^ denoting, 1017
priests, officiating, words denoting,
rinciples, initiation in, 262-3
riti, modier of Dattoli, 49
worshipped, 90
priya, a nerve, 316
priyaAgu, a herb, 372
Friyavrata, son of Svavambhuva Manu
and Satarflpa, 41
sons of; performed penance and
attained god, 322
prok;ani, a vessel, 38, 95
properties, division of, procedure
relating to, 666-70
of a dead naan; rules relating to
payment to heirs, 680
property, code of law relating to
disputes about, 637-8
enjoyn^nt and possession as valid
relating to, 657-8
rules relating to sale of^ 672
mortgaged; disputes relating tc^
’Imfon; rules relating to, 672-73
" a women; six kinds of, 541
prosody, rules o6 901-2
relating to Vedic metres, 902
prostration, merits of, 1043
prtfadajya, explanation of the word,
Fnadhra, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 735
became a ^udra on account of kill¬
ing the cow of his preceptor, 736
Ff^ta, son of Jantu; son of, 750
Pftha, denotes Kunti; accompanied
Dhftarastra and G^dhari to the
forest, 36
Pftha, a vein; carries the wind naga,
Pfthu, son of Vena, 42
Ffthu, installed as the ruler, 47
two righteous sons of, 43
— son of Vibhu, 323
— son of Suyodhana, 736
Ffthudarbha, one of the four sons of
Sibi, 747
Ffthul^^, son of Lomapada; son of,
Ffthurukmaka, one of the sons of
Rukmakavaca, 741
Pfthusena, son of Vf^asena, 748
Pfthusrava, foremost among the sons
of l§asabindu; son of, 741
Pfthividhara, a type of temple, 315
Pfthvi, characteristics of the metre,
Pfthvidhara, a god; worshipped, 317
prthvisamana, mantra, 442
public service, qualities of those in,
pukkasa, a caste, 430
pulaka, a gem, 641
Pulaha,asage; a mind-bom son of
Brahma, 41, 41fn;
sons of, 49
father of Visravas, 24
Pulastya, asage; a mind-bom son of
Brahma, 41, 41fn
father of Dattoli, 49
pulmonary consumption, commend¬
able food during, 753
Puloma, a daughter of Vaisv&nara, 46
Puloman, son of Danu and fiither of
Saci, 46
puihsavana, one of the rites, 59
die time for performing, 86, 95
punamava, a herb; used as an unguent,
Punaruktati (tautology), an impurity,
two kinds of, 948
sub-divisions of, 948
Puiuurvasu, an asterism; has the fooe
lateral, 381

Index
comprises the sphere of wind, 387
its location in Kotacakra, 383
commended for all acts, 381
commendable for imparting arch¬
commendable for taking harvested
grains inside the house, 361
misery caused by the transit of Sun
should not enter the cow-pen in,
— son of Candana-dundubhi; wife
and son of, 742
Pu^dnrika, a deity presiding over the
banner, 148
worship of, 284
— son of Nabha; son of, 738
— mountain, 332
— a measure, 551
Pu9d^ilt^?n, form of Vi^u at
— a formula known as, 53
Pundra, one of the sons of Bali, 747
punishment, one of the means to be
employed by the king, 587
a political expedient, 627
two kinds of, 606
three kinds of, 628
two different Unds of, 628
for abuses; varies according to the
order of castes, 676
pupil, obligation to the preceptor, 673
nine-fold function of 929
puraka, a variety of praijayama; reason
for its name as, 557
purapa, defined as having five charac¬
teristics, 992
Pura^as, eighteen in number, 2, 730
as a form of Hari, 492
as an Apar&vidyS, 2
the names of eleven Rudras in, 45fn
merits of making a of, 735
Purafifaya, son of Srfljaya; son of, 747
Purasta, one of the three sons of
Matinira, 748
Purastad Bfhati, composition of, 903
Purastad Jyotis, composition of, 904
pure, word denoting, 996
things which are, 440
purgative, the herb that is the best,
decoction of herbs to be given as,
a decoction to be given as, 775
greasy barley water as; a different
combination known as nkrkca as.
purification £}r
different pollutions,
for travellers for eating food, 480
mode of, 82 ff
of the
of establishment,
of the principle of peace, 254-57
of remnant materials, 480
of scriptural knowledge, 252-54
of things, 439-40
purificatory rites, their number and
names, 85ff
forty-eight names of, 466
purity, two kinds — external and inter¬
Pur^a, a mountain, 414
pur^a, a pitcher, 270
purvd, a stone, 269
PQrpagiri, a mountain, 412
pur^ima, fifteenth day of lunar fort¬
night, 990
letter denoting, 417
Purojava, son of Anila, 44
Purovasu, son of Babhrusetu, 747
purtadharma, explanation of, 539
Pfiru, one of the sons of Manu and
Nadvala, 42
— one of the sons of Yayati, and
Janamejaya was bom to, 748
one of the founders of a dynasty, 740
lineage of, 748-51
Furuhuta, son of Dravarasa; son of.
Purujuti, was born from Santi; son of,
Purukutsa, son of Mandh&tf ; wife of;
sons of, 737
Purumidha, one of the three sons of
Bfhat, 749
Pururavas, bom to Budha and Ila,
born from Soma; father of Ayu, 25
enjoyed the company of Urvasi, 739
practised Yoga and reached the
world of Gandharvas; eight sons
divided one fire into three, 739
Purufa, form of Vijnu at Pum^avafa,
Puruia (soul), Visnu’s entry in, 39
Pumifasukta, hymn ; offering of water
made with, 437
repetition of; as remover of sins,
Pumsavafa, a place; the name of
Puni^a to be repeated at, 841
Pumtfottama, form of Viwu i® tile
region of Odhra, 842
— a i&lagr^a, 126
Purufottaxna (Puri), a sacred place,

Agni Purdfjia
merits of doing Sr&ddha at, 350
Purvabh&drapadi, an asterism; belongs
to the sphere of fire, 387
location in ko^acakra, 383
represented by letters, 400
associated with increase of gnrain,
causing death, 377
PQrvaphilguni, an asterism; belongs
to the sphere of fire, 387
location of letters representing, 400
commendable for doing agriculture,
associated with increase of grains,
profitable, 376
misery caused by, 363
Pfirvas, the three asterisms; associated
with increase of grains, 361
medicine to be administered in, 338
commended for copulation, 434
adversity caused by purchase of
goods in, 339
an employer should not be attended
Purva$adha, an asterism; belongs to
the watery region, 388
location of letter representing, 400
commendable for sowing seeds, 36 1
associated with increase of grains,
misery caused by transit of Sun in,
affliction caused by, 377
pili;&, an occult nerve, 233
Ffi$an, one of theAdityas; as son of
Kalyapa, 43
to be worshipped, 316
worshipped with fried grains, 108
Puskala, a class of men in Krauncadvipa, 352
Pu;kara, narration of duties of castes,
— a continent given to Savana, by
Priyavrata, 322, 323
ruler of, 333
— a holy spot, 327
Pupd^lk^?^ to be contemplated
destroys sins, 491
benefit of making a gift at, 1078
— son of Bharata, 24
— a class of men in Krauncadvipa, 352
Pufkaripi, at Gaya; balls of rice to
bo offered at, 342
— daughter of V«rapa Praj&pati; wife
of G&Mufa, 42
Pti^padanta, door keeper, 108
worship of, 273, 31/
pufpanandaka, a pitcher, 270
Pufpaka, chariot, 23
— a class of temple, 314
rectangle-shaped, 314
nine temples belonging to the class
pu^pakfcchra, an expiation; explana¬
tion of, 483
Pu^pavat, a boundary mountain, 332
Pu;pitagrS, characteristics of the metre,
to be employed in a Mahakavya,
Pu^potkat^, wife of Visravas, 24
Pusti, wife of Dhata, 739
worshipped, 91
Pu^ti, nourishment; worshipped, 31
Pu$tihara, a goddess, 376
Pu$tika, a female divinity; worshipped,
Pu$ya, month; profit gained by pur¬
chase of perfume in, 387
— asterism; belongs to the sphere of
fire, 387
has a firm look, 382
located in kotacakra, 385
location of the letter representing,
benefit of wearing a herb in, 410
rite to determine the sex to be
performed in, 357
karnavedha to be done in, 359
good for eating new fruits and
food, 338
commended for all acts, 381
misery caused by transit of Sun in,
Puta, characteristics of the metre, 912
Putana, a demoness; sent by Kaihsa
to kill Knna, 27
Putana, exercises her influence during
the day, 826
letter denoting, 417
holds sway over the north-east, 138
symptoms of a child possessed by,
a monster taking possession of
the child that is one month old,
material for the child possessed by,
material for fumigation when pos¬
sessed by, 822
offering for seven days to appease,
prayer to boyhood form of Viftlu to
destroy evil forces like, 84
worshipped by offering meat etc.,
offering of meat etc. to, 274

JruUx
to be worshipped, 317
PQtimrttika, sub-division of a hell,
PQtivaktra, a hell, 532
putrafijiva, a herb, 406
Qiualitative, a kind of Abhivyakti, 943
qualities, eight kinds of, 466
characteristics associated with the
three, 1033
needed for gaining fortune, 617
query, words standing for, 993
Raga (tint), an excellence of word
and sense; explanation of, 946
Raghava, wor^ spoken by after
hearing Daiaratha's words, 1 1
Hanumat’s words to Sita to show,
Angada’s words to Ravana to return
Sita to, 21 *
Bharata’s visit to, 24
the ^vords of praise spoken by the
sages to, 24
form of Vi90u at Citrakuta, 841
(See also Rama)
Raghu, son of Kakutstha, 9
— son of Anamitra; son of, 737
— one of the sons of Yadu, 740
Ragini, image of, 138
Rahovadi, son of Samyati; son of, 748
Rahu, words denoting, 989
born to Sirhhika and Vipracitti, 45
drinking of the nectar in the guise
of the Moon by, 6
form of, 137
chariot of, 356
period (years) of influence- of, 363,
presides over one-sbctcenth part
of day, 381
description of its rule on a day, 409
two kinds of eclipses caused by, 388
head denoted by the asterism occu¬
pied by, 380
worshipped, 52
contemplate as resembling char¬
coal, 828
merits of making a gift when the
Sun is eclipsed by, 362
predi' lions based on the position
in tenth house confers good, 384
S[ood or bad luck indicated by, 400
right caused by the aspect of, 378
fa^ty indicate by, 389
indicates misery by presence in the
seventh house, w3
RihucakrtL procedure fm writing,
description of, 377-78
Rai\’ata, one of the eleven forms of
Rudra, 45
— the flfth Manu, 427
— son of Reva; known as Kakudmin;
an account of; performed penance
on the Sumeru Mountain and
reached lord Vi;mi; founded
Dvaravati (Dvaral^), 736
— a boundary mountain, 352
Raivataka, a place; Deva worshipped
Damodara worshipped at, 842
Raja, son of Vasi;;tha and Urj^, 49
— son of Viraja and father of Satyajit,
Rajagfha, a place; merits of, 328
r^jamaya, auspicious nature of the
gem called, 641
rajani, a herb; used as an unguent, 372
riljapatta, an inferior kind of diamond;
said to be auspicious, 641
Rajas, father of Ketumat, 48
Rajasa, a form of god; letter denoting,
rajasi, denotes the entry of the Sun in
a sign, 362
Rajasuya, a sacriflee, 33, 42, 1079
Rajeyas, name of the one hundred
sons of Raji, 739
Raji, one of the sons of Ay us; hundred
sons of, 739
got a boon from lord Vi$nu and
killed the demons, 739*40
whose sons usurped the kingdom
of Indra, 740
Raji, salutations made to, 52
xajila, a class of serpents, 807
Rajni, daughter of Raivata: one of the
wives of the Sun, 735
RakS., a son of Ahgiras and Smfti, 49
raka, the full moon is called, 990
R^ni, a goddess; worshipped, 415
Raksa (Naiirta), worshipped, 51
R^$asa, a year of the Hindu calendar,
rakfasa, a type of marriage, 435
Rak^asi, a spirit afflicting the child
in the eleventh month; symptoms
of the child afflicted by, 824
image of, 138
Rakta, invoked in worship, 230
Raktacan^ika, invoked as the eyes
in the worship of Kubjika, 41 1
Raktak^ a year of the Hindu
calendar, 405
Raktak;!, image of, 138
Riima, manifestation of Vimu as, 9-25
foremost of Raghus, 738

eldest son of Daiaratha, 738
birth of, 10
married Sita, 1 1
conquest of Para^urama by, 1 1
proposal for coronation of, 1 1
Kaikeyi’s request to send him to
forest, 12
Da^ratha's words to, 13
Bharata's meeting with; arrival
at Daodtilc^ 15
Khara, Du^apa and other demons
killed by, 16
lamented and searched for Sit&, 17
befriended Sugriva, 17
was assured by Sugriva of help to
get back Sit&, 18
Sugriva’s meeting with, 18
signet ring of, 18
Hamlmat recounting the story of,
crossing the ocean by, 21
fainting of, 22
kUUng of R&vana by, 23, 738
rescue of Sita etc. by, 23
ruled at Ayodhya, 738
imageof, 115,129
to be contemplated on every
mountain, 482
salutations made to, 82
beneSt of worshipping, 343
ethics narrated by, o 17-18
Riima (Parasurama), 9
Rama, See Balarama
^maijia, a son of Dhara and
Manohara, 44
R&matirtha, at Gaya; balls of rice
to be oflered to, 342
RamUyana, story of, 9
composed by Valmiki after hearing
from Nar^a, 25
Rambha, a monkey; accompanied
RSma to Lanka, 21
Rambhi, as a form of Gauri, 133
Rame^a, a linga at Gaya; benehts
of worshipping, 343
Ramya, Nilacala given by Agnldhra
Ramy&, characteristics of the metre,
Ramyaka, a mountain, 324
Rao&jiva, one of the two sons of
Saihhat&jva; son of, 737
randhra, herb denoted by, 487
range of things, words denoting, 988
R&hgal&nanda, to be worshippra, 414
raftjani, a flower, 529
rasftbf herb denoted by, 406
Rasal^, a type of drama, 921
RkttrapSla, one of the sons of Ugra^
sena, 742
Agni Purd^
Ra^travardhana, a minister of King
Dafaratha, 1 1
rathatjiu, a measure, 107
Rath(^dhata, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Rati, invoked, 91
propitiation of, 176
reborn as Mayavati, story of 29,
29fn
ratnadhenu, a great gift, 544
Ratnasundarl, worshipped in the
worship of Kubjika, 412
rats, poisons due to sixteen kinds;
remedy for, 819
Raucya, thirteenth Manu, 428
Raudra (Raudri), a year of Hindu
calendar, 405
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 37 1
Raudraka, propitiation of, 176
Raudri, a female energy, M
one of three forms of Um^, 374
a comparison of goddess Tvarita,
as an old goddess, 412
characteristics of, 375
worshipped, 51, 201, 413
to be worshipped, 412
Raurava, had a son Dubkha through
Vedana, 49
Raurava, a hell, 531
sub-division of hells, 1039
Ravaoa, Vif^u’s manifestation to kill,
son of Visravas and Kaikasi, 24
the king of Lanka, 15fn
Surpaijakha’s visit to; abduction
of Sita by, 16
requesting Sita to marry him, 19
reference to Jatayu wounded by, 18
battle with Rtoa and fall of, 23
search for Sita by Hanumat in the
house of, 19
HanOmat's words to and anger of, 20
was intent on killing Ahgada, 21
Kumbhakar^a’s words to, 22
killed by Rama, 738
— a. muhurta; deeds tobedonein, 371
Ravi, as a name of the Sun, 136
— herb denoted by, 406
recipes, which would revive dead, 772
reconditeness, a defect of word; five
kinds of, 947
red, words denoting different shades
re^I power, three kinds of, 629
rejoice, wonis denoting, 990
relatives, words denoting different
kinds of. 1014
reli^om observance, words denoting,

Indix
remedies, five groups of; the charac¬
teristics of, 763
renovation of decayed images, 184
Reqiukhaya, one of the sons of Satajit,
Renuk&, Bh&igava as son of, 8
renunciation, explanation of die term,
greatness of, 464
repetition, word meaning, 993
of a word; two kinds of, 935
conqwunded, 935
of a sentence, 935
reply, words signifying, 993
respiration, nine actions of, 929
retention, explanation of the term,
four kinds of; explanation of, 1050
Reva, Raivata alias Kakudmin was
the eldest among the hundred sons
Reva, a river; greatness of, 328
Revanta, son of Sun and Rajhi, 735
Revanta, merits of worshipping, 343
Revati, a female force, 84
image of, 138
goddess invoked, 399
worshipped in the wind-circle, 375
— daughter of Raivata; given in
marriage to Baladeva, 736
wife of Balabhadra; sons of, 29
beloved of lord Vi^u, 746
— an asterism; has its face lateral, 381
belongs to the watery rmon, 388
location in kotacakra, 3o5
location in a diagram, 400
marriage commendable in, 357
profit caused by things bought in,
sowing seeds gains fortune in, 361
new fruits and food to be eaten in,
wearing of gems commendable in,
mi^ry caused by Sun’s transit in,
reward, for soldiers after victory;
proportionate to the task accom¬
plished 632
Rgveda, authority for the Dvaip&yanas, 730
hymns to be recited by the follow¬
ers of, 287
two divisioos of, 730
number of hymns of the briUimapas
application of the mantras of, 683asamaniftStation of lord Viftpi, 356
as an Apar&vidyk, 2
saluted, 50
assigned on the hand, 64
ornament for Indra, 93
llgveda, a Yogini; image of, 1 38
rheumatic pain, in general and in the
hip; remedy for, 775
rheumatic patients, commendable
medicines for, 754
rheumatism, remedy for, 775
righteousness, ten charcteristics of,
rikth days, good for commencement
of study, 359
Ripra, one of the sons of Sifti and
Succh&ya, 42
Ripu, had the son Ciksu;a through
Bfl^tl, 42
Ripuhara, form of Vifpu at Lokkkula,
Ri^ufljaya, form of Vifpu at ViraJ&,
—one of the sons of Sisti and
Succhkyi, 42
rite, strengthem'ng, 410-11
rites, different kin^ of, 379
Rjifa, sub-division of a hell, 1039
Rk, hymns; creation of, 40
]^sa, bom to ^amidha and DhOminl; son of, 7w
Rksa (the second), son of VidOratha;
rkfanayaka, a type of temple, 315
Rkseyu, one of the ten sons of
Bhadra4va, 748
R^uunoksa, at Gayi; merits of bathing
rocana, a herb, 372
rocika, a pterfection, 257
Rodani, a monstress affecting the
child on the tenth day after birth;
symptoms of the child possessed by;
offering and fumigation to appease;
the unguent to besmear on the
child possessed by, 822
— a moiutress seizing die child in the
third year; symptoms of the child
seized by; offering to appease;
fumigation when the cUld is
seized by, 824
rodhaka, explanation of, 403
rodhamudra, 308
Rohioi, one of the fixed asterisms, 381
one of the Uunted asterisms, 382
location in kotacakra, 385
location of the letter denotii^, 400
reason for unusual oonanotion in,
a combinatioa caurad by the pre¬
sence of Sun in, 362

Agni Purina
new fruitt and food should be
taken in, 358
commendable for marriage, 357
commended for copulation, 434
good for the first feeding of the
child, 358
good for commencing construction
of a house, 360
not good for entering the cow«pen,
mis^ caused by Sun's presence in,
wife of Vasude\'a; the birth of
Balarima to, 26, 26fn., 744
Rohit&^va, son of Hariicandra; son
roots, paste of; to make the woman
deliver the child comfortably, 834
rosary, the presiding deity of the
thread of, 899
rosary beads, four different kinds of;
each subdivided into four; bene*
fits of wearing and using for
counting, 894
row, words which mean, 1007
royal fan, characteristics of, 638
royal priest, qualities of, 619
R^abM, a constellation; correction
(See also Taurus)
— son ofNftbhi and Meru, 323
— son of Svahya; son of, 743
R^abha (hills), as a sacred place, 328
Rfabha^javUasitam, characteristics
of the metre, 913
Rfi, region known as, 640
Rfyamuka, mountain; kingdom re¬
stored to Sugriva by Rima at, 17*18
Rtadham&, Indra dtiring the period
of the 12th Manu, 428
^vab, herb denoted by, 406
Rtu, story relating to his disciple
Nid&gha, 1066f
rtu, herb denoted by, 408
Rtupart>a, son of l§rutayu; son of, 737
ftvijah, r^vik, herb denoted by, 406
ruby, a gem, 640
characteristics of, 641
said to be auspicious, 641
rucaka, a herb, 407
Rucira, characteristics of the metre, 913
rudantikS, a herb, 406
rudhirfik^a, said to be auspicious, 641
Rudhiiodg&ri, a year of die Hindu
calendar, 405
Rudra, creation of, 40
as a son of Satl, 45
bdng known so because of birdi
from wailing Brahmft, 49
protection sought by, 30
herb denoted by, 406, 407
the five constituents of worship of,
the sage, metre and deity for the
hymns for, 815*16
the order of recitation of different
hymns of, 815
presiding deity of an element, 271
worship of, 274, 290
denoting 8iva as destructive fire;
as a form of Visnu, 2
the feminine form of Vifuu seen by,
Rudracamuoda, a goddess of dancing;
image of, 134
Rudracauda, a goddess; worshipped,
Rudracarcik5, a goddess, image of,
rudraUna, a pavilion relating to the
presiding deity, 318
rudrajatk, a herb, 406
rudrSikya, excdlence of, 900
Rudrap&da, at Gay&; merits of
touching, 338
Rudrasangrahl, a goddess; image of,
Rudras, as a creation of the sages, 41
names of eight, 263
eleven names of, 44, 44fn., 45fn.
fourteen names of, 254*55
25 different forms of, 252-3
names of different, 249
numerous, 45
consecration of, 180
Rudra, a siddha, 414
Rudresa, a linga, 343
Rudra Savaroi, the twelfth Manu, 428
Rukmakavaca, son of Kambalabar*
hifa; foremost among fifty sons of,
Rukmavati, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Rukmcfu, one of the sons of Ruk¬
makavaca, 741
Rukmikuoda, at GayS, 341
Rukminl, one of the wives of Kffna,
birth of Pradyumna to, 29
had many forms tt^ether with
Kr?na,31
Rflkfakaru!, a goddess; imap of, 138
Rum&, entrust^ to Sugriva by R&ma,
Rilpaka, explanation of; when it may
be called Upam&, 941
Rflpakam, one of the similarities, 939
Rflpavardhana, a form of Rudra, 252
Rum, a demon; slayer of, 399
Ruyadgu, son of Sv&h&; son 741

Indtx
Rufadratha, ion of Titikfu: son of, 747
Sabdabbeda, a weapon, 14
Sabdabrahman, one of the two brah¬
mans; explanation of die term, 1060
3abdak^ one of those worshipped in
the worship of Kubjikfi, 414
Sabdam, explanation of the term, 1027
Sabhanara, one of the foremost sons
of Vidusa; son of, 747
Saci, daughter of Puloman, 46
faciyaga, one of the four acts relating
to a marriage, 434
sacred formulas, conferring prosperity
and having medicinal enect; des¬
cription of, 770-72
sacred spots, greatness of, 326-8
sacred thread, made of different
material for the different castes, 433
investiture of, 221-24
mode of investitute of, 215-21
knots on, 216
sacrifices, seven domestic, 466
sacrificial ground, words denoting,
sacrificial pit. mode of constructing,
sacrificial rites, of three kinds, 1043
classified as sattvika, rajasa and
Sadasiva, presiding deity of an ele¬
ment, 271
identified with letter kfa, 254
worshipped in die worship of
Kubjika, 414
Sadaiiva, a goddess worshipped in the
worship of Tvarit&, 424
^d^9taka, position of planets, 357
s^dhaka, one of the t^&balas, 359
Sadhani, letter denoting, 417
s^hya, relating to letter in worship,
relating to the letters in the name
of the votary, 895
Sadhya, Sadhyas were bom to, 44
s^hyamantras, become fmitful by
repetitions, worship etc, 803
Sadhyas, bom to Sadhy&, 44
consecration of the images of, 180
sadobhaya, a pavilion, 318
f^fjyam (similarity), an embellish¬
ment of senses, 939
Sadyojata, letter denoting, 418
saffron, lued as an unguent, 372
Sagara, son of Bahu; two wives of;
sons of; whose sons were burnt by
sage Kapila, 737
sages, general term for, 1018
names of the seven {mminent
lefisnted to as Citrafikfaap#!,
Sagiturius, the time taken by the
Sun to traverse, 384
friendly with Gemini, 392
Sahadeva, son of Somadatta; son of,
— son ofjar^ndha; son of, 750
— born to M&dri and Pa^du* 744, 751
bom through the grace of A^vinikumara, 32
fell on the way of march, 37
son of, 751
sahadeva, a herb, 372
sahadevi, a herb used as an unguent,
offers good protection, 378
used in a charm, 405-6
sahasa, denotes fine; three kinds of,
Sahasrajit, eldest son of Yadu, 740
Sahasraih^, a name of the Sun, 1 36
Sahasrasva, son of Ahindsva; son of,
Sahi^nu, one of the sons of Pulaha and
K$ama, 49
Sahokti, one of the similarities, 939
explanation of, 941
Sahya, mountain, 350
rivers flowing from, 351
Devadeveia to be worshipped, 842
Sahyadri, a sacred mountain, 328
iaila, herb denoted by, 406, 407, 408
Sailu^, a Gandharva; sons of, 24
Saithhikeyas, R&hu and others; pro¬
geny of Siihhiki, 45
Saindhava, a forest, 842
saindhava, a herb, 407
Sairandhri, Draupadi as, 33
Saitava, an authority in prosody, 913
Saka, one of the seven continents, 323
given by Priyavrata to Bhavya, 322
mlers of, 352
about the people of, 351
sakala, one of ^e kinds of mantras
of Siva, 873
Saka, son of Narifyanta, one of the
sons of Vaivasvata Manu, 736
iakata, an array; a variation of the
array called bhoga, 634
an array of the slmpe of a cart, 635
S&kha, younger brother of Kum&ra, 44
image of, 134
Sikini, a goddess; to be worshipped,
S&kini-s, image of, 135
Sakra (Indra), was given the worlds
by Vi?hu, 8
abandoning of the festivity of, 27
birth of Aijuna by the gra^ of, 32
Maruts as the allies of, 47
praued Lakyml, 49

Agni Purd^
udutation made to the face of, 51
wonhipped, 316
one of me twelve Adityas, 43
5akrajit (Indrajit), 20
Iftkta, a method of locating mantras,
Sakti, a guardian deiw, 50
saluation made to, 52
wonhipped, 284
^ti, a posture of the hands, 857
Saktidik^, initiation to be performed,
lakuna, an astral combination, 363
Sakuni, a son of Hira^y&kfa, 46, 46fh
— assisted Duryodhana in dice play,
•>— an impeding force; prayer to Kff^a
to destroy, 84
— kara^a on fourteenth day of dark
fortnight, 369
SakuntalU, wife of I>u;yanta, 749
Sakunti, son of Drdharatha; son of,
Sakvari, name of a metre, 905
Mahikavya should be composed in
the metre, 920
Sala, one of the sons of Balhika, 751
Salagrama, a sacred place, 350, 491
Mahayoga to be contemplate^ at,
Hari to be contemplated at, 84 1
resorted to by ^^abha, 323
merits of, 328
iilagrdma, characteristics of, 124*
three kinds of wonhip of, 126
mode of worshipping, 126
4&lagfha, a type of temple, 314
5&lihotr^ science of hones expounded
S&lini, characteristics of the metre,
Salmala, a continent, 323
given by Priyavrau to Vapu^m&n,
extent of and mien of, 352
Sklmala, a hell, 532
Sihnali, main river in the hell, 1039
iftlnudiya, flower not to be used in
wonhip, 529
flalya, fought for a day and was killed
by Yudhiythira, 35
sam&dhi, definition of, 454
explamtion of, 943, 1076
eimlanation of the mode of practisbenmts of practising, 1052
gan>fim (evenness), an embeUiduneat
of sense, 939
Skman, hymm; creation of, 40
sam&na, a life-force carried by the
vein sufumn&; functimis of, 556
Sam&ni, characteristics of the metre,
samapada, relating to archery, 645
samasaptaka, position of planets,
happiness indicated by, 357
Sam&sokti, brevity of e^>ression, 943
Samasya, a puzzle, 992
a kind of Gitrak&vya, 935
definition of, 936
Samavak&ra, a type of drama, 921
sam&varta, a rite to be p^ormed, 95
Samaveda, as an Apar5vidy&, 2
two branches of, 730
division of, 429
three kinds of songs of, 730
extent of, 730
hymns to be recited by a follower of,
use of the hymns of, 704-7
the irisQkta of, 710
sacred for water sod, 93
Samaya, a Rudra, 254
Samayavimala, to be worshipped,
Stoiayikatvam (conventional), an ex¬
cellence of sense, 945
Samba, son of Jfimbavati from Kr^^a,
curse of the sages on, 36fn
Sambara, a son of Hira^y&kfa, 46
— demon; Daiaratha’s battle with,
12fn
— a companion of Kaihsa, 29
— story relating to, 29fo
$ambar&, image of, 138
Saipbhava, one of the guaurds of door;
worshipped, 93
son of tjrja; son of, 750
S&mbhava, a method of locating
mantras, 416
sambhav&yanlya, details relating to
the vow of, 520-1
Sambhu, denotes Siva; reference to
K&ma made bodileu by, 29
Sati bom again and becoming wife
investiture of sacred thread for, 215
one of die Rudras, 45, 252
— wife of Dhniva and mother of
Si$ti and Bhayya, 42
Sambhflta, son of Pttfukutsa; son of,
SambhOti, vrife of Marid; prcweny of,
Saihhma, stm of Dharmanetra; son
Saifahftri, a goddess, 375

Index
Saihh&rik&, letter denoting, 417
Saiiihirit!dmudr&, 236
Saihhatasva, son of Nikumbha; two
sons of, 737
Sami, one of the five sons of Sopiiva;
son of, 743
SaihjtiS, daughter of Tvaftr* one of
the wives of the Sun; gave birth
to Vaivasvata Manu and the
Asvins, 735
sampat, one of the tar&balas, 359
Samp&ti, eagle brother of Jafayu;
words spoken to the monkeys by, 18
words spoken to Hanumat and
others by, 19
samprad&na (giving), three kinds of;
explanation of, 97 1
8am|>raptidvidali, on the practice of,
Sampratipana, sub-division of a hell,
samputa, relating to a mantra, 403
Samrat, daughter of Kardama and
Dev^Qti, 41
saihsargayamaka (samudga?), one of
the Yamakas, 935
Sarii^yopama, explanation of, 940
Samuccayopama. emlanation of, 940
Samudra, father of &ivarQa, 43
samudra, a treasure, 269
Saihvaraoa, son of ^$a; son of, 750
Sarhvarta, a law-giver, 455
Saihvarta, one of those worshipped in
the worship of Kubjika, 414
letter denoting, 419
Saiiividh^na (contrivance), an ex¬
cellence of sense, 945
Saihy&ti, son of Bahuvidha; son of,
Saiiiyogavimala, one of the Vimalas;
worshipped, 412
sart^ktahsdapankti, name of a gift,
Sanaka, a sage; dwells in Janaloka,
expositions made by, 1074
Sanatkmn&ra, creation of, 40, 48
Kum^ identified with, 44
sand, word for, 995
sandal, red; as an unquent, 372
sandhya, a flower, 529
Sandhyflvata, as an excellent place,
S&i^lilya, a PkftcarfttrSgama, 106
S&ndipani, guru of KfWft, 28
Safighflt^ sub-division of a hell, 1039
safigrahi^ collection of stories, 992
saflgraha^ a posture relating to
riding horses, 787
Sani, worshipp^ 52,
Sanicakra, to find victory; drawing of,
safijaya, a modification of the array
dan^a, 633
Safijivana, sub-division of a hell, 1039
Saftjivani, letter denoting, 417
Sahkalpa, progeny of, 44
Sankara (Siva), fight between Hari
and, 30
installation of image of, 172
worshipped in the worship of
Kubjika. 414
Sahkari, image of, 133
Sahkarsan^* denotes BalarSma, 26 fn
as a form of Vi;nu, 62
installation of image of, 1 72
as a deity presiding over the banner,
worship with the basic syllable of, 68
worshipped, 91
— a iSlagrama, 124, 125
Sahkha, a law-giver, 453
— a serpent, image of, 137
jahkha, a t)^ of temple, 315
— one of the postures of the hand, 857
Sahkhadvara, a place, 841
SaiikhakOtai group of mountains, 325,
325fn
Sankhapad, son of Kardama Prajkpati; made ruler of the south,
Safikhapila, one of the eight chief
Krpents, the number of heads of.
Sahkhin, form of Vistiiu at SaAkhaiankhini, an occult nerve, 257
carries the wind dhanafijaya, 556
Sknkhya, creation according to, 39fn
sankirqa, a variety of horses, 789
SaAkrtit classical metres bas^ on, 914
SaAk^epa, an embellishment of sound
and sense; explanation of, 942
SaAk;iptaka, a variety of Arabhadt
SaAku, one of the sons of Ugrasena,
SaAkukarna, worship of, 284
SaAkumati, gAyatri, composihon of
the metre, 904
SaAkurArya, one of the sons of Danu,
8aAkufirA]|;t, different reading for
SaAkurAx^, 46fh
Sannateyu, one of the ten sons of
BhadrAiva, 746

Agni PurU^
Sannati, wife of Kratu; progeny of, 49
S&nta, a son of Apa, 44
HaatA, a nerve, 316
6&ntabhaya, a son of Medhatithi, 351
Santanu, bom in the race of Bharata
son of Fratlpa; 31
sons of; through Gahg& and Kali
(Satyavati), 751
s&ntapana, an expiation; explanation
for having stolen things, 476
for having drunk polluted water,
Santati, different reading for Sannati,
49fn
S&nti, Indra at the time of the 10th
Manu, 428
—a female energy; worshipped, 91
—bom to Ajami^ha and Nilinj, 749
sapfo^ikarai^a, rite; mode of per¬
forming, 348-9
to be peiformed for women, 442, 460
sapphire, a gem, 64o
qualities of a good, 641
sapta, herb denoted by, 407
Saptabhilm&, a hell, 1039
Saptar&tra, religious texts, 105
Sapt&rcis, worship of, 285
lara, a posture oi the hands, 857
a flower, 529
s&ra, a ray of the Sim, 195
Sftr&, image of, 138
5arabha, a monkey that accompanied
R&ma to LahkH, 21
Sarabhaiiga, sage saluted by R&ma, 15
altered foe Are in foe presence
of RSma, 15fn
S&rabhata, a muhurta; deeds to be
done in, 371
Saradvata, married AhlayS, and had a
Saradvipa, future birth of cakrav&kas
S&rapa, one of the sons of Vasudeva
and Rohi^ii, 744
ferapuAkhikk, a herb, 410
Sarasiruha, a variety of bandha, 937
S&rasvatakalpa, a kupa period, 732
sftrasvatavrata, mode of practising, 524
Sarasvati (goddess), suuted, 1
foe term used m a formula, 52
woiwpof, 197
benefit of worshipping, 343
—river, 327
confluence of Ganges with, 327
Sarasvati, river at Gay&, 344
Strafoa, beads bdongmg to the Savitra
class, 894
SarayCl, a river, Dalarafoa's funeral
rites done on foe banks of, 14
Sarira, letter denoting, 417
Sarmi9fo&, daughter of Vr^aparvan,
vras the second wife of Yay&ti, 25,
story relating to Devay&ni’s curse
on, 25fn
S&riiga, worshipped, 52, 88
S&rngddharin, form of Vi^u at
Daudaka, 842
Saipa, a form of Rudra, 45
sarpa, a constellation; adversi^ cau¬
sed by purchase of thin^ in, 359
sarpacari, array; modification of
bhoga, 635
sarpakri, used as an unguent, 372
sarp&sya, a modification of foe array
darida, 633
Sarpis, an ocean, 324
sarpya, herb denoted by, 407
Sarva, a name of Rudra, 50
worship of, 290
sarvabhauma, significance of foe word,
Sarvabhavodbhava, a form of Rudra,
Sarvabhutadamani, a female energy;
worshipped, 51
SarvadS. (Sarvari), a year of foe
Hindu calendar, 405
Sarvadh&tri, a year of foe Hindu
calendar, 405
Sarv^it, a year of foe Hindu calendar,
Sarvajft&, image of, 138
Sarvajiiavimala, one of foe Vimalas,
worshipped, 415
S&rvakaxnada, letter denoting, 419
Sarvakarmfi, son of Kalm&fap&da; son
Sarvanetra, a deity presiding over the
banner, 145
worship of, 234
Sarvap&pahara, form of Vif^u on
Vindhya mountain, 842
Sarvatobhadra, a mystical diagram,
worship of Hari in, 75fh
— a type of temple, 314
—one of foe bandhas; description of;
three kinds of, 937
modification of marid^ila, 634
has opening <m all sides, 634
formation optional, 635
SarvatomukhI, an energy, established,

Index
wonhipped, 51
Sarvatraga, son of Dharmas&vamii
Manu, 428
Sary&ti, one of the eight sons of
Vaivasvata Manu, 735, 736
two sons of, 736
— one of the seven sons of Nahu^a, 740
Sa^bindu, son of Gitraratha; a great
monarch; a devotee of lord Vis^u;
had ten thousand sons, 741
&ii, herb denoted by, 406
Sasiva, a form of Rudra, 252
$a9tha, worshipped, 412
Sa9(hi, one of the Adinathas, 412
Satabhi;ak, a movable asterism, 381
a blunted asterism, 382
an asterism; profit caused by pur*
chase in, 360
for increasing the grains, 361
misery caus^ by Sun’s transition,
location of letter representing, 400
Satadhanu, was killed by Knba, 743
iSatadhanva, one of the ten sons of
Hrdika, 743
$atadyumna, a son of Manu and
Nadvala, 42
Sata^pai'ikti, a variety of Pankti, 904
Satajit, one of the sons of Yadu; three
sons of, 740
fatamuli, a herb, 407
Satmanda, a sage, 10
son of Saradvata and Ahaly&, 750
son of, 750
Satanika, son of Nakula and Draupadi,
iatapufpi, a herb, 407
SatarOpa, two sons of, 41
Satairngtt, hermitage of, 32
Satatapa, a law-giver, 455
Satat^a, an asterism; located in
Kotacakra, 385
fetiivari, a herb, 371
Sat&yus, a son of Pururavas, 739
Sati, gave up her life; bom as
daughter of Himav&n, oO
—a nerve, 316
— an excellence of word, 944
Satobfhati, name of Mah&bfhati
according to Bhat^dil^f ^04
Satrajit, son of Nighna; got the Syamantaka from Sun god; Syamantaka
gem returned by Kyfoa to; was
killed by Satadhwu, 743
fetru, explanation of, 1019
Satrughna, birth of, 10
married Sratakirti, 1 1
was brought to the dty along with
Bharala, 14
killed Lavapa, 24
Satn^it, one of the five sons of Sotjiiiiva,
Sattdca, a type of dranu^ 92 1
s&ttvika, one of the qualities, 48
Saturday, tripufkara caused by, 362
prosperity caused by KrttikS occurr¬
ing on, 377
inauspiciousness of seventh day on,
rule of Rahu lies at south-east on,
Saturn, distance of, 354
chariot of, J56
period (years) of influence of, 363,
presides over a part of day, 381
diagram of, 409
the letter presided over by, 374
image of, 137
contemplated as dark, 828
confers good in sixth place, 383
brings good in tenth place, 384
victory indicated by, 393
begets defeat, 377
fatality indicated by, 389
bad luck indicated by, 400
SStvata, son of Jantu; four sons of;
a goc^ YSdava king, 742
S&tvati, one of the numes, 928
Satya, a manifestation of Vi^uu, 428
— Aiivara, an &gama, spoken by, 106
—one of the sons of Priyavrata, 322
— a world; worshipped, 79
— ^personified; wonhipped, al6
Satya, one of the wives of KnOft* 744
Satyabhkroa, daughter of Satrajit;
married by K^^a, 743, 744
was devotra to Kr^pa, 744
return of Kff pa in the company of,
Satyadevi, one of the daughten of
Devaka; married 1^ Vasudeva, 742
Satyadhrk, son of Sat&nanda; pro¬
geny of, 750
Satyahita, son of Vffabha; son oC 750
Satyajit, son of Raja, 323
Satyaka, son of Sini, 743
Sat^ketu, son of Sukumkra, 749
SStyaki, son of Satyaka; also known as
Yuyudhkna, 743
survived the Bharata war, 36
Satyaloka, distance of; residents of,
Saty&nanda, sandals of; woiriiipped,
Satyaradia, son of Satyavrata; son of,
son of Gitraratha; son of, 748
SatyavSk, one of the sons of Manu
and Nadvalk, 42

Agni AffdcMi
Sfttyavat, different reading for
Satyav&k, 42fn
Satyavati, daughter of G&dhi, 749
wife of Santanu, 31
had Vicitra'^ryaka as a son, 751
Satyavrata, son of Tarima; son of, 737
Saubhadra, denotes Abhimanyu
Saubhfigya (loveliness), an excellence
of word and sense; explanation of,
Saubh&gyA, image of, 133
sa^hi^yavrata, details relating to,
Saukum&rya, an excellence of word,
Saumitrl, Lakfma^a, Sita’s words to,
Saumya, a blunted asterism, 382
— a territory, 350
— (north) Hiraoyaromaka made as
regent of, 48
—a muhOrta; deeds to be done in, 371
Saumyk, a goddess accomplishing a
charm, 375
characteristics of the metre, 907
saumyamantras, characteristics of and
effects of, 802-3
got by inversion of the letters of
kgneyamantras, 803
Saunaka, at the forest of Naimi^a, 1
— ^rqsresents a branch of Atharvaveda,
— a FkAcar&tragama, 106
SauQdikeyas, one of the five branches
of Haihayas, 741
Saurabha, ^aracteristics of the metre,
Sauri, form of Vifttu at Utpala, 842
sautrimaoi, i haviivyajiia, 86, 466
Sauvira, a king; an accoiint of know¬
ledge imparted by Bharata to, 1062fr
Sauvira, country; Vipiu temple built
Savana, a sage, 428
->H3ne of the sons of Vasi^fha and
Uqk, 49
—son of Priyavrata, 322
ruled Pufkara, 353
sons of, 353
Savaruk, daughter of Saroudra; pro¬
geny of, 43
Skvarpi, the eighth hbnu; son of
SOrya and Ghkyk, 428
a disciple of Loonaharpma, 730
Savitr, one of the twelve Adityas, 45,
worshipped, 317
red flowen for wondiip of, 108
iMitti, wonhip 274
Skvitra, one (d* the four Idads of rosary
beads; the four divisions of, 894
a muhkrta; deeds to be done in, 371
Skvitri, letter denoting, 418
located for wonhip, 317
worship of, 274
name of a new-moon day conferring
benefits, 519
skvitrimantra, as purifying from sin,
Scorpio, time taken by the Sun to
transit, 384
friendly with other constellations,
scorpion, remedy for poison due to,
scorpion-bite, remedy for, 756
seasons, two divisions of; the different
tastes getting increased in, 759
seat of a king, characteristics of, 638
self, the subtle nature of, 1076
self, golden image of; merits of giving
as gift of, 548
selling, words denoting, 1022
senility, remedy which arrests, 756
sense(s), compared to an elephant, 617
as me horses, 1075
embellishment of, 939
description of, 42
sentence, definition of, 992
that is well-constructed; word for,
sentiments, importance of; inter¬
dependent on emotion, 924
the names of, 994
words denoting different, 994-5
exhibited by moods; origin of, 923four self-developed ones, 924
serpent, words stsuiding for, 995
serpent bite^ four kinds of, 808
at certain places described as
inauspicious, 808-9
auspicious and inatispicious sounds
and objects seen relating to, 809
description of auspicious-inauspiciotjs type of messengers conveying
news a^ut, 809
the pdison due to; the way in which
spreads, 810
the treatment with mystic formulae
serpents, the different species of, 807
seven fimtors such as the nature
etc. of, 807
the names of eight chief; classified
into groups, 807
three classes of, 807
having hoods bear different signs,
four divisions of^ 807

IndBx
the names of the differeitt teeth
details relating to impregnation,
laying of eggs etc. by, 807>8
seven among the eight preside over
the days of the week, 808
servant, words denoting, 1019
the qualities marking the king’s, 621
servants, of the king, code of conduct
the qualities of, 620-21
8e$a, one of the eight chief serpents
the number of heads of, 807
born from KadrO, 46
the word Ananta denoting, 63fn
worship of, 273, 317
worshipped, 108
sesa, an array; marked by rows of
elephants, 6M
Sevacakra, indicating gain or loss,
Sevya, name of the wife of Jyamagha,
sheaths, description of the seven, 1034
shellac, as an unguent, 372
shyness, words denoting, 993
3ibi, a son of Hrada, 46
different reading for Gaya, 42fn
the four sons of. 747
Sibikavesma, a type of temple, 314
sickness, a general remedy to remove,
siddha, letters falling into the group
relating to the letters in the name
of the votary, 895
as fruitful, 391
Siddha (vimala), worshipped, 415
Siddhac^u^d^, image of, 135
siddhacatufka, four siddhas, 415
SiddhakotUvara, worshipped, 414
siddhamantn^^ become fruitful by
mere repetition, 803
Siddbartha, a minister of King Daiaratha, 11
—a year of the Hindu calendar, 405
tiddhkrtha, a herb, 407
siddhas, names c^, 414
Siddhairama, a place; Rftma’s stay at,
Siddhayogeivari, image of, 135
Siddhefvara, a lihga, 34^
sides, five actions o^ 930
SikhA, a goddess, 417
— one of die four kinds of rosary
beads; die four divisions oC 894
^-characteristics of the metre, 907, 911
fflrhfl, a barb, 372
SikhaQdirMMS of Dnipada, 34fn
fought on the side of the F&qi^vaSf
Sikhapdui, a Rudra, 263
Sikha^^ini, later transformed to a
male form, 34fn
wife of Antardh&na, 43
Sikhariqi, characteristics of the metre,
Sikhi, letter denoting, 419
Sikhivahini, a goddess; location of die
letter denoting, 417
3ikhivasa, group of mountaim, 325,
325fn
$iks& (phonetics), science of, 2
Silpaka, a type of drama, 921
simantnonayana, a rite, 59, 86, 95
Siihha, a constellation; correction for
rSee also Leo)
siihha-homa, pcnormance of, US
siihhakar^a, a position relating to
archery, 648
siihhavidya, ceremony known as, 1 17
Siihhika, a demoness, daughter of
Kasyapa and Diti, 45
killed by HanQmat, 19
Siihhonnata, the name of Vasantatilaka according to sage I^^pa, 913
similarity, explanation of; is four-fold,
3iihiapa, tree in the Afoka grove, 19
8i(3&)iiiiapayana, a disciple of
Lomaharfana, 730
sin, words denoting, 990
sins, major types, 471-74
the consequential births for diff¬
hymn which destroys, 483-5
Sindhu, region of, indication of the
destruction of the inhabitants of, 387
— ocean; name of Gopisvara to be
repeated at, 842
— ^a river, 24
as yielding all fruits, 327
Sindhudvipa, sage for the hymn &po
hi fth&> ^2
—son of Ambariya; son of, 737
sindhu-v&raka, a herb, 407
8ini, one of the sons ofBabhru, 742
—descendant of Dhryta; 7^^
8ini, was born from Anamitra; son o^
Sinivftli, wife of Kardama, 738-9
— a son of Ahgiras and Sinfti, 49
sinivSli, die new-moon day if the
moon is perceived, 980
siniv&U, caturdail, 360
fiph&, a herb, 407
iiriia, flower not to be used in worship^

Agtti Purdtfa
a son of Dhara, 44
one of the sons of Medh&tithi, 331
son of Dhruva and Sambhu;
iiiuc&ndr&yatjia, an expiation; ex¬
planation of, 482
£suka (ii^uc&ndrSyaoa), an expiation
for eating certain things, 488
ISiiuvaktr&, image of, 138
Slt&, daughter of Jaiuika, 10
wife of Rama, 738
R&ma was asked to observe vows
along with, 1 1
crossed the river Jahnavi, 13
SOrpa^tAkh&'s words to Rava^a
rwting to, 15
abduction of, 16
search ordeied by Sugriva for, 18
Jat&yu gave his life for, 18
seen by Hanflma^ 19
crest-jewel given to Hanflmat by,
Vibhi taiga's advice to R&vana, 21
Kumbhakartia’s words to Ravat^a
relating to, 22
R&vana*s intention to kill, 22
brought back after purification, 23
birth of Ku&i and Lava to, 24
rule of son of Slta, 25
merit of worshipping, 343
—a river, 325
fitakfcchm, an expiation; explanation
Sitambha, a lake, 325
oltoda, a lake, 325
Siva, synonyms of, 986-7
a form of Rudra, 252, 254
Vifpu as the refuge of, 746
name of attendants of, 987
B&pa considered as a son of; words
spoken to Ba^a by, 29
words spoken by Vi^nu to, 30
image of; meditation on, 202
installation of inuM of, 172
mode of wordi^iping, 197-204,
worship of, 274
a sacr^ fonnula of, 837
eight kinds of mantras of, 873
appeasing rite for, 891-94
to be oontempla^ at every quad¬
rangle, 842
a deity located in the body, 414
—herb denoted by, 406
— « son of Medhiitithi, 351
—the name of a temple, 318
-—one of four kinds of rosary beads;
die four divisions of, 894
one of the kinds o€ mantras of
Siva, worshipped, 51
location of the letter reoresenting,
iivakhya, a pavilion, 318
iivar&tri\Tata, description of, 517-8
iivasraya, a pavilion, 318
Sivottama, a Rudra, 263
Skanda, synonyms of, 987
conquered by T^kwa and others,
obeisance made to, 1
worshipped, 51
placing of the image of, 116
worship of the image of, 215
ofifeiing made to, 274, 275
Skandapurapa, narrat^ by lord
Skanda ; on the virtues of Ta^uru^akalpa; extent of; should be g[iven
as a gift, 733
skanda^afth!, a vow; details relating to,
Skanda vikata a demon, 317
Skandhogrivi (Brhati) , name of Nyankusaripi according to Krau;tuki, 903
skin, defects of; remedy for, 767
sky, words denoting ^8
slave, rules relating to making free a,
Sle$a, a variety of gu^ relating to
word, 944
(See also coalescence)
sling, uses of, 652
Slo^yani, represents a branch of
Atharvaveda, 730
Smara, worship of the image of, 215
smoothness, explanation of, 945
smrti, collection of texts relating to
religious duties, 992
Smf d, wife of Angiras, 49
snake-bite, remedy for 756
( See also serpent bite)
snataka, denotes a person who had die
ceremonial bath, 1018
Sndi^, a class of men at Kuiadvipa,
352fn
snow, words denoting, 989
snuhl, a herb, 406
society, everyone diould strive for
the welfare of, 674
so^a&i, herb denoted by, 407
$o4aft, a somasaihsthk, 64, 79, 86, 466
$o^Uianyfisa, three kinds of, 416
soft, a mode; eiqilanation of, 933, 934
Softness, explanation of, 945
Soka, bom from h^r^yu, 49
solar rac^ description of the genealogy
solar region, worshiimed, 50
soldiers, methods of n^t by; to be

/ndinK
rewarded suitably after the victory,
Soma, bom from BrahmS, 25
given as born from Atri, 31, 738
bora to Atri and Anasily&, 49
married 27 daughters of Dak^a, 44
performance of R&jasilya by, 738
the supremacy gained by, 739
the wives of me celestials, and sages
deserted their husbands and
served, 738*39
seduced Tar&, wife of Brhaspati,
the king of planet; words spoken
to progenitors by, 43
worship of, 274
worshipped, 52
request^ to come, 336
— one of the eight Vasus; father of
Varc&, 44
Somadatta, son of Pahcadhanus; son
— one of the sons of Bilhika, 751
—one of the sons of Santanu, 751
Somaka, a boundary mountain, 351
son of Sahadeva; son of, 750
Somakuud^* S’t Gaya, 341
Soman&tha, a linga, 343
greatness of, 327
Somapa, son of Maitreya, 750
somasamsthSs, the seven kinds of, 466
thousands of, 86
Someia, letter denoting, 419
worshipped, 100
3op&, a river, 841
as excellent, 328
Sop&iva, one of the two sons of Sura;
sons of, 743
Sopitapura, city, 29
Sopama, worshipped, 412
sore-mouth, remray for, 768
soul, words denoting, 991
diat is liberated becoming one
with Bralunan explained, 1076
as the travdler, 1075
sound, words standing for ordinary,
sounds, three divisions of, 917
words denoting different kinds of,
spear, uses of, 651
qseech, twelve kinds of exertions of,
preceded by weeping; words denot¬
worm denoting, 992
words signifying beginning of, 992
spheres, dmerent kinds of, 387*8
murapa, denoting a division of time,
spiders, remedy for poison due to,
spies, characteristics of, 625
(evil) spirits, possessing the newly
born child from the first day on¬
wards; the names of different, 820*26
spiritual initiation, removing bondage,
for emancipation, 243*48
four kin^ of, 227
mode of, 226-35
spitoon, words denoting, 1017
spleen, enlargement of; remedy for,
splendidness (Ojas), abundance of
compounds, 945
spy, words denoting, 1019
friddha, mode of performing, 457*61
merits of doing on different day,
Sraddhadeva, the seventh Manu, 427*
Sragdhara, characteristics of the metre,
Sragvipi, characteristics of the metre,
Srama, a son of Apa, 44
irauti (rite), to be performed, 86
Sravana, an asterism having firm look,
the rite to determine the sex of
the child to be done in, 357
auspicious for administering medi¬
cine, 358
new fruits and food to be eaten in,
good for gathering hay, 360
money is depositra or articles taken
back in, 360
not commendable for toiuure and
other rites, 359
cow-pen should not be entered in,
misery caused by Stm^s transit in,
located in Kofacakra, 385
located in a diagrain, 400
3r&vapa, benefit of oil purchased in
the month of, 386
Iravapadv&dafi, rules relating to the
practice of, 513-14
foUvatjd, a sacrifice, 86, 466
Sr&vanta, son of Yuvaniiva; had
6r&vantikS as capital, 736
Sr&vantikI, a city in the east: was the
capital of 6r&vanta, 736
Sri, became the consort of Vifpu, 49
located on the body, 414
hymn in praise oi^ ol5-16
mentioned as a form of Hari, 91

SricandrSdevi, a goddess, 413
Srids^dU * ^irit possessing the
diild on the eighth night after birth;
symptoms of child possessed by;
offering to appease; materials for
fumigation and besmearing when
the child is possessed by, 822
Sridevi, one of the daughters of
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742
Sridhara, a name of Vi^^u, 65
contained in a formula, 52
image of, 115
name of a falagrama, 1 25
Srigadita, a type of drama, 92 1
Srijaya, a type of temple, 315
characteristics of the temples of the
class of, 318
Srikapthii, a Rudra, 263
letter denoting, 418
—a type of temple, 315
8rikapthanatha, worshipped, 413, 414
filkrcchra, an expiation, 483
^rlmah&kala, worshipped, 414
Srimukha, a year of the Hindu
calendar, 404
Sriparvata, one of the eight holy
spots, 330
as sacred, 328, 350
signihcance and greatness of, 331
oriprafna, a Pahcar&trilgama, 106
Srisamay^otiia, worshipped, 414
8r!vatsa, worshipped, 51, 32, 55, 63
— a type of temple, 314
Sriyahpati, form of Vi$Qu on Narmada,
SfAgaberapura, a place; Rama*s
arrival at, 13
Bharata’s visit to, 14
as an excellent spot, 328
fyhg&taka, an array; formation
optional, 635
a var$aparvata, 324
Sriljaya, son of Km&nala; son of, 747
—one of the five bom from B5hya^a,
son of, 750
Snti, a minister of King Daiiaratba, 11
sni^ a ladle, 58
Srutadevi, one of the daughters of
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742
Srutakarmaka, son of Ud&pi, 750
Srutaklrti, son of Aijuna and
Draupadl, 751
— ^married by Satrughna, 11
Srutasena, one of the four sons of
Jahnu, 750
—son of Bhimasena and Draupadl,
Agm Purina
Srutavarmi, son of Sahadeva and
Draupadl, 751
Srut&yu, son of Sindhudvipa; son ofl
— son of Bhanuratha, 738
Sruti, a division of Abhivyakti, 943
sruva, a ladle, 58
sthili, a vessel, 94
sthalipAka, a rite, 86fn
Sthaudilcyu, one of the ten sons of
Bhadrasva, 748
SthApu, letter denoting, 418
sthapana, explanation of, 267
stl^^nimudra, a posture of the hand,
Sthira, a goddess, 376
sthitasthapana, explanation of, 267
sthOoAkaroa, a modification of the
array dar^d^ 633
sthuuapak^a, an array; characteristics
stone slabs (in temples), mode of
placing 27^7
strategem, one of the means to be
employed by a king, 587
strength, prescription w gaining, 777
student, duties of, 432-33
study, commencement of; time for,
conclusion of; time for rite relating
Stuti, a variety of Pra^asti, 942
8ubha, one of the siddhas, 414
subhadra, a pitcher, 270
Subhadra, daughter of Vasudeva, 744
wife of Arjuna, 751
birth of Abhimanyu to, 33
as a goddess, 376
merit of worshipping, 343
subhadra, a nerve, 316
SubhadrikA, a goddess, 376
subhagA, a herb, 372
Subh^ri, a year of the Hindu
calendar, 405
SubhumikA, a hell, 1039
subjects, five sources of dangers for,
substantives, the inflectimis of the
seven cases of, 957
two kinds — ending invowds and
ending in consonants; again
dividra into three, 957
examples for the two varieties,
in the feminine; examples for, 958example for those in the neuter,
in the fianinine; exanqdes of fini¬
shed fisrms of, 966-68

Indat
in the neuter; examples of finished
forms of, 968-70
different kinds of, 1024-7
success, the marks of, 625
Succhayi, wife of ^2
$uci, bom from Agni and Sv&hk, 49
— a daughter of T&mra, 46
— different reading for Kavi, 42fn
— Indra at the time of the 14th Manu,
suci, a kind of arrangement of the
army, 630
a modification of the array dand^,
sQcivyiiha, an array, 612
Sudaihftra, one of the sons of AsamauSudarsana, the disc of lord Vifttu*
installation of, 179
worshipped, 63, 84
— a jalagrama, 125
Sudariana, a herb, 378
$uddhavir^fU'9abha, characteristics
of metre, 910
Suddhavirit, characteristics of the
metre, 91 1-2
Suddhodana, Vi^uu’s manifestation as
son of, 38
Sudhanu, one of the sons of Kuru, 750
SudhanvS, son of Sambhuta; son of,
— son of Pund^fi^i 738
—son of Satyahita; son of, 750
— one of the sons of Kuru; son of, 750
Sudhanvaka, son of Akrura, 744
Sudhanvan, water-god known as, 93
became the regent of the east, 47
Sudharmi, name of the council of
gods, 987
SudirghS, a hell, 1039
Sudyumna, a son of Manu and
Nadvala, 42
— name of I1& after she dianged sex,
the three sons of, 735
sufierinn, two kinds of; explanation
of, IMO
sugandha, a flower that pleases lord
Hari,529
sugatidvkdait, on the practice of, 513
Si^or&, a hell, 1038
Sugriva, R3ma advised by Jat&yu to
meet; met by R8ma, 17
lAkfma^a's words to, 18
rrferenoe to his becoming a friend
of Rima, 19
ctxnsoled Rima, 21
acoompankd R&ma to LaAkk, 21
cut die nose of Kumbhakarpa, 22
reference to Dvivida, counsellor of,
30fn
as a door-keeper, 108
worship of, 273, 317
Sugrivk, a daughter of T&mr&, 46
Sumitra, saluted by Rama, 23
Suhotra, one of the five sons of Vitatha,
Suhotra, son of Sudhanvk; son of;
seven other sons of, 750
Girika was the queen of, 750
Suhotraka, name of Atharvaveda, 93
Suka, paying respects to Vy&sa, 1
Sukal&, a gcmdess, 413
Sukanya, a son of Sary&ti, 736
Sukarma, a part of Samaveda given
Suketu, one of the five sons of Vitatha,
Sukha, a celestial, 428
sukha, a ray of the Sun, 195
Sukhodaya, a son of Medh&tithi, 351
Sukla, a year of the Hindu calendar,
Sukra, preceptor of the demons, 8,
story relating to Devayani, daugh¬
ter of, 25fn
daughter of; invoked, 112
— planet worshipped, 52
• — a son of Dhi^na, 43
— a sage; son of Vasi^tha wd Urjk, 49
iukra, an array; description of, 633
Sukradcviki, letter denoting, 418
Suksetra, son of Brahmaskvarpi Manu,
— the name of a temple, 318
Suksma, a Rudra, 255, 263
SOk^ma, a female divinity, worshipped,
sukti, a weight, 209
l^uktimat, a mountain, 350, 351
Sukumara, son of Havya, 352
SukumkrsUca, son of Anarta; sm of, 749
Sukumkrikk, spirit exercising her
influence ^ whole year, 826
Soli, the name of a temple, 318
Sulin, worshqi of the image (d*, 215
Sum&lin, fether of Kaikaii, 24fii
Sumank, a boundap' mountain, 351
Sumanas, a son of Agncyit 42
Sumanta, one of the four sons of
Taihsurodha, 749
Sumantra, a minister King
Dairad^ 11
left bade by Rinu, IS
Sumantu, a disciple of Vyftsa; a part
of S&maveda given to; divided
Atharvaveda, iZ9

rroresents a branch of Atharvaveda,
sumatadv&daii, mode of practising
the vow of, 513
Sumati, a disciple of Lomaharfa^a,
— son of Bharata, 323
Siimbha, a demon; killed by the
goddess Durg&, 26, 26fn
Sumeru, a mountain where Raivata
performed penance, 736
Sumitra, born to G&ndh^i and
Dhrfta, 743
Sumitri, birth of Satrughna to, 10
Sumukha, a deity presimng over the
banner, 145
worship of, 284
Sumuldii, consort of Skanda; image of,
a goddess worshipped, 375
Sumuftiha, one of the sons of Ugrasena,
Sun, synonyms of, 989
only one, 376
as a manifestation of Vi^^u, 356
born from Marici, 9
bom from tCajyapa, 735
three wives of, 735
(planet) distance of, 354
^e extent of the chariots of; the
horses etc. of, 355
celestials who ride the chariot of,
words denoting the lustre of, 990
words denoting halo around, 989
words denoting the ray of the, 989image of, 136
contemplating the form of, 827
mantras for, 425^
mode of worshipping, 195-97
mode of worship of^ 830-32
worshipped by people of Sakadvipa,
worship of, 51
worship of the weapons of, 52
eclipse of, 388
period (years) of influence of, 363
presides over a part of a day, 381
effect of stay in one*s birth-star, 363
effect of stay in certain asterisins,
effects of transit in some kara^as,
wa^r to find strength of, 380
no influence on war, 377
qualities of a person indicated by,
consecration to be done in a parti¬
cular posititm of, 361
Agni Fwitna
benefit of transit in some karanas,
gains indicated by, 384
gains of position etc. indicated by,
marriage not commendable in
particular position of, 357
adverse effect of entry in certain
astral combinations, 362-3
death caused by Ae position in
Aries, 378
misery indicated by, 383
epidemics indicated by certain
things in the disc of, 387
fatality indicated by its presence
in an asterism, 389
bad luck indicated by, 400
Sun, Viftitu made as the lord of, 47
Suna^iepa, also known as Afta^; was
the other son of Visvamitra, 749
Sunaman, one of the sons of Ugrasena,
sunanda, a pitcher, 270
Sunday, rite for determining the sex
of the child to be done on, 337
rite of chewing betel leaf to be
done on, 358
first shave of a child commended
profit caused by purchase made on,
excavation of a tank etc. to be
avoided on, 360
cows should not be grazed on, 361
a special combination caused by, 362
inauspiciousness of twdflh day
occurring on, 381
the rule of R&hu on, 409
Sundhu, son of Vitamaya; son of, 748
Sunitha, daughter of Mftyu; wife
of AAga, 42
Suniti, wife of Utt&napada, 41
sun-stone, a gem, 641
juqthi, a herb, 407
iflnya, one of the kinds of mantras of
description of, 875
Sup&rsva, a mountain, 324, 325
supernatural events, relating to the
three worlds, 711
Siq>rabha, a form of Rudra, 252
a country, 352
SuprabhS, a mountain in the south, 18
a goddm; worshipped, 230
dau^ter of Svarbh&nu, 46
suprabh&, a nerve, 316
Suprasiddh^ image of, 138
supratiftha, a modification of the
array dao^^t; characteristics con¬
trary to, 633

hidtx
Supratifth&y number of letters in the
metre 905
Supratifthita, a deity presiding over
the banner, 145
worship of, 284
Supreme Being, praise of perception
of one’s oneness with, 1074
Supreme Brahman, nattue of 923,
identified with knowledge, 1060
declared as the thing to be known,
Supreme spirit, as the highest, 1075
water known as nar^b because of
its creation by, 40
Sura, an ocean, 324
sura, explanation of, 487
Sura, one of the sons of Kartavirya,
— son of VidOratha; son of, 743
Vasudeva and others bom to, 744
Surabhi, birth of eleven Rudras to
KaiSyapa and, 44, 44fn
cows, buffaloes were bom from, 46
—divine cow; worshipped, 213
surac^draya^a, an expiation; ex¬
planation of, 482
Suran&tha, sandal of; worshipped, 414
Surapi, one of the daughters of
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742
Surasa, mother of the serpents, 46
Surasena, one of the sons of Karta¬
virya, 741
Suratha, son of Janamejaya; son of,
— one of the four sons of Jahnu, 750
surety, for a loan; details relating to,
Suroda, an ocean, 352
Surpaigiakha, a demoness 15
sister of Ravamt, 15fn, 24
Surparaka, a place, 640
an excellent place, 328
Suruci, wife of Uttanapada; birth of
Uttama from, 41
Surya, a name of the Sun, 1 36
herb denoted by, 406
installation of image of, 172
Su^bdat&, G&mbldrya called by
some as, 945
Su^ena, a monkey that accompanied
Rama to Lahk^, 21
Susenaka, first child of Vasudeva and
DevakI, 744
Sufeoaka, a guard of the doors;
worshipped, 93
susiddha, relating to the letters in
the naiaa of the votary, 390, 391,
Susiia, one of the wives of Krvoa, 744
Sufkaievati, a goddess, 375
Susminab, a elm of men at Kusadvtpa, 352fn
Susruta, compositions declared as
conferring bMMns by, 778
Susthirii, a goddess; worshipped, 412
Sufunm^ as a female energy, 136
— at Gay^; pi^d^ to be offered at, 342
su^umna, an artery, 54
carries the wind sam&na; functions
is established in the middle of the
body, 557
suta, as an interlocator, 42
a caste; origin of, 430
duty of, 431
Sutala, a nether world, 8, 333
Sutanu, daughter of Kiiiir&ja and
wife of Vasudeva, 28rn
Sutanu, one of the sons of Ugrasena,
Sutap^ clan of celestials in the period
of the 8th Manu, 428
— son of Paila; son of, 747
Sutapab, a s^e; son of Vasiffha and
Urja, 49
Sutik$na, a sage; paid respect by
Rama, 15, 15in
Sutramatiia, a celestial, 428
SuvadanI, characteristics of the metre,
Suvar^a, an excellent place, 327
Suvasa, one of the sons of Asamaujas,
Suvela, mountains; Lanki seen by
Rama from, 21
Suvrata, son of Uiinara and Dr$advati,
Suyajnaka, son of Ffthuirava; son of,
Suyodhana, son of Kakutstha, 736
denotes Duryodhana, 33, 35
Svadha, mother of MenS and Dhibripi,
Svadhfti, propitiation of, 176
Sv^QdaJta, ocean around Fufkara,
Svagati, characteristics of the metre,
Sv&hk, wife of Agni; sons of, 49
— son of V|jiniv&n; son of, 741
Svidiya, son of Yugandhara; was
invincible; sons of, 743
Svaph^ca^^, son of B-Ptbha; 743
Svarkt, composition of the metres 904
SvarUiSnu, mother of Suprabhi, 46
—a year of the Hindu caloidar,

Agni Purd(fa
Svargadv&ra, at GayH, 341
Svargaloka, location of, 354
SvargSnan^, wonhippt^, 414
Svargativrata, on the eighth lunar
day, anecdote etc. relating to, 508-9
ivarita, a division of sound, 917
svarjit, a sacrifice, 474
Sv&rocifa, the second Manu, 427
Svarodayacakra, success in battle
known from, 370, 375
•varOpam (natural form), one of the
kinds of embellishment of sense, 939
Svafiva, a Rudra, 254
svastika, a type of temple, 315
a posture relating to archery, 646
Sv&ti, a movable asterism, 381
has a firm look, 382
comprises the sphere of wind, 387
commendable for marriage, 357^
good for administering medicine,
archery to be imparted in, 359
compendable for construction of
a nouse, 360
one should do agriculture in, 36 1
banner of India to be hoisted in, 362
an employer should not be attoided upon on, 360
one should not enter the cow-pen
misery caused by Sun's presence
location in the Kotacakra, 385
located in a diagram, 400
SvayambhO, denotes Brahm^, 40, 40fn
Svkyambhuva, the first Manu; pro¬
geny of, 427
method of woi^p of Vi^^u as
done by, 50
—a P&ficar&tragama, 106
Svayariu&tas, one of the five branches
ofHuhayas, 741
svayaihvara, of Draupadi, 32
Sveta, letter denoting, 419
— « country, 352
— a parvata, 324
muhOrta; deeds to be done in,
Sveta kalpa, a kalpa period, 732
Ivet&rka, a herb, 37 1
Svetavarfa, country, 322
Svetavihana, one of the two sons of
Sfira, 743
svreet, a mode; explanation, 933
sweUing, herbal remedy for 753-4
decoction of herbs wliidi removes,
remedy fisr, 776
sword, a vseapon, ffilty indies long
as the exedient one; 645
commendable qualities of; certain
rules^ relating to the use of;
certain colours as not auspicious;
the characteristics of, 640
mode of wearing, 649
thirtytwo kinds of employment of,
uses of, 652
Sy&ma, a boundary mountain, 352
jyain&^ a grain used in worship, 94
iyena, a modification of the array
Syeni, a daughter of T^mri, 46
—characteristics of the meti^ 912
syllables, use of different kinds of, 378
taddhita, bases, rules governing the
formation of, 976-79
tagara, a flower, 529
taijasa, evolution of, 40
Tailap&ka, a hell, 531
taitila, a kara^a, 362, 369fn
Taittirlya, a branch of Yajurveda, 730
Taksa, son of Bharata, 24
Tak9a(ka), one of the eight chief
serpents; the number of he^ of, 807
bom from Kadrii, 46
made as the king of serpents, 47
image of, 137
Kubjild worshipped having, 415
t&la, an unguent, 372
a measu^ 119 etc.
explanation of the term, 994
TilajaAgha, son of Jayadhvaja; the
five Ranches of Haihayas formed
by the sons of, 741
T&lajahghiki, image o^ 138
T&lavana^ made secure by Krf9a, 27
tam&la, a flower, 529
Tamasi river, Ribna's halt on the
banks of, 13
T&masa, the fourth Manu, 427
t&masa, evolution of, 40, 40ih
eighfo creation having the quality
Tami, an energy, 292
Tftmisraka, a heu, 531, 1039
T&mr&, daughters of, 46
T&mravai^ a territory, 350
Taihsurodha, one of dm diree sons
of hfodnkra, 748
four sons of, 749
t&Q^t^vam, synonyms of, 994
Tandrinitha, woishiiqmd, 414
tank, excavation of; mod day fin* 360,
tuiks, asterisms gora for oonstruetion

Index
tanks and ponds, consecration of, 1 73*78
tanm&tras, creation of, 48, 48fn
tantras, application as per, 62
Tanumadhya, characteristics of the
metre, 911
Tapana, a name of the Sun, 1 36
— sub-division of a hell, 1039
Tapani, image of, 1 38
Tapas, a world; worshipped, 79
T&pasi, a spirit seizing the child in
die tenth month; symptoms of the
child seized by, 823
offering to appease, 823-4
Tapasvin, a son of Manu and Nadvala,
Tapi, a river, flows from Sahya, 351
merits of, 328
Tapoloka, distance of, 354
(See also Tapas)
Taptakfcchra, an expiation; explana¬
to be practised for eating food
during pollution, 471
for having eaten offering intended
for the dead, 472
to be practised for certain pollution,
to be observed for having caused
death, 487
Tara, a monkey; accompanied Rama
to Lanka, 21
Tara, entrusted with Sugriva, 1 7
— wife of Bfhaspati; seduced by Soma;
restorted to Brhaspati; was found
pregnant and was directed to
shed the cJiild, 739
— letter denoting, 418
image of, 138
t&rabala, indication to And, 359
Taracakra, indicating friendship; des¬
cription of, 391
Tarakamaya, battle involving the
celestials on account of Soma, 739
Vi?nu’s role in, 745
Tarala, image of, 138
Taralat^^ a hell, 1038
Tarapa, a year of the Hindu calendar,
Tarapida, son of Gandr^oka; son of,
T^k^ya, eagle chief, 22
Nandi and others conquered by, 30
as destroyer of enemies etc, 394
worshipped, 52
— a P&ficarfttragama, 106
T^k^yacakra, descriptbn of, 394
Tampa, son of Tridhanv&; son of, 737
tarupi, milk, of; used as an unguent,
tastes, the different; as having origi¬
nated from moon and fire, 761
Tata, characteristics of the metre, 912
T&taki, a demoness; killed by R&ma, 10
Tatpurusa (compound), eight kinds
of; examples of, 973-74
Taurus, a fixed sign, 384
agriculture to be done in, 361
a special combination caused by,
has enmity with Scorpion, 392
tauryatrikam, a collective term, 994
teeth, measure to strengthen, 755
Tejas, bom from Sumad, 323
temples, preparing the ground for,
construction of, 113-115
benefits of constructing, 1 0 1 -1 05, 90 1
merits of causing the construction
divisions based on installadon of
deities, 267
measurement of the stone slabs for,
common features of, 318
five classes of, 314
names of; containing rooms facing
different direcdons, 3 1 8
the location of different chambers
location in cities, 32 1
to be protected by the king, 577
tenses and moods, grammatical con¬
notation for, 981-2
formation of; examples for, 982-4
termination, for the verbs, 981
terror, sentiment of; accomplishing
factor of, 932
thief, apprehension of, 681
thigh, stiffness of; remedy for, 754
thirst, pills to remove, 754
herbs which remove, 768
remedy for removal of, 773
throat-affections, remedy for 768
Thursday, profitable nature of, 376
chewing of betel leaf to be done on*
karpavedha to be done on, 359
agriculture to be done on, 361
inauspiciousness of sixth day falling
RShu lies at the south on, 409
tiladvadati, details^ relating to the
practice and merits of, 512, 513
tilaka, a flower, 529
time, words denoting, 990
words denoting mfferent periods
of time, 1000
reckoning, 364
tiinira, a flower, 529

Agni Pwdnifa
tu^aksrotas, explanation of, 48
Tifya, class of men at KrauAcadvipa,
tithaya]i;i, herb denoted by, 406
Tithi, commencing point of and
correction for, 3G7
further correction for, 368
herb denoted by, 408
Tithi ja, letter denoting, 418
Titik;u, son of U^anas; son of, 741
— was bom from U^iinara; son of, 747
tittibha(?), auspiciousness of a gem
called, ^1
Tittiri, son of Kapotarom&; son of, 742
tomara (iron club), used for striking
the eyes etc, 651
tongue, defects in; remedy for, 766
tonsure, time for, 359
to be done according to family
custom, 432
toothache, remedy for, 766
topaz, a gem, 641
tortoise, form taken by Vifisiu, 5ff,
Totaka, characteristics of the metre,
town, and suburbs and parts of words
signifying, 1006
toxic matter, from head; eliminator
toyakrcchra, an expiation, explanation
trader, percentage of profit allowed
rules relating to, 679-80
Trailokyakarsiiip, Kubjika addressed
Trailokyamohana, a Pailcaratragama,
Traii&ni, son ofGobhanu; son of, 747
Tranquility, explanation of, 945
transactions, when considered as
invalid, 658
Trasadasyu, son of Furukutsa, 737
— son ofjanamejaya, 750
trasare9U, a measure, 107
treasures, words denoting, 988
to be confiscated by the king if
concealed, 657
treasury, defects of, 626
should always be with the king, 632
term denoting person in charge of,
treaties, sixteen kinds of, 622
those with whom one should make,
treatment, to be begun on a good clay;
the factors to be examined bdbre
giviiffi. 758
treaty, dwned as makii^ peace, 607
trees, and parts of, different categories
of, words which stand for, 1007-8
mode of planting, 188-89
the directions good for planting;
the^ asterisms auspicious for, 764
planting and nurturing; planting
and watering of; to be planted in
such a way as to be fed by rivers
etc; the minimum distance
between, 643
method to make them bear more
fruits, 765
bearing fruits; protection of, 644
Treta, an attendant of 8iva, 201
Tretayuga, creation relating to, 323
tri, herb denoted by, 407
tridaodin, an ascetic, 454
Tndam, a Rudra, 255
tridara, herb denoted by, 406
Trida^svara, a Rudra, 254
Tridhanvfi, son of Sudhanva; son of,
Tnko^a, a hell, 1038
trikot^a, marriage of girls not to be
done in, 357
Trikuta, group of mountains, 19, 325,
325fn
Trimata, a division of Vithi, 928
TrimOrta, a Rudra, 263
Trimurti, letter denoting, 418
trine, prosperity in married life indi¬
cated by, 357
Tripura, the names of gods and
goddesses to be worshipped in the
worship of, 866-8
mode of worship of goddess, 866
salutation made to, 52
Tripuraghna, a guardian deity, 284
worshipped, 343
tripu^kara, combination called, 362,
trirfitravrata, for lord Vi^^u; mode
and merits of practising, 522
TtisamS, a river; originating from
Mahendra, 351
Trinras, a demon 16
commander of Khara, was killed by
Rama, ]6fh, 22
Trii^tubl^ a metre, 562, 902
the number of letters in a quarter of,
red coloured; belongs to Kaufikagotra, 905
appropriate time for the recital (rf*,
a metre to be employed in a
Mah&k&vya, 920
TrisfUa, the name of a temple, 318
triiOla, a posture, 857
trisilpi^a, a rk, 349

Index
Tritayajvara, located in connection
with consecration, 292
Trivikrama, a form of Vi;ou, 65, 82
form of Vi;9u on Yamuna, 841
— name of a ialagrama; characteris*
tics of, 125
trivistapa, a class of temple; octagonal
shaped, 314
temples belonging to the class of,
Trotaka, a type of drama, 921
Tr§oa, bom from Mrtyu, 49
truth, words denoting, 993
trust, definition of, 654
Tryambaka, a form of Rudra, 45
Tuesday, writing a formula for sub¬
jugation on, 358
gain indicated, 376
imfavourable for marriage, 357
to be avoided for commencing first
study, 359
to be avoided for the excavation
of a tank, 360
inauspiciousness of sixth day oc¬
curring on, 381
a special combination caused by,
R^u lies at the south-east on, 409
TulS, a constellation ; correction for 367
(See also Libra)
tulapuru^a, a great gift, 544
Tumburu, image of, 133
tumours, in the abdomen; remedy for
the destmction of, 776
TungabhadrS, a river, 328
Tur^anathaka, worshipped, 413
Turvasu, one of the sons of Yayati
and Devayanl, 25, 740
father of Varga, 747
Tu^ita, the names of Devas in the
C^;u9a manvantara, 45
Tu^tif n female divinity; invoked,
worshipped, 52
Tvarita, goddess; mode of worship of,
mantras relating to the worship of,
spell relating to, 854-57
secret mantra relatiiig to, 424
location of the basic mantras of,
and worship of, 858-861
companions of, 424
addreoed, 52
Tvarita mantra, benefit of knowing,
Tva^ta, son of Manasya, 323
Tva^tr, one aS the Ruoras, 45
<>-one of die Adityas, 45, 136
twilights, ivords denoting the three,
Uccaihsravas, was made the ruler
of horses, 47
to be adored, 51
ucchvasa, a division of time, 370
— a division of the prose k&vyas, 919
ucchvasana, an action relating to the
riding on horses, 788
udana, a life-force carried by the vein
g&ndhari, 556
functions of, 557
Udapi, son of Sahadeva; son of, 750
Udarata, an excellence of word, 944
(See also splendidness)
Udarata, (elegance) an excellence of
sense, 945
Udarka, son of Nidhfti; son of, 742
udarka, explanation of the term, 1019
udasina, significance of the term, 1019
udatta, a division of sound, 9 1 7
Udaya, a boundary mountain, 352
udbhava, one of the seven sons of
Nahu^a, 740
Udbhida, a son of Jyoti^mat, 352
Uddharii?!, the name of Vasantatilaka
according to Saitava, 913
Ud^iyana, a mountain, 412, 414
Udgata, characteristics of the metre,
Udghataka, a division of \^thi, 928
Udgitha, son of Pratiharti, 323
Udicyavftti, characteristics of the
metre, 907
uflu tyam Jdtavedasam, a hymn, 563
Ugra, Rudra was variously called as,
propitiation of, 176, 290
Ugr5, a female deity, 292
Ugraca^d^* a goddess, 132
Ugragandha, a hell, 532
Ugrasena, a Yadava, 30
son of Ahuka, 742
nine sons of; Kaihsa as the eldest,
— one of the four sons of Jahnu, 750
uha, section of Samaveda, 730
Ukt^ a metre; number of letten in,
Uktha, a somasaihsthi, 79, 86, 466
uktha, section of Samaveda, 730
ukti, an embellishment of word, 932
explanation of; six kinds of, 933
ulcers, good remedy for, 768
Ullapyaka, a t^>e of drama, 921
Ulmuka, a son of Balabhadra suid
Revati, 29

Agjil Pur(b)a
Umi, consort of; propitiatated by
Um&kanta, letter denoting, 419
um&vrata, merits of practising, 523
umbrella, characteristics of royal, 638
a brahmin’s, characteristics of, 638
umeravrata, should be practised by
women, 525
unconsciousness, remedy for removal
unguents, for bathing, 372
Universe, extent of, 353-56
unmatta, flower not to be used in
worship, 529
Upacitr^, characteristics of the metre,
Upacitraka, characteristics of the
metre, 910
UpadSnavi, daughter of Vf^aparvan,
Upadeva, son of Devaka, 742
Upagiti, characteristics of the metre,
up^karaoan, explanatiom of the term,
upakrama, explanation of the word,
upkkfta, denotes an animal killed and
sanctified, 1017
Upama, explanation of, 939
two kinds of — compounding or not
compounding; further divisions
eighteen kinds of, 940
another classification into five kinds,
upam&na, explanation of the term,
upanayana, to be done in the eighth
year for a brahmin, 432
to be done in the eleventh year for
the warrior class, 4?2
to be done in the twelfth year for
tradesman, 432-3
should never be done after sixteenth
year, 433
Upanifads, adoration with, 99
Uparift&d BfhaU, composition of, 903
Upari^t&jjyotib, composition of the
metre, 904
Upasthitft, characteristics of the metre,
Upasthitapracupita, characteristics of
the metre, 909
Upendra, requested for protection,
Upendravairk, characteristics of the
inetre» 912
Orddhvab&hu, a son of Vasiftha and
Uija,49
urdhvagkmi, a perfection, 257
Ordhvagr&hi, a monstress possessing
the newly born child on the
ninth day; symptonu of the child
possessed by; materials for fumi¬
gation and besmearing when the
child is possessed by, 822
urdhvmiga, an array; formed from
divisions of vajra, 634
urHhvasrotas, creation of, 48
urinary ailment, remedy for, 767
urinary defects, remedy for, 766
urine, painful discharge of; remedy for,
Crja, son of Sudhanva; son of, 750
Urja, wife of Vasi;tha, 49
Urmila, married by Lak;ma]?a, 1 1
Urobrhati (metre), name of Nyankusadriui according to Yaska, 903
Ursa Major, asterism denoting the
seven sages, 354, 355
Uru, son of Bhautya Manu, 428
Oru, sons of, 42
Urvarupa, different reading for
Kramapadika, 49fn
Urvasi, a nymph, 330
her love for Pururavas, 739
U$a, daughter of Ba^ia, 29
accompanied Aniruddha to Dvaraka,
Usanas, praised Dhruva, 41'
known also as Sukracarya, 41fn
— a law-giver, 455
— son of Suyajfiaka; son of, 741
Uslnara, son of Mahamanas; wives
of; sons of, 747
U$ua, a country ruled by a son of
Dyutimat, 352
U;oik, a metre, 562, 902
two varieties of; — pura and para;
number of letters in the pada of,
the number of letters in, 903
has variegated colour; belongs to
Kaiyapagotra, 905
u^oi^a, a type of temple, 315
Udcala, name of a country, 733
— a son of Sudyumna; ruled over
Utkala, 735
Utkalikk, a division c^prosek&vy a, 918
Utlqrti, number of letten in the metre,
Utkfti, classical metres based on the
Vedic metre, 914
Utkura, a ion of Hira^yak^ 46fa
Utpala, a whirlpool, ^2
utpala, aunakaoumess of a gon called,

Indtx
utprekfi (fancy), an embdlishment of
senses, 999
explanation of, 941
ii^sadana, the syllables used for the
act of, 403
Uttama, the third Manu, 427
— son of Uttanap&da and Suruci, 41
— one of the seven sons of Nahu^a, 740
uttama, a variety of pr&tT^ay&ma, 1044
uttamottama, a variety of pra^ay&ma,
Uttanapada, sons of, 41
uttara, a pitcher, 270
Uttara, ^ughter of King Virata;
wife of Abhimanyu, 33
whose embryo survived as Parik;it,
uttara, the three asterisms known as,
commended for copulation, 434
Uttara, an asterism; forms the watery
region, 388
commendable for marriage, 357
commendable for imparting sci¬
ence of archery, 359
to enter a (new) house, 360
to take grains into the house in, 361
misery caused by Sun’s transit in,
Uttarabhadrapada, an asterism; a
thing cannot be recovered if it is
lost in, 382
location in a diagram, 400
Uttaramiuiasa, at Gaya; bathing at,
one should go to Phalgutirtha
after visiting, 337
Uttarapatha, region of, 387
Uttaraphalguni, an asterism; com¬
prises the sphere of wind, 387
new clothes should not be worn in,
location in Kolacakra, 385
located in a diagram, 400
Arjuna’s name related to his birth
in, 37fn
Uttaras^ha, as asterism; located in
Ko^akra, 385
indication of unusual commotion
utterance, words signifying contra¬
dictory, 993
word denoting sweet, 993
words denoting unrefined, 993
that is meaningless; word denoting,
words denoting good, 993
wor^ denoting ateurd, 993
word signifyuig inauspicious, 993
words denoting harsh, 993
utth&pana, explanation of, 267
v\ca, a herb, 407
used as an unguent, 372
Vadavamukhi, image of, 138
V^i, different reading for P&lita,43fn
Vaditram, one of the kinds of musical
instrument, 994
Vagisvari, goddess of speech; mode
of worship of, 878
invocation oC 246
Vagvcni, a division of Vithi, 928n
Vahni, adored, 1
vahni, a herb, 407
vahnayali, herb denoted by, 406
Vahlika, region of, 387
Vaibhava, a Pancar&tragama, 106
Vaibhraja, a forest, 325
a boun^ry mountain, 351
Vaidarbhi, wife of Pradyumna, 745
— a variety of diction; characteristics
Vaidehaka, a caste; duties of, 431
vaidhfta, an obstacle; journey or
battle to be avoided in, 383
Vaidya, science of; Viijiju as the
cause of, 3
Vaidyuta, a country, 352
Vaijayanta, name of the mansion of
Indra, 987
Vaikaril^, creation of, 40, 40fn
as the third creation, 48
Vaikftasarga, explanation of, 48
Vaikunlha, a manifestation of Vi;i;>u,
form of Vi^nu at Magadha forest,
image installation of, 172
— abode of Vi?ou, 82
— name of a salagrama, 1 25
Vainateya, letters representing, 63
weapons of; adored, 66
Vair&ja, a class of temple; square
shaped; nine temples belonging
to the class of, 314
Vairaja Prajapati, father of Sudhavan,
Vairajas, presiding deities of Tapoloka,
Vairohya, son of Anarta, 736
Vaiiak^, month of; multiplication
of things brought in, 386
relating to U$&’s dream, 29
vai^&kha, a posture relating to archery,
advocated, 646
Vaiiamp&yana, disciple of Vy&sa, 429
a branch of Yajurveda, 730
vaifpava, the formulae relating to
Vifpu, 895

Agni Purd^
Vai99avapur&9a, narrated by Far&^
iara; based on accounts in Varahaka^a; merits of making a gift of>
Vai;pavi, a mother goddess, 139fn
invoked, 399
to be worshipped, 412, 415
vai^i^avl, a rite, 86
— denotes asterism sravapa
Vaiiravapa (Kubera), made as the
king of kings, 47
the||reat fig tree to be contemplated,
Viuiravapi, image of Kubera, 116
vaiivadeva, offering made to all gods,
Vailvadevi, characteristics of the
metre, 913
Vai^v&nara, the two daughters of, 46
vaiiya, words relating to the activi¬
Vait&liya, characteristics of the metre,
Vaitapdytt, a son ofApa, 44
Vaitarit>i, river at Gay4, 342
Vaivasvata Manu, was bom from Sun,
eight sons of; at Ayodhya, 735
penance of, 3
Vaivasvata manvantara, devas be¬
coming Adityas in, 45
Vaivasvati, explanation of, 463
Vkjapeya(ka), asomasaxhsdia, 86, 466
certain practices relating to, 338
benefit of performing, 1079
located on the body, 64
worshipped, 79
V&jasaneyas, a branch of Yajurveda,
V&jasaneya Veda, only 15 sections
would exist in Kaliyuga, 38
Vajra, son of Animddha, 30, 745
was installed in the kingdom, 37
vajra, an adverse period; to be avoid¬
— a type of temple, 315
— an array; arrangement of army in,
to be made when there is fear
on the sides, 630
arrays formed from divisions of, 634
vajra (mace), uses of, 652
Vajradeha, a form of Rudra, 252
V^irakav&ta, a hell, 532
Vifjr&kfa, an array; formation op¬
tional, 635
Vajrakubjini, goddess Kubjikk in¬
voked, 418
vijmnftsikfl, a line drawn known as,
Vf^raiastraka, a hell, 532
Vajra^iikhala, a goddess, 410
V^rasvastika, a type of temple, 315
vajratupdttf a mudrk, 857
Vmrini, a goddess located on the face,
vakovakya, an embellishment of
word, 932
explanation of; two kinds of, 933
Vakratuod^, one of the forms of
Ganapati, 190, 868
vakula, a flower, 529
Vaktra, characteristics of the metre, 908
a metre to be employed in a
Mahakavya, 920
Vakyarthopama, explanation of, 941
valaohi, a type of temple, 314
valaya, a t)^ of tonple, 315
valaya, a modification of the array
dapda, 633
an array formed by union of two
dapdas, 635
durjaya made up of four, 635
Vklin, brother of Sugriva; killed by
Rama, 17
V&lmiki, sage, story of Ram&yapa
narrated by Narada to, 9
composed the Ramayapa, 25, 738
birth of Kusa and Lava at the
hermitage of, 24
Vamk, as female energy; as one of the
three forms of Uma, 374
located, 292
worshipped, 51, 201, 413
VSmadeva, a form of Rudra, 252
Vkmana, a name of Vi$pu, 65
a manifestation of Vifpu, 428
form of Vi;pu at Kumk^etra, 841
a deity presiding over the banner,
as an excellent place, 328
worship of, 284
merits of worshipping, 343
image of, 115
inst^ation of image of, 172
name of i&lagrama, 125
mountain, 352
Vamanapurapa, narration of story of
Vi$pu relating to Dhaumakalpa in,
extent of, 733
should be given as a gift during
autumnal equinox, 734
Vaihiapatrapatita, characteristics of
tike metre, 913
Vaih&ipiira, one of the siddhas, 414
Vaih&atha, characteristics of the
metre, 912
Vimanti^fi»mofVi9puat Kiykindhk,

Index
Vanaraka, at GayS, 341
Vinari, a spirit seizing the child in
the sixteenth year, 825
symptoms of the child seized by
offering to appease, 826
V&navasika, characteristics of the
VandanI, a formation made with
fingers, 66
Vanga, one of the sons of Bali, 747
a place, 640
Vamja, a karai^ 369fn
famine indicated by Sun’s transit
vamk, an astral combination, 363
Va^isa, letter denoting, 419
Vapu, a division of Ko^, 921
Vapu^man, ruled 8almala, 322
names of sons of, 352
varada, a posture of the hands, 857
Var^a, form of Vis^iu at Vardhamana, 841
Vi;i^u resides at Ketumala as, 326
Saluted, 62
worshipped, 343
j&lagrama denoting, 125
a posture of the hands, 67
Varahakalpa, a period, 4, 732
Varaha-purana, narrated by lord
Visnu, dealing with the account of
boar form; extent of; merits of
making a gift of it in Gaitra, 733
V&r&hi, a mother goddess, 139fn
invoked, 399
image of, 133
worshipp^, 412, 415
name of a metre; the number of
letters in the padas of, 903
virihi, a herb, 371, 378
Varai;;i3., a river at V&ranasl, 330
Varaprada, image of, 138
Varanasi, location and greatness of,
an excellent sacred place, 327, 350
Vara-tithi, correction, 365
Varca, son of Soma, 44
Vardhamana, a variety of metre;
the number of letters in each pada
characteristics of, 910
— name of a place, 841
Vardhani, a water jar used in worship,
worshiiq>ed, 99
-a type of temple, 315
Varga, son of Turvasu; son of, 747
Varfa, an-Adinktha, 412
Var^aketu, son of K^emaka; son of,
var^avratas, vows, relating to rainy
season, 525
Vartula, a hell, 1039
Varuiia, one of the Adityas, 45
a name of Sun, 136
Varuna, words denoting, 988
made as the king of water, 47
image of, 137
installation of image of, 173
consecration of image of, 174-77
meditation of, 286
propitiation of, 176, 317
meditated upon, 89
temple of, 106
— a territory, 350
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in,
varupa, denotes 8atabhi$ak, 360
Vkrurii, a goddess; origin of, 5
vkrui^i, one of the dhkra^as; explana¬
tion of, 1050
Varutha, son of Du$yanta; son of, 747
Vaja, a deity; worshipped, 414
vasaka, a herb, 407
Vasantatiledca, characterutics of the
metre; different! v called by others,
Vasaraka, a sacred place, 330
va^t, use of the terra, 403
Vksava, Indra; made the ruler of
Maruts, 47
Vasava, denotes the asterism Jyefthi
vasavah, herb denoted by, 406
Vasift^, one of the sages; creation
ofi 41
an interlocutor, 2, 3
Da^ratha’s request to arrange for
Rkma’s coronation, 1 1
Bharata brought to the city by, 14
saluted by Rama, 15, 23
progeny of; through his wife Urjk,
goddess earth addressed as bom of,
as one of the seven asterisms having
Dhruva in font, 42fn
merits of contemplating as a form
of god, 842
one of the sages who protected the
celestials in the battle, 746
hymn addressed to Siva by, 564-65
a law-giver, 455
Vksiftha, a Pkficarktrkgama, 106
Vasi^theia, at Gayk; obeisance and
omning of pit>da to, 342
Vkstu, ddty worshipp^, 50, 51
VSstu, rdating to cities, 320-22

Agni Purdn^a
Vastflpam&y explanation of, 940
v&stupuj^ periormed by R^ma, 14
VaatQtth&pana, a variety of Arabhati,
Vasu, a son of Pururavas, 739
—wife of MSrica Ka^yapa, 739
Vasus as bom from, 44
vasu, merits of use of herb denoted
Vasudcva, born to Sura, 744
a manifestation of Kaiiyapa, 744
wife of; sons of, 744
other sons of, 744
birth of Kr?9a to Devaki; wife of, 26
story relating to, 26, 26fn
Kr^i^a entrusted to Nanda by, 27
worshipped by Kr?^, 28
V&sudeva, as a form of Hari, 91
the foremost among the Yadavas, 25
Jarasandha referred to as the despiser of, 28
as leading the Yadavas, 736
Paund^^ asserting as the real,
28fn
seen by Yudhisthira on the way to
heaven, 38
characteristics of the image of,
installation of an image of, 161-64
located on the thumbs, 56
obeisance made to, 1
worshipped, 50, 71
refers to Vi^nu; worshipped by
characteristics of formulae relating
recitation of mantra relating to, 53
use of basic syllable of, 67, 68
oblations made to, 73
— a silagrdma, 124, 125
V&suki, one of the eight chief ser¬
pents; the number of heads of, 807
born from Kadru, 46
made the ruler of N^as, 47
was used as the rope while churning
the ocean, 5, 745
as a garland on the neck of goddess
Kubjika, 415
— a sacred spot; as being present at
Prayaga,330
Vasuloka, Bhi^ma waiting on the bed
of arrows to reach, 34
vasumati, a nerve, 316
Vasus, a class of semi-divine beings,
44fn
bora from Vasu, 44
the names of the eight, 44
Pivaka made as the king of, 47
directed Bhifina to wait to reach
Vasuloka, 34
mode of consecration of, 180
vata, a tree, 92, 324
Vita, Wind god; birth of Bhima from,
— the name of a temple, 318
Vatesa, an excellent place, 328
Vatormi, characteristics of the metre,
Vatsa, son of Pratardana; son of, 749
Vatsabliumi, son of Vatsaka, 749
vatsaka, father of Vatsabhumi, 749
Vatu, a form of Rudra, 252
Vafuka, obeisance made to, 414
a form of Ganapati, 412
Vava, an astral combination, 363
Vayavi, a spirit possessing the child in
the thirteenth year; symptoms of
child possessed by; offering to
appease; bathing and fumigation
when the child is possessed by, 825
Vayaviya-puraria, narrated by Viyu
relating incidents of i^veta kalpa;
extent of; to be copied and given as
a gift in Sravai^a, 732
vayavya, denotes the asterism svati;
commended for copulation, 434
vayavyakrcchra, expiation of; eating
handful of food everyday for a
month, 483
Vayu, image of, 106, 137
propitiation of, 176
contemplation on, 286
syllables of; used for puriheation, 60
worshipped by inhabitants of 8almala, 352
Vayutirtha, at Gaya, 341
Vayuvega, location of letter denoting
the goddess, 417
image of, 13B
Veda, efficacy of herb denoted by, 470,
vedab, denotes a herb, 406
Vedana, sons of, 49
Vedanta, is knowledge about Brahman,
Vedas, goddess as the source of, 26
the number of hymns of all, 730
division of at the end of dvapara,
the different recensions of, 730-31
Hayagriva a demon killed by
Visnu to rescue, 4
reference to those who had become
Buddhas abandoning, 38
adored, 50
Vedaiiri, wife of Myka^^u, 49
Vedhft, a goddess, 292
Vedic study, period for commencing
and cessation of, 456

Index
Vegavati, characteristics of the metre,
vehicle, words for, 1019
veins, convey the ten life^forces, 556-7
number 72000; the names of ten
prominent, 556
Vena, son of Ahga and Sunithd, 42
birth of Ai'iga when his right hand
was charred, 42fn
story relating to, 42
venereal disease, remedy for, 774
venom, due to all in^ts; remedy for,
due to centipedes; remedy for, 819
(See also poison)
Venus, words denoting, 989
distance of; from Mars, 354
distance of; from Mercury, 354
chariot of, 356
letters presided over by, 374
period (years ) of influence of, 363,
presides over a part of a day, 381
gives mental happiness, 377
confers good occupying first house,
confers good occupying the second
or third house, 383
indicates happiness occupying the
seventh house, 383
auspicious occupying the ninth
house, 384
confers gain in the tenth house, 384
beneficial in the twelfth house, 384
plenty of wealth etc., in the period
marriage not commended when set,
investiture of sacred thread not
commended when set, 359
building of a house should be
avoided when set or transition,
defeat indicated by movement from
its own asterism, 386
image of, 137
contemplated as white, 828
verbs, three forms of bhava, karma^i
and kartari, 981
transitive and intransitive; the two
other forms of, 981
primary affixes added to, 985-6
Vetala, beads belonging to Sikha
^ class, 894
vibhadra, a pitcher, 270
Vibhava, a year of the Hindu calendar,
vibhkvan& (imagination), an embellish¬
ment of sefliti, 939
explanation 'of, 941-2
Vibhifana, a demon; Handmat search¬
ing the house of, 19
prevented R&vana from killing
Hanumat, 20
anointed as the ruler of Lafikd, 21
was on the side of Rama, 22
I^nka entrusted by R&ma to, 23
became deep-rooted in dharma, 24
invoked for destroying evil demons, 84
Vibhu, son of Prast^ra, 323
— son of Var;aketu: son of, 749
Vibhuti, a female divinity; worshipp¬
vibhuti, a nerve, 316
Vicitrakesa, an attendant of ^iva, 201
Vicitravirya(ka), son of i^antanu and
Kali (Satyavatn, 31, 751
AmbiLi and Ambalika became
wives of; died on account of con¬
sumption, 31
Vidala, image of, 138
Vidalak^i, consort of Skanda, 1 34
vidahga, a herb, 407
Vidarbha, son of lyamagha; sons of,
Vidarbha, king of; benefit gained by
giving a lamp by the wife of, 526
vidarbha, explanation and use of the
term, 403
Vidari, a demoness; worshipped with
red lotuses, 109
word with lotus flowers offered to,
worshipped outside, 317
viddhark^a, to be avoided in a mar¬
riage, 357
Vidhatr, son of Brahma, 50fn
father of Mrkatitdu, 49
adored, 50, 88
Vidh&tri, a female deity, located, 292
Vidruma, a boundary mountain, 352
Vidura, begot by Kfs^ia Dvaipayana
through the wife of Vicitraviryaka,
was burnt by forest fire, 36
honoured K^soa, 33
Viduratha, son of Udarka; also known
as Dasarha; son of, 742
— chief among the charioteers; son o
Bhajam&na; son of, 743
—son of Suratha; son of, 750
Vidu^, son of Ghrta; son of, 747
Vidy&, a goddess; worshipped, 413
Vidykdharas, image of, 1 37
Vidyakotisvara, worshipp>ed, 414
Vidy&s, two kinds of— par& and apari;
explanation of, 1077
Lord Vi?5u is of the form of two, 491
Vidyelvaras, the names of the eig^t,

Agni PuTlti^a
Vidyujjihv&, image of, 138
Vidyeias, meditation of, 291
Vidyunmala, characteristic! of the
metre, 911
Vidyutil, a female divinity; worshipped
Vighna, a variety of bandha, 937
Vighnanaiana, a name of the ele*
Ehant-&ced god, 190, 866
ahga, a celestial, 428
Vijaya, a minuter of King Dasaratha,
Vijaya, a year of the Hindu calendar,
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 371
— a kind of temple, 315
— a pitcher, 270
— a modification of the array dan^a,
Vijay&, a goddess accomplishing a
charm, 375
—one of the wives of Kfwa, 744
— a stone, 269
yijav3ntik&, image of, 138
vikala, correction, 367
^ application of, 368
vikalpa, relating to a kind of yamaka,
Vikar|Ua, a hell, 1038
Vik&ri, a year of the Hindu calendar,
Vikafa, a name of the elephantvikata, a posture relating to archery,
Vikarama, a form of Rudra, 252
—a year of the Hindu calendar, 404
vikr&ntayamaka one of the yamakas,
VikriyopamS, explanation of, 940
Vikrt5, image of, 138
Vik|ttoan&, imaM of, 1 38
Vikfti, a year of the Hindu calendar,
classical metres based on, 914
Vikuk^, was bom from Ikfv&ku; was
a divine ruler, 736
Vilamba, a year of the Hindu calendar,
vQfisin!, used in a paste for subjuga¬
tion, 372
Vilepa, a hell, 532
Vimala, a Rudra, 254
vhnala, a ray of the Sun, 195
Vimalk, a female divinity; image of,
worshiped, 51
. InvolMd, 111
form of Vi99u to be represented as
attended by, 131
vimala, a nerve, 316
Vimalas, five names of, 415
vimana, a type of temple, 314
Vinaiiana, as meritorious, 327
Vinat&, a monkey; accompanied
Rama to Lanka, 21
Vinat&, mother of Aruna and Garuda»
mother of Garu^a, 63fn
Vinata^va, a son of Sudyumna; ruled
over the western part of the earth,
VinSyaka, conqured by T^k?ya, 30
image of, 134
installation of image of, 172
mode of worshipping of, 865
merits of worshipping, 343
Vinayak^, letter denoting, 417
Vindhya, a mountain, 350, 842
Narmada and other rivers flow
from, 351
Vipilpma, one of the sons of Ayus, 739
Viparital^yanik^ characteristics of
the metre, 910
Viparitopama, explanation of, 940
Vipana, a division of Vithi, 928
vipat, one of the tirSbalas, 359
Vipracitti, married Siihhika, 45
Vipula, a mountain, 324
Vipula, characteristics of the metre,
Vira, one of the four sons of Taihsurodha, 749
— one of the seven sons of Suhotra and
Girika, 750
Virabhadra, image of, 135, 139
Viraja, son of Savarni Manu, 428
Viraja, son of Tva^fi, 323
— a place, 841
Viraka, one of the four sons of 8ibi,
Virakataka, one of the siddhas, 414
Virat;ia Pny&pati, father of ViriQi, 42
Viras, the name of the formulae of
Rudra, 895
WSsana, a posture, 473, 482
Virasena, a guard of the door; to be
worshipped 93
Virkt, son of Nara, 323
— ^metre; the number of letters in a
quarter of, 903
conqxMition of the metre, 904
Virata, country, 33
king of, 33fn
drowned in the ocean of arrows of
Dro^a, 35
Vir&t g&yatri, the number of letters in
the p&da of, 903
viravaktra, an array, 630

Index
Virgo, friendly with Scorpion, 392
dual nature, 3B4
one should do agriculture in, 361
goddess Durg& is awakened when
Sun enters, 362
time taken by Sun to transit, 384
Viriihsas, a clan of men in the Plak$advipa, 351
Virit^i, daughter of Virata Prajapati;
al^ known as Pu;karitii, 42
Virocana, son of Prahrada, 46
father of Bali, 8fn, 46
— a muhurta; deeds to be done in, 37 1
virodha (contradiction), an embel>
lishment of sense, 939
explanation of, 942
Virodhi, a year of the Hindu calendar,
virtues, eight kinds of, 86
ten lands of, 493
of religious students, 617
VirdpSk^, a demon; killed by R&ma,
VirupSk^i, a goddess dwelling in the
essence, 375
Visakha, younger brother of Kumara,
Vi jakha identified with Skanda, 1 34
Visakha, an asterism; belongs to the
sphere of fire, 387
down-faced, 381
known aa Tripui^kara, 382
grains increased if a formula is
written and placed in, 361
an employer should not be attended
upon in, 360
misery caused by Sun’s transit in,
assigned in the south-west, 385
location of, 400
Viiakhaytipa, a place, 841
Viiala, a prince, 339
— a type of temple, 314
— a modification of the array da^^a,
— a nerve, 316
Vis&laksi, image of, 1 38
Vbandhi, an impurity, 947
two kinds of, 948
Vifefal^ division of poetry called, 919
definition of the x&vya known as,
Vifefokti, explanation of, 941
Vifkambha, the part of which to be
avoided, 383
Viiloka, characteristics of die metre,
Vinni, syndllyiia of, 986
die dineri^t names of, 65
§rl as the consort of, 49
Brahmi was born from the navel
lotus of, 9, 31
identical with brahman, 355
as the cause of the um’verse, 356
as the mfuge of Siva, 746
Garuda as the vehicle of, 51
Pr^inabarhis conferred status of
progenitor by, 43
Dhruva’s steadfast devotion to, 4 Ifn
manifestation as a Fish, 2, SflT
killed Hayagriva, a demon, 4
tortoise form of, 2, 5fr
maniiestation as a boar, 7fr
Prahrada as a staunch devotee of, 46
the first war assuming the form of
a man-lion, 745
manifi^tation as Rama, 9if
Rama praised by Indra and others
as; worshipped by Rama, 23
meditative sleep cast on the sons of
Hirai^yakasipu by, 26
manifestation as Kfsi^a, 25-31
removed the oppression of the de¬
mons on earth, 36
YMava women referred to as the
wives of, 37
manifestation as Buddha, 38
manifestation as Kalki, 38
manifestation as Vy&sa and divisions
of Vedas etc., 730
kings etc. as manifestations of, 746
the different manifestations of; and
the battles in which he partici¬
pated, 745
manifestations innumerable, 39
past manifestations of, 428
greatness of; knowing the objects of
world as manifestations of, 1077
different forms of, 82
characteristics of the form of, 1 28
characteristics of the different forms
as being present in all the beings,
invoked differently by different men,
the Purai]ia dealing with the eternal
form of, 3
reference to Garuda, vehicle of, 30
presiding deity of an element, 27 1
image of, 130
installation of the image of, 172
to be meditated, 55, 58
to b<- contemplated at the conflu¬
ence of Gang^es with the ocean,
adoration of different forms of, 127propitiation of, 176

Agni Puribfa
wonhip of the disc, gem etc., of, 63
adoration of the weapons of, 66
reference to Bhi;ma as contemplat¬
ing on, 35
assignment of, 69
punfication of 6re of and boiling
food intended for, 59
plying on head the hand of, 61
primordial form dissolved in 6re, 73
mode of worshipping, 50-53
mode of worshipping in nine com¬
partments, 527-28
mantra for the seat and image of, 52
meditation on man-lion form of, 53
salutations made to, 50, 62
meditated, 68
worshipped in a circular altar, 70
merits of worshipping, 51
as the greatest kinsman, merits of
meditating on, 1074
greatness of a person who has attain¬
the qualiheation of a person who
attains the place of, 1075
merits of contemplation on, 1077
merits of worshipping, 644, 731
the greatness of, 731
the greatness of fiftyone names of,
hymn on; destroys all sins, 483-5
a hymn that destroys evil addressed
s&lagrama representing, 1 25
— a name of the Sun, 1 36
devas born as one of the Adityas
made as the lord of Suns, 47
— a law-giver, 455
Vi^Qudasaka, one of the sons of Vasudeva and Devaki; was killed by
Kaihsa, 744
vifQukr^nta, a herb used as a p>aste, 372
used as a charm, 406
Vi$9umadvrata, explanation of, 525
Visttupada, at Gaya; merits of doing
ancestral rite at, 339
Vijonvrata, details relating to, 499Vi^ituya^s, father of Kalki, 38
vi^k^ an occult nerve, 316
vifokadvftda^i, on the practice of,
Vijravas, son of Pulastya; wives and
progeny of, 24
Vifti, a karaQa, explanation of, 369fn
adverse effect of Sun’s entry in, 363
vifdr^u, description of, 410
Vilva, tantra spoken by, 106
Viiva, mother of Viiyedevas, 44
vUvacakra, a great gift, 544
Vi^iva^iva, son of F^u, 736
Vi^vaiit, son of B^hadratlia; son of, 748
Visvakarman (celestial architect), was
born from Kaiyapa and Prabh&, 44
made a mace for Viftitu, 334
image of, 137
the sculptor should be imagined by
the priest as, 118
Visvaksena, form of Vi;riu; character¬
istics of, 131
to be worshipped, 6 1
worshipped, 66, 100
merits of worshipping, 51
carving of staff similar to that of, 115
Visvamitra (sage), son of Gadhi; sons
respected on account of his glory, 10
one of those who protected the
sages in battle, 746
Visv^rca, a female energy placed at the
end of a petal; colour of, 136
Vi^varupa, one of the Rudras, 45
form of Vi§i]iu; characteristics of the
image of, 131
installation of the iinag;e of, 172
Vis'varupika, image of, 138
Visvedevas, born to Visva and Kasyapa, 44
mode of consecration of the image
invoked at the time of ^raddha, 346
one of the siddhas, 414
Visvesvara, form of Vis^u on river
Soi^a, 841
Vitala, a nether world, 353
vitality, the things which give, 756
Vitamaya, son of Manasyu; son of, 748
Vitanaka, characteristics of the metre,
Vitatha, worshipped, 316
bom to Bharata after performance
of rituals by Bharadvaja; five sons
Vithi, a type of drama, 921
thirteen sub-divisions of, 928
a component of the mode Bh&rati,
Vitihotra, Ananta was the son of, 741
Vitihotras, one of the five branches of
Haihayas, 741
Vivasvat, one of the Adityas, 45
a god to be worshipped, 317
worship of, 274
viveka, denotes power to distinguish,
vnmitting, beneficial drinks during,
oil boiled vrith herbs to be used for
bathing to remedy, 774
vow, of giving a gift of lamp, 525-6

Ir^Ux
of fasting; mode of practising and
merits of, 533-34
on the eleventh day; merits of, 532
rules relating to the practice of, 493,
certain regulations relating to, 497
ten virtues to be practise during,
eight things which do not vitiate a
resolutions relating to, 496-7
to be observed on the first lunar
to be observed on the second lunar
to be observed on the third lunar
to be observed on the fourth lunar
to be observed on the fifth lunar day
for the serpents, 504
to be observed on the sixth day, 504
to be observed on the seventh lunar
day for the sun, 504-5
to be observed on the eighth lunar
day; for lord Krs^a, 505-6, 507-8
to be observed on the ninth lunar
day for goddess Durga, 509-10
to be observed on the tenth lunar
day; merits of, 510-11
to be practised on the eleventh day
for Lord Vis^u, 511
to be practised on the twelfth lunar
to be practised on the thirteenth
lunar day, 515-6
to be practised on the fourteenth
lunar day for lord Siva, 516-7
relating to week days, 519-20
relating to different asterisms, 520that are practised on certain days,
to be performed in different months,
relating to different seasons, 524-25
merits of practising, 591, 538
expiation for bres^n^ 496
Vraja, one of the sons of Dhi^aiji^ 43
Vrajyas, names of sections of Kosa, 921
vrata, as a penance, 492-3
vratabandha, one of the Vedic rites, 59
vfddha, formulae having upto 300
letters, 895
Vrddhaka, a fierce force; prayter made
for protection from, 84
Vfddhaiwati, a terrible force; prayer
made for protection from, 84
Vrddhaianiian, one of the sons of
Ayiis, 739
Vijinivan, son of Kroi^tu; son of, 741
Vrka, son of Rohitaiva; son of, 737
Vfkala, a son of Si^ti and Succh&yk, 42
Vrkatejasa, a son of Si$ti and Succii^-
Vrkodara, denotes Bhimasena,
Vrndavana, Kfsria’s visit to, 27
Vfnta, characteristics of the metre, 912
Vr5a, Indra at the time of the 1 1th
Manu, 428
Vf^a (Vi?a), a year of the Hindu
calendar, 404
Vf$abha, son of Ku&tgra; son of, 750
vr$abha, a type of temple, 315
Vf^akapi, one of the Rudras, 45
Vfsaparvan, father of Sarmistha, 25,
daughters of, 46
Vr§ascna, son of Kart>a; son of, 748
Vf^ika, vikala correction for, 367
(Sec also Scorpion)
Vr9ni, one of the four sons of Satvata,
Vfsijls, a division of Yadavas, 736
Vr9li, one of the four sons of, 742
Vrtra, a demon, killed by lord Vistjiu
in his ninth manift'station in the
form of a foam, 745, 746
Vftresa, a siddha to be worshipped,
Vftta, characteristics of the metre, 914
Vftta, a division of Padya; charac¬
teristics of, 919
Vfttas, three divisions of, 919
vftti, see modes
Vyadhi, born from Mftyu, 49
vy&ghata, an adverse period to be
avoided, 383
Vyahara, a division of Vithi, 928
vyahftis of gayatri, name of the sage
associated with, 562
Vyakarat^a (grammar), as an Aparavidya, 2
Vyala, a variety of Da^d^ka; forma¬
tion of, 915
Vyana, a vital wind, 253
carried by the vein Hastijihv^ 556
functions of, 557
vyantaras, a variety of seipents; have
mixed marks born at an unspecified
time, 807
Vyasa, as a manifotation of lord
Visnu, 730
divided the Vedic hymns and
Upanifads into recensions, 730
as an interlocutor, 1
birth of Dhfteri^tra from, 31
consoled Arjuna, 37
a law-giver, 455
Vyastasambandhat&, an in^Mirity, 947

Agni PurSg^a
vyatip&ta, an obstacle to be avoided,
Vyatirekopam^ explanation of, 940
Vy&yoga, a tyf^ of drama, 921
Vyoma, worshipped, 316
Vyoma, son of Viduratha; son of, 742
Vyflhas, the names of the eight, 63
wages, commensurate with work, 675
war, when one should be^in a, 623
warriors, the duties of difiercnt kinds
wasting diseases, food that gives
strength in, 754
water, as a form of ViK^u, 173
words used in the sense of, 995
word denoting drops of, 989, 995
asterisms belonging to regions of,
relative merits of bathing in different
kinds of, 436
cold, as the best astringent, 757
waves, words denoting, 995
wealth, words denoting,^ 1022
word representing desire for, 995
three kinds of acquisition of, 541
should be acquired by rightful
means, 617
period within which one can claim
his ownership of, 657
weapons, of different kinds; words
denoting, 1020
two kinds of — weapons and missiles,
two kinds of— those cast off and
those retained, 645
two divisions of — curved and con¬
ceit, 645
the gradations in the use of, 645
should be worshipped before an
expedition is made, 639
should be washed before use, 647
propitiatory rites for, S83->85
We^esday, discharge of debt to be
made on, 358
the first ^ave of a child is commend¬
harvested grains to be taken into
the house on, 361
loss brought by Axdtk occurring on,
inauspicious nature of third day
occurring on, 381
RShu lies at the north on, 409 ^
wedc days, the names of the presiding
deities of, 805
weight, different measures of, 588
welntre, words denoting, 991
wUte, words denoting, 992
white, word denoting little, 992
wind, words denoting, 988
sphere of; asterisms belonging to,
that is deranged; remedy for, 756
remedy for eighty kinds of diseases
due to deranged, 774
remedy for the removal of excess of,
wind and bile, remedy for deranged,
wine, three kinds of; women men¬
tioned as the fourth, 1042
winning, different means for, 629
witnesses, lawsuit depending on, 654
codes relating to, 656-7
qualifications and rules relating to,
when considered as false, 663
of the plaintiff should be heard
first, 657
women, words which denote, 1013
words denoting different, 1014
words denoting the parts of body of,
characteristic features of, 637-8
when allowed to re-marry, 434
when declared as pure and impure,
three divisions of property of, 541
results of the defect of association
with, 627
nature of treatment after delivery
wonder, origin of the sentiment, 924
wooden water-carrier, word denoting,
words, having many meaning, 1001denoting conjunctural stories, 992
division of, 918
repetition of; two kinds of — single
letter or many letters, 933
two kinds of defects of, 947
denoting celestial region and nether
world; synonyms of, 986ff
of threat; fine relating to, 676
mono-syllabic; their meaning, 950world. Brahman as the cause of; Pradhana as the cause of, 949
worldly events, words denoting, 992
worms, remedy which destroys, 755,
remedy to remove 766
wor^p, words denoting, 1017
worw denoting mode cd*, 1017
mode of, 54-56
of ddltiei, mode of, 190-95
five constituents of, 836
of Vlf9u and other gods, 50-53

Index
relating to forma such as V&sudeva,
in different diagrams of the shape
of a lotus, circle etc., 880-83
of gods in sixtyfour squares, 272ff
in eightyone squares, 275
of Hari in Sarvatobhadra, 75-78
of different gods in a lotus figure,
for success in battle, 425
different flowers used in, 528-29
withered and broken flowers not to
be tised in, 529
merits of, 538
of gods: expiations for discontinuing,
worshippers, of lord; four types of,
wound, a paste that heals, 775
healing medicine for, 768
wounds, a paste for cleaning, 774 .
due to affected arteries, 775
parasites of; juice that destroys, 775
a decoction for cleaning, 774-3
wrath, sentiment of; origin of, 923
three-fold ; factors accomplishing,
wrestling, modes of, 652-3
Yadavas, belong to the race of Yadu,
counted as eighty thousand; were
protected by 745
rise of innumerable, 31
Kaihsa’s father made ruler of, 28
Kalayavana, as a foe of, 28fn
Kr^pa’s amusement at Dvaraka
with, 30
destruction of, 36, 37
legend relating to destruction of,
36fn
Aijuna’s performance of obsequies
Yadu, one of the sons of Yayati and
E^ayimi, 740
founder of a dynasty, 740
Yadavas came in the race of, 25
five sons of, 740
one of the seven sons of Suhotra and
Girika, 750
Yajamana, explanation of the term;
synonyms of, 1017^
Yajfladatta, an ascetic youth killed by
Da^aratl^ 14
YaJAavar^, form taken by Viwu, 7
Yajiiavalkya, as a priest of Kalki, 38
branches of Yajurveda founds by,
— a law-giyip, 455
Yajur hymo% creation of, 40
Yajurveda, an Aparkvidy^, 2
branches of, 730
division into four of, 429
division into seven of, 429
number of hymns of, 730
auspicious for Yama, 93
the hymns to be recited by a follower
use of the hymns of, 695-704
the hymns of; which confer fortune,
assigned on the fingers, 64
Yakini, a goddess, 4 1 5
Yak?a, image of, 106
Yak;a, bom from Khasa, 47
Kr;i>a married the daughter of, 28
piaycr made for protection from, 84
Yak$ini, a monstress possessing the child
in the fourteenth year; symptoms of
child possessed by; offering to
appease; bathing when the child is
possessed by, 825
Yak^man, worshipped, 317
Yama, bom to Sun and Samjn^ 733
also called Dharma; Yudhifthira as
born due to the grace of, 32
domain enlarged due to Bharata
war, 35
made the king of manes, 47
Kr$rta was worshipped by, 28
investiture of sacr^ thread for the
image of, 215
contemplation of, 286
requested to come, 336
propitiation of, 176
worshipped, 51, 55
praise of, 403-4
asterism of, 384
— name of celestials during the period
ofSvayambhuva Manu, 427
— a law-giver, 455
— a muhOrta; deeds to be done in, 371
— -denotes daily rites, 1018
Yamaka, explanation of; two kinds of
— contiguous and non-contiguous,
further divisions of, 934
ten prominent kinds of, 933
Yamala, a method of locating mantras,
mode of worship of Gauri according
Yamagita, narration of; consists of ex¬
position made by Kapila and others
Yamajihva, a guardian deity, 284
inu^ of, 138
wor^ip of, 273
Yamas, descripdon of, 1076

Yamasiiryaka, the name of a temple,
Y&mi, Nagavithi born from, 44
Yamuna, the spirit afflicting the child
in the eighth month; the symptoms
of child seized by, 823
— the spirit possessing the child in the
seventh year, 824
syn^toms of the child possessed by,
offering to appease, 825
bathing and fumigation for child
possessed by, 825
— born to Rajhi and Sun, 735
—river; Krsna’s conquest of Kaliya in,
was dn^|[ged by Pralamba, 30
flowing at Prayaga, 329
region of; indication for the des¬
truction of, 387
image of, 133
woi^p of, 197
worshipped, 51, 88
Trivikn^a to be contemplated at,
Yamya, denotes the asterism Bharai^i,
medicine to be administered in,
imparting the science of archery to
be done in, 359
yaia, a vein; carries the wind Kurma,
Yaska, an autliority on metrics, 903
Ya^a, lord Hari as a child taken by
Vasudeva to, 26
in the custody of Nanda, the hus¬
band of, 27
Ya^ohara, one of the daughters of
Devaka; married by Vasudeva, 742
Yasovati, a nerve, 316
Yatana, a monstress affecting the
child in the second year; symptoms
of the child affected by; offering to
appease; bathiiv and other prac¬
tices for child afi^ted by, 824
YathSsahkhya (relative enumeration),
an excellence of word and sense;
explanation of, 946
Yati, one of the seven sons of Nahu^;
even as boy contemplated on Vi^ttu
and attained him, 740
explanation of, 911
yatic&ndrhyai^ an expiation; ex¬
planation of, 482
yatis, significance of the term, 1018
Yaugild, an excellence of urord, 944
Y&vadarthath, an t^bellhhm^t of
sound and sense, 942’
eaqilaaarion of, M2-3
Agni Purdija
Yavamadlwa, composition of the
metre, 904
yavamadhyamk, a measure, 107
yavamati, characteristics of the metre,
Yavanas, Kalayavana as the king of,
28fn
Yavinara, one of the five bom from
Bihyasva, 749
Yayati, one of the seven sons of
rescued Devayani and married her,
25fn
married Devayani the daughter of
Sukra, 740
married also iSarmistha, daughter of
Vf^parva, 740
had two sons through Devayani and
three sons through Sarmi^tha, 740
years, cycle of; results indicated by
names of, 404-5
yellow, words denoting, 992
Yoga, one of the five factors in the
almanac; correction for, 368, 369
division of time; good or bad known
from names, 371
— ^and its constituents; explanation of,
has eight constituents, 1 082
— relating to a mantra, 403
Yoginis, image of, 1 38
Yogijavimala, worshipped, 415
yogorasya, an array; two wings in the
array dai;]id^, 634
yoni, a posture made with the hands,
Yud^amu$ti> one of the sons of
Ugrasena, 742
Yudhajit, uncle of Bharata, 1 1
born to Madri and Dhffta, 743
Yudhi^thira, born to Pa^^u and
Kunti from god Dharma, 32, 744,
son of, 751
was defeated by Duryodhana in
dice, 33
Kcfqa’s directive to fight with
Duryodhana, 33
armv of, going to Kuruk$etra, 34
killed Salya, 35
became a king after the war, 36
set on ^ final journey, 37
Yuga (s ), extent of, 39fh
creation takes place in every, 45
salutation made to 50
— ^herb denoted by, 406
Yugandhara, son of Uhuni; son of, 743
YOka, a measure, 207
yukti, an embellishment wofd, 932
explanation of; six lands of, 933

/m/car
jntiya* moHOt a hymn, 437
yuthi. yuthik^ a herb, 371, 378
yQthiki, a flower, 529
Yuva, a year of the Hindu calendar,
Yuvan&lva, son of Ayus, 736
— son of Ra^aiva; son of, 737
Yuyudh&na, another name of S&tyald,
Zodiacal si|;ns, movable; fixed and
dual; their influence on the days;
the time taken by the Sun to tra*
verse, 384
