READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: the_agni_purana_part_3.json
Dataset number: 389 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 421,479 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: The Agni Purana, Part 3
Creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
Date: 1954
Description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-3-aitm-vol-29-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-3-aitm-vol-29-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: The Agni Purana, Part 3
  • creator: N. Gangadharan (Translator)
  • date: 1954
  • description: <p>This book was published by Motilal Banarsidass, the oldest publisher in India. For more information on this and other books please see:</p><p><a href="https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-3-aitm-vol-29-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology" rel="ugc nofollow">https://motilalbanarsidass.com/products/agni-purana-pt-3-aitm-vol-29-ancient-indian-tradition-and-mythology</a></p>
  • subject: West Bengal Public Library
  • identifier: dli.bengal.10689.12914
  • source_folder: dli.bengal.10689.12914
  • total_pages: 226
  • total_words: 72588
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.932
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THE
AGNI PURANA
PART III
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI

First Edition: Delhi, 195 A
Reprint: Delhi, 2000
Also available at:
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS
41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, Warden Road, Mumbai 400 026
120 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004
236, 9th Main 111 Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011
Sanas Plaza, 1302 B^i Rao Road, Pune 411 002
8 Camac Street, Calcutta 700 017
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001
Printed in India
BYJAINENDRA PRAKASH JAIN AT SHRI J,\1NENDRA PRESS.
A-45 NARAINA, PHASE-1, NEW DELHI 1 10 028
AND PUBLISHED BYNARENDRA PRAKASH JAIN FOR
MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBUSHERS PRIVATE LIMITED.
BUNGALOW ROAD. DELHI 1 10 007

CONTENTS
PART III
CHAPTERS
252. The mode of wielding the swords, maces etc. 651
253. The description of the administration of justice 653
254. Debts and their repayments 659
255. Description of rules relating ' to disputes and
different kinds of ordeals 661
256. Description of the procedure for division of
properties 666
257. Settlement of disputes relating to the boundaries
of fields 670
258. Punishment for making defamatory speeches and
committing other offences 675
259. The application of the mantras of the Rgveda 683
260. The use of the hymns of Yajurveda 695
26 1 . The use of the hymns of Simaveda 704
262. Tlie use of the hymns of Atharvaveda 707
263. Appeasing rites for portents 710
264. Worship of gods to ward off the effects of portents
and mode of offering the Vaisvadeva ball 713
265. The sacred bathing of the deities 716
266. The mode of performing the ceremonial bathing
to wash off obstacles 718
267. Ceremonial bathing known as Mahe^vara and
other kinds of ablutions 719
268. Mode of worshipping Indra, doing nirajana (relat¬
ing to King’s expedition) and other rites 722
269. The sacred formulas for the consecration of the
umbrella and other royal insignia 725

Contents
270. A hymn to Visnu that destroys Evil 728
271. The different recensions of the Vedas 730
272. The meritoriousness of making gifts of the different
Puranas 732
273. The description of the solar race 735
274. Description of the lunar race 738
275. Description of the dynasty of Yadu 740
276. The manifestations of Lord Visnu 744
277. The narration of the lineage of Ahga 747
278. The description of the lineage of Puru 748
279. The description of the potent remedies 751
280. The remedies for all the diseases 757
28 1 . The description of the characteristics of the different
tastes and the qualities of the herbs 76 1
282. Description of horticulture 764
283. The remedial herbs for all the diseases 766
284. Narration of sacred formulas that are medicinal 770
285. The accomplished recipes that would revive the
dead 772
286. Collection of medical recipes 778
287. The treatment of the diseases of elephants 781
288. The diseases of the horses and the management of
the horses 784
289. The characteristics of the horses and the treatment
of the diseases of the horses 789
290. Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of horses 794
291. Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of ele¬
phants 795
292. The greatness of cows and their welfare 798
293. Different kinds of mantras and their nomenclature 802
294. The characteristics of different kinds of serpents 807
295. .The medical treatment for a serpent bite 81 1
296. The five constituents of the worship of Rudra 814
297. The remedial mantra that would remove poison 817
298. The treatment for the poison due to snakes such
as the gonasa and others 818
299. Recipes for the diseases of infants 820
300. Description of the mantras which remove the bane¬
ful influences of planets 826

Contents
301. The mode of worship of Sun 830
302. Description of different kinds of potential mantras
and herbs 832
303. The propitiation of the letters of one’s limbs to
ward off evil 833
304. The mode of worship of Siva with the mantra of
five syllables 837
305. The fiftyfive names of (Lord) Vi§^u and their
greatness 840
306. Description of the mantras to be repeated to ward
off evil incantations etc. 843
307. Description of the mantras that would stupefy the
three worlds 845
308. On the mode of worship of goddess Lakfmi and
others that confer immense benefits 849
309. The mode of worship of Tvarita 852
310. The narration of the spell relating to Tvarita 834
311. The location of the basic mantras of Tvarita and
her worship 858

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-TWO
The mode of wielding the swords^ maces etc.
Fire-god said :
I- 4. Bhrantarht udbhrSntarh, Hviddhadiy dplutarfiy viplufarh, sfta^
sathpdlarhy samudirnarht Syenap&tarh^ dkvlarh^ uddhUtarht avadkUtarh,
savyarht dak^inam^ andlakfita, visphola, kardla, indramahdsakhay vikardloy mpdlOy vibhifanaf bhaydnaka, samagra (the entire), ardha
(half), trtiydrhSa {pn.G-th\vd) , pddaf pdddrdhOy vdrija, pratydlliharht
dlidharhy vardharn and lulitarii are known to be the thirty-two
kinds of employment of the sword and armour in a battle.
5-6. PardvrUarfi, apdvrltarhy grhitam, that known as laghUy
Urdhoaksiptarh, adhahksiptarhy sandhdritarfi, vidhdritarhy Syenapdtashy
gajdpdtarh and grdhagrdhyarii are the eleven ways of manipulating
a noose.
7. Great men hold that the five ways of casting a noose
are : extending in a straight line, long, broad, horizontal and
whirling.
8. The uses of a disc (are) : cutting, piercing, felling,
whirling and severing.
9. jMay you know that the uses of a spear are : slapping,
thrashing, cleaving, frightening, incarcerating and, the sixth,
striking down.
10. O Excellent Brahmin ! It has been declared that an
iron club (TOMARA) (is used) in striking the eyes, the arms
(and) sides (of the enemy) and should be countered with an
arrow of the defendent.
II- 12. O Brahmin 1 It has been declared that a mace
(GADA) is used for the acts (such as) dhata, gomUtraf prabhStay
kamaldsanay Urdfioagdtray vdmanamitay dakfii^anamita, doftta, pardvftUiy
pddodbh&tay avaplutOy haihsamardda and vimarda.
13. The use of a battle-axe is said to be kardla (dreadful),
avaghdta (sharp blow), dathSa (cutting), upapluta (leaping).

652 Purina
(that has been released from the hand), sthita (re¬
maining in the original position) and iunya (void) .
14. O Brahmin ! The use of a mudgara{m3LCc) is for striking,
cutting, pounding, causing deluge and killing *
15. The uses of a bhindipala (sling) are for sarfilranta, otfrdnta and govisarga and sudurdhara (that is extremely unbearable) .
The same are the uses of a laguda (club) .
16. O Excellent Brahmin ! The uses of a mace (VAJRA)
are for (striking) with the end, with the middle, turning back
and commanding. The same (are the uses) of a paffiia (a kind
of spear with sharp edge).
17. Taking away, cutting, killing, piercing, anointing,
felling and snapping are indicated as the uses of a sword.
18. The functions of a sling are indicated to be frighten¬
ing, protecting, killing and helping a big fighting column. The
same are the functions of a machine also.
19-30. The methods of using the mace (GADA) should
be known as total discharge, stimulating, throwing upwards
in the posture of a boar, using the hand and the back of the
hand, standing with the right knee being advanced and the left
leg retracted, (holding) with one hand, (holding) by the back
of the hand, (holding) with two hands, with the arms thrown
round as in embracing, discharging from the hip, raising up¬
wards, striking on the chest, striking on the forehead, bhujavidhamana (?), raising with the hand, lifting skywards, striking at
the feet, injuring the feet, pressing the body together, putting
an end, total destruction of the body, striking after raising up,
blowing, intermittently (striking), wielding in the left or right
(hand) , enabling to cross, enabling to protect, (like a) stick,
fettered like the braid of hair, agitating, transversely locked up,
removal, frightening speed, good looking, attacking like lion or
elephant or an ass. The modes of wrestling are drawing ( the
enemy), drawing apart the base of the hands, the turning about of
the neck, the breaking of the back, the terrible one, revolution,
reversion, the manner of slaughtering animals, ajdvika (?),
hitting the feet, slapping (as done with the arms) , discharging
from the hip, resting on the shoulder, (using) the earth as a
contrivance, striking at the chest and forehead, open conquest,
raised one, as a wave, moving transverse, riding an elephant.

casting down, not having the face turned aside, the path of the
celestials, downward path, moving haphazardly, consistent,
striking with a club, casting down, tearing the earth, locking
up in the knees, locking up by the arms, embracing by the
body, the terrific one, backwards, together with water, shining
one and enclosed with the amis. At the time of the battle, (the
warriors) should be ready with the weapons, elephants and
other (divisions) .
31-33. Two soldiers (should be) bearing excellent goads,
one of them on the neck (of the elephant) and the other on
the shoulder and two archers and two (soldiers) carrying the
sword on the elephant. Three cavalry men should be there (to
defend) a chariot or the battle>front or the elephant man. It
is said (that there should be) three archers to guard the cavalry.
Armoured men should be employed for the protection of the
archers. Whoever goes for a war after having worshipped the
weapon with the respective sacred formula or (the sacred
formula known as) the one captivating the three worlds, would
conquer the enemies and would govern the earth well.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THREE
The description of the administration of justice
Fire-god said :
1 -4. I shall describe the administration of justice that gives
the discriminative knowledge of justice and injustice. It -is said
(to comprise) four feet, four places and four means. That
which is beneficial to four (classes of men), extends to four
(different parties) and benefits fourfold. In the same way (it
is said to comprise) eight parts and hundred divisions. (It has)
three sources, two sorts of statements, two parties and two
kinds of issues. The codes of law, justice, conduct and the
command of the king are the four feet in the administration of
the justice. (Among these) each subsequent one is the means

654 Agni PuriU^a
for the previous one. Therein righteousness rests on truth. A
law suit (rests) on the witnesses.
5. The conduct of a person (rests) on the opinion of the
people. The decree (depends) on the command of* the king.
Since (a legal case) could be decided by the means such as the
conciliation (and the like), they are said to be the four
means.
6-12. Since it is protecting the four institutions (such as
the student life) , it is said to be beneficial in four ways.
Because (the suit) encompasses the plaintiff, witness, assessors
and the king, one-fourth each, it is said to be encompassing
four-fold, it is said to be the instruments of four kinds, because
it accomplishes the four— righteousness, material prosperity,
fame and esteem of man-kind. The king with the attendant,
courtiers, scripture, astrologer, scribe, gold, fire and water are
stated to be the eight accessories (in a law-suit). It is said to
be having three sources because it results from the three such
as lust, anger and greed. Hence these thi'ee are the cause of a
law-suit. The cause of the law-suit are two such as apprehension
and firm disquisition. Among these, apprehension is known
from association with six things and the genuine (fault) from
the preceding events of six kinds. Because the suit has two sides
it is said to be having two openings. Among these (two) , the
first one is the plaintiff and the other one is the defendant. The
two courses are said to be that which has happened and the guise.
13. (The term) debt (denotes that admitted) by a person
as payable or that denied by him as not payable or that which
is given as gift (to another) .
14. One’s own property placed out of trust (with another)
without any doubt is said by wise men to be a trust that is a
matter of dispute.
15. The place where the merchants and others collectively
transact business (called) the active occupation is known to be
a matter of dispute.
16. If one wants to take back that he has paid (to an¬
other), that is called the withdrawer of a gift and is known to
be the matter of dispute.
1 7. Having agreed to do service (to another), if one refuses

to do so, it (is known as) refusal to do service and is said to be
a matter for dispute.
18. The wage of a servant is said to be coming under the
head of debts and the non-payment (of the same) is deemed to
be a matter of dbpute.
19. If one sells the entrusted property of another or the lost
(property of another) after having got it or having stolen it
without the knowledge (of the owner), it is known to be selling
of another’s property.
20. After having sold the goods for money if (the goods)
are not made over to the buyer, it is non-delivery o^ sold (arti¬
cles) and is a matter for dispute.
21-22. If a pui chaser opines that the articles bought are
not good after having bought (it is also a disputable thing).
That condition of a wicked (assuring) good conduct is said to
be conventional practice. The transgression of the conventional
practice is said to be a matter for dispute.
23. The dispute that arises in respect of the right over the
land that has been determined by a bridge or a held or drawn
boundaries is said to be that (dispute) arising from the land.
24. Where the marriage rite of men and women is declared
that is named as the union of women and men and is a matter
for dispute.
25. That which is termed the division of the ancestral
(property) by the sons is said to be the partition of the property
and a matter of dispute by the wise men.
26. A rash act done by those haughty of their strength is
said to be a crime and is declared as a matter for dispute.
27. It is said to be an abusive language that (is spoken)
out of hostility with reference to the country, caste and family
and the like with gestures.
28. It is said to be an assault if injury (is inflicted) on
other’s bodies with hands, feet, weapons tod destructive mate¬
rials such as the fire.
29. It is said to be divine gambling (when it is played)
with dice, vajra (diamond) and rod etc. It is termed as animal
gambling (if it is played) with animals, and birds kept for
pleasure.

Afffii PurStfa
30. That dispute is again known to be a miscellaneous
one if it does not rest on anything. The violation of the com¬
mand of the king as well as not carrying out that comviand (also
constitute an offence) .
31. 'Dius disputes are of eighteen kinds and there are one
hundred divisions of these. These hundred divisions (of disputes)
are stated to be due to difference in the acts of men.
32>37. A king should examine the disputes with the help
of learned brahmins without becoming angry. The courtiers
(jurists) should be disposed equally towards the enemies and
friends. They should not be greedy and they should be proficient
in the scriptures. When such men cannot be found, a brahmin
should be engaged with (the help of) the courtiers. Judges
swerving from the codes of law and the like out of attachment,
greed or fear should be punished separately. The fine is double
as that for a quarrel. If a person that has been annoyed by
others by following a method that is contrary to the codes of
law aifd practice, informs the king, that is (known to be) a
matter for dispute. The year, month, fortnight, day, name,
caste and the marks (on the body) should be recorded by the
complainant as known to him in the presence of the defendant.
The reply of the defendant after having heard (that of the
complainant) should be recorded in the presence of the
complainant. Then the complainant should record (the argu¬
ments) that would accomplish his statement. He would get
success if it is established or the contrary if otherwise.
38-46. These are the four steps indicated (by experts) in
disputes. Without having settled a plaint, (the court) should
not accept a cross-suit. One should not take up a case rejected
by another (tribimal). A counter-suit could be made only in
the case of a quarrel or violence. An appropriate bail should be
collected from both (the parties) in deciding optional cases.
One should pay (a fine of) equal amount to the king for the
denial of an established matter. Double the fine has to be
collected for a false plaint firom the plaintiff. Gases of rash acts,
theft, abusive language, pronouncing a curse and disappearance
of women should be examined at once. It has been said that in
other cases, they may be (put off to a different) time option¬
ally. One that wanders from one place to another, one that

licks the corners of the mouth, one whose fore-head perspires,
one whose face gets discoloured and one who by his nature gets
changed in his thought, speech and physical actions is, said to
be adefamer fora plaint and witness. (A witness) (uttering)
words of ambiguous import, uttering voluntarily something (not
being summoned), falling down (when questioned) , not telling
something when summoned is known to be punishable if he is
rich. Among the witnesses of both the sides, the witness of the
plaintiff (should be heard first). When the examination of the
plaintiff is completed, (the examination) of the defendant
would be done. If the dispute is between members of the same
clan, the younger should be punished .
47-49. The king should conduct the proceedings with
respect to money paid or property or riches of a rich man after
removing the fraud by (employing) the messenger. The king
should confiscate all treasures, if it is concealed wholly or partly.
All such properties should not pass over to the sovereign unless
voluntarily offered (by the parties). In the case of conflict
between two law codes in deciding a suit, equity relevant to
the suit (should be considered as) stronger.
50-5 1 . The codes of law are deemed to be stronger than the
science of wealth. The documents, actual enjoyment and the
witnesses are said to be evidences ( in a law suit) . An oath is
prescribed in the absence of one of these. The later incidents
are stronger in all the law suits.
52-59. The preliminary (events) are stronger in the case of
a mortgage, gift or purchase. (The ownership) of a ground
taken possession of forcibly by another with the knowledge of
the rightful owner could be disputed only within twenty years.
The wealth enjoyed by another (could be disputed by the
legitimate owner) only within ten years, except in the case of
a mortage, an encroachment, a property held in trust, wealth
belonging to an idiot or an infant, or treasures or wealth
belonging to the sovereign, to a woman or a brahmin. One
who sells away a mortgaged property should pay the value to
the owner of the property and pay an equal amount of fine or
that befitting his ability to the king. Possession is title, even in
the absence of (proof of) continuous enjoyment. But possession
without (proof of) even a little enjoyment has no strength (for

Agni PurSva
the title). An enjoyment with good possession (of a property)
becomes valid. An enjoyment without proper possession could not
be valid. The possession made by the trespasser should be reco¬
vered by a suit. It would be of no avail that thfe present
possessor liad got it from the son or the son’s son of the original
trespasser. In the case of the deadi of the possessor, the value
of the property should be recovered from the property left by
him. An enjoyment without a sound possession could not be
a valid reason (against that). (The king) should prevent the
encroachment by force or deceit.
60-62. A transaction done by a woman or in the night or
inside a room or outside or made by an enemy (as well as that
done) by a drunkard, lunatic or one addicted to evil, an infant
or a frightened one or one that is defective is not valid. The
king should- cause (the mortgager) to return to the mortgagee
the property mortgaged. If not possible, an amount equal to
the property should be paid. The king should pay to the village
headman the property stolen by a thief.
63-66. The interest relating to (a loan for which interest
accrues) every month is one eightieth (of the amount lent).
Otherwise the interest should be two, three, four or five (per
cent) in the order of the castes (to which they belonged). It
is seventieth part in the case of animals and women, eight
times in the case of food, four or three or two times in the case
of dress, food grains, gold and other things. If ( the money is
lent) to a person of a dififerent village) (it should be) ten (per
cent) and if beyond the ocean, (it should be) twenty (per cent).
(Members of) all castes may pay (rates of) interest of their
choice. A king would not be censurable by paying money to
those in need. One that would go to the king after having
obtained (a loan) would be liable for punishment and that
money should be confiscated.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOUR
Debts and their repayments
Fire-god said :
1-4. A debtor may pay the borrowed money to a creditor
in instalments. One has (to pay) to the king after paying to a
brahmin first. It is said that the debtor should be made to pay
ten percent of the loan by the king(as fine). In case the debtor
had realised his money back, five per cent (of the amount)
should be made payable (to the king). (A debtor belonging to)
the low caste and impoverished should be made to work in lieu
of the debt. A brahmin (debtor) who is impoverished should
be made to pay leisurely after the betterment. The money that
the creditor does not accept when offered, should be deposited
with an arbitrator and it would cease to bear any interest.
5. One that inherits a property, as well as the wife of a
deceased person that inherits the property should be made to
pay the ( incurred) debt. The debt of a sonless owner of a pro¬
perty (should be paid) by the person that inherits the property.
6-7. The debt that is incurred on an undivided family for
the sake of the family should also be paid similarly (by the
person that inherited that property) . When the head of a
family is dead or had gone* abroad, (it should be done
similarly). The wife (is) not (bound to repay) (the loan in¬
curred by the husband or the sons and the father (is not bound
to repay) the loan incurred by the son. The husband need not
repay the loan incurred by the wife unless it has been (taken)
for the sake of the family.
8. The husbands of the women of the gopa (a guard),
Sau^dika (a distiller and seller of spirituous liquors), SailUfa (an
actor or dancer), rajaka (a washerman) or lySdha ,(a hunter)
(castes) should repay the loan incurred by them because their
livelihood is dependent on them (those women).
9. The wife need not repay any other loan except that
(incurred by her husband) with her consent, or that incurred
jointly with her husband or that incurred by herself.
10. When the father hsis gone abroad, is dead, overpowered
by misfortune, the loan (incurred by him) should be paid by

Agni Purdifa
the sons and grandsons. If ( the loan incurred by the father) is
not known (to the son) , (it should be paid) on being estab¬
lished by the witness.
11. The son need not repay the debt incurred by the
father by drinking or wenching or by way of the balance of fine
inflicted by the court or by making improper gifts.
12. A loan should be- got by a member of the undivided
family against the surety of the brothers, the husband and wife,
the father or the son.
13. A surety .consists in being a witness, or in giving a
guarantee (for the repayment of aidebt). When a property is
pledged by a person that has no rigiit of possession, the sons of
that mortgager should be liable to repay (the incurred loan).
14-16. The sons of the deceased persons who had been
sureties as witnesses or as guarantors, need not pay that money.
But those who had induced to make the payment should pay
(in similar cases) . In case if there were many guarantors to an
advance made, the guarantors should be made to pay their
respective shares. A creditor will have the choice (of realising
his dues) from any one of the sureties of the joint bond. A
debtor should pay double the amount to his surety, in case if
the latter pays the loan with the knowledge of the debtor.
17. If the hypothecated thing is one’s own progeny or the
wife or cattle or grains, double the amount (has to be paid to
redeem) . It is said that four times that in the case of dressing
material and eight times tliat in the case of condiments (has to
be paid to redeem).
18. A mortgs^e shall be forfeited if that is not redeemed
by paying double the amount. (The right for redemption)
would cease at the lapse of the period agreed upon at the time
of the mortgage. But it would not cease if enjoyments of the
proceeds have been ageed upon.
19-20. Interest need not be paid on a thing left as a deposit
or in a deposit that has been left for enjoyment. (If the
mortgaged property) is lost on account qf any reason other
than fate or the king, it should be restored (to its original state) .
On the acceptance of the hypothecated property (by the
mortgagee), it becomes valid. If (the mortgaged property)
being governed, gets deteriorated, a different property should

be mortgaged. Otherwise the creditor should be paid money (in
lieu of it) .
21. Money borrowed by pledging one’s character, should
be repaid together with interest. Money borrowed on a solemn
affirmation should be returned double ( that) .
22-24. (A mortgaged property) should bs released (by the
mortgagee) , when it is sought for. Otherwise he would be liable
for punishment. If the money-lender belongs to one’s own
family (and advances money on the security) of one of his co¬
parceners, he should be looked upon as a mortgagee. The value
(of that property) should be determined according to the
market at that time and it should remain without any interest.
The property may be sold without (the consent) of the debtor
in his very presence, if the debt on the mortgage gets doubled.
Tiie mortgaged property should be released if double the amount
is produced (by the debtor).
25-27. A packet that has been entrusted with another with¬
out disclosing its contents is (said to be) a deposit and it should
be returned in the same condition. If it (the contents of that
packet) has been destroyed by (the acts of) the king, fate or
the robbers, it need not be restored. If that is found after search
and the custodian returns it after being urged (to .do so) , ( the
custodian) should be punished to pay an amount equal to that.
If the custodian wilfully derives benefit (from that), he is
punishable and should pay together with the benefit. The same
rule (holds good) in the case of deposits such day Scita, dfiita and
nydsa.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIVE
Description of rules relating to disputes and
different kinds of ordeals
Fire~god said :
1-2. There should be five or three witnesses ^uch as chose
who are ascetics, munificent, born in noble families, truthful,
virtuous, honest, having progeny, wealthy and regular in per-

662 Affti PurSifa
forming the paHcayajiia^. They may all belong to the same or
varm^ or from all (the castes).
3-7a. Those who are not suitable to be witnesses are
women, old men, children, cheats, intoxicated, lunatics, injured,
actors, heretics, men of the writer caste, those having defective
sense organs, those that take food from degraded persons,
relatives or friends or enemies (of the persons contesting the
dispute) and thieves. All people arc deemed to be witnesses in
cases of thefts, violence and rashness. A virtuous man accepted
by both the parties may be a witness. A person that refuses to
answer the questions relating to a loan in which (interest) at
the rate of ten per cent (has been allowed) should be made by
the king to pay the full amount (together with interest) within
fortysix days. The vilest person that does not depose the facts
even though he is aware of them, is (considered) as equivalent
to the sins of false witnesses and is also liable for similar
punishment.
7b-10a. The witnesses (of the plaintiff as well as the
defendant) should be questioned in the presence (of the
parties) (as follows) : “A person making a false statement
would incur all (the sins) that would accrue to the sinners,
deadly sinners, incendiaries and the murderers of women and
children. You also know that the few good deeds that you had
done in hundreds of your previous births, would befall that
person whom you defeat by fraud.**
lOb-13. In the case of conflict of evidences (among the
witnesses) , (one should accept) the statements of the numerous.
(If the statements of the witnesses of both the sides) are equal,
then that of the virtuous (should be accepted) . In the case of
conflict (among the views) of the virtuous, the Statement of
more virtuous should be accepted. That person whose witnesses
make the truthful declaration, would become the winner. That
plaintiff whose (witnesses) are different (from the above), his
1. These are the five obligaUons that a person has to discharge daily-—
the act of the religious instruction, offering water to the manes, oblations for
the gods, oblations to the goblins and entertaining die guests.
2. The word Jdti denotes the castes in general mid the word vma
denotes the four principal castes.

defeat is certain. When a set of witnesses have deposed, if
more virtuous men or double (the previous number) make
statements against that, the previous witnesses becmne false
witnesses. Then the forgers and (&lse) witnesses should be
punished separately.
14-15. The punishment would be double that of the (fee
for) litigation. A brahmin (witness in similar circumstances)
should be banbhed (from the country) . A person that conceab,
on account of his ignorance, the statements of evidences heard '
from others, should be fined eight times. A brahmin (in similar
circumstances) should be banished (from the country) . A false
statement may be made only when a brahmin (staiuls) to be
capitally punished.
16-19. If a property has been accepted after mutual con¬
sent of two parties, the loan-bond should be endorsed by the
witness in the presence of the creditor. That bond should bear
(the details such as) the year, month, fortnight, date, name,
caste, one’s own clan, and the name of one’s fellow-student,
one’s own name and that of the father etc. When the bond has
been completed, the debtor should enter his name in his
own handwriting (and also write) , so and so, son of so and
so, fully agree to the statements made above.” Then the wit¬
nesses also should write their names after (having written) the
names of their fathers (and write) **1, so and so, son of so and
so, put my name as a witness”.
20-21. An unlettered debtor should cause (the writer of
the deed) to write his assent. A witness (that does not know
how to read and write) (should cause his assent to be written)
by another witness in the presence of the other witnesses. Then
the scribe of the deed should write “I so and so, son of so and
so, being requested by both the parties have written this deed”
and then write the deed.
22. A deed that has beeh written in the handwriting of
the mortgager is valid ' even without the attestation by the
witnesses, except in (cases) where undue compulsion had been
made.
23. The debt mentioned in a deed has to be discharged
by the three men (the debtor, the son or grandson). A mort¬
gage remains in force until the pledge is not redeemed.

Affii PurSifa
24. A new deed has to be written when the old one has
been taken abroad or the original writing has l^en forged or
lost or erased or seized or torn or mutilated or burnt.^
25-27. One should record in his own hand, things that
are explanatory of ambiguous terms, on the back of the deed,
such as total, receipt, investigation, indication, relation, addi¬
tion and means. The creditor should endorse all that he has
received from the debtor with his own mark. A deed should be
destroyed after paying the debts and another deed of release
should be executed. It should duly be attested by the witnesses,
if the original one was also made in the presence of witnesses.
28-31. The balance, fire, water, poison and holy water are
the divine ordeals (to test) one's innocence. These ordeals
(should be instituted) in cases of great offences when the
accuser agrees to undergo punishment. Or one may be
made to undergo the ordeal, and the other to undertake the
agreement to undergo punishment. They may be made to
undergo an ordeal even without the s^reement in cases of
treason and sin. One should not parry the ploughshare,
the balance, or the poison for matters of less than a thou¬
sand (coins). In the case of treasons one should always
agree to carry (these ordeals to show their) innocence. The
balance and other (ordeals) are instituted in the case of
(matters) exceeding one thousand and the holy water (is insti¬
tuted) even for minor (offences). If it is lesser than that and
the innocence has been established in the ordeal, one should
pay fifty (coins) . If the offence has been proved, one has to
be ptmished.
32. (The accused) that has bathed together with the dress
and observed fast should be called up and made to carry all
the. ordeals in the presence of the king and brahmins.
33. The balance is for women, boys, the aged, the blind,
the lame, brahmins and the sick. The (ordeals of) firp, water
and seven (weights) of poison are for the iudra.
34. (The accused) that is resorting to the balance is
weighed by those conversant with balances. After the balance
comes to rest, line is drawn and (the accused) is taken off.
1. a kind of grain.

35-37. (The accused should begin the ordeal thus) : “The
Sun, the Moon, the Wind, the Fire, the Sky, the Earth, the
Waters, the Heart, the god of Death, the Day, the Night, the
two Twilights^, as well as the god of Virtue know the acts of
man! O Balance! You are the abode of truth. You were created
by the gods in olden days. Speak the truth. O Auspicious one I
Deliver me from suspicion. If I am a sinner, O mother ! Then
lead me downwards. If I am pure then take me upwards.**
Thus one should address the balance.
38-42. One should mark the hands of a person that has
rubbed rice, and then place seven leaves of the holy fig tree
(on those hands) and (fix them) with a string wrapped as many
times. (Then he should be made to utter as follows) : “(O
Agni !) O Purifier ! You reside in all beings. O Truthful
one ! speak the truth like a wimess about my good deeds and
sins.** After he has said this, (the judge) should place a red-hot,
round ball of iron weighing fifty palas on both his hands. After
he has taken that, he should walk slowly through the seven
circles. The inner space of the circle is known as sixteen
aAgulas (four finger breadth). After he has released the fire and
rubbed rice (between his hand), the one that is not burnt gets
(freed) as innocent. If the ball falls in between or if there is
doubt, he should carry it again.
43-45a. (One should say as below in the water ordeal) :
“You are the mostholy among the holy. O Purifier ! You purify
the accused. O Varunia ! (You) protect me with the truth.’*
Having addressed (the water) thus, one should enter the water
holding onto the thighs of a man standing in water upto his
navel. His innocence would be established, if one bringing back
an arrow simultaneously discharged, finds him fully dived (into
the water) .
(In the case of the ordeal of poison one should address the
poison as follows) :
45b-47a. “O Poison ! the son of Brahmi : One esta¬
blished in truth and Virtue ! Deliver me with your truth from
this curse. You become ambrosia for me.*' After having said
1. In the morning and in the evening.

Agni Purity
thus, he should take the idrhga^ poison that is got from the
Himalaya mountain. His purity should be declared 'if he could
assimilate (the poison) without vomitting.
47b-50. (Alternatively), one should collect the waters
for bathing dreadful gods after having worshipped them. (He)
should proclaim (that he ha^ not done the crime) and drink
three handfuls of tliat water. He should be deemed undoubtedly
pure if no dreadful malady afflicts him within fourteen days.
Truth, vehicles, weapons, cattle, grain and gold, the feet of the
gods and preceptors and the consecrated tanks are the easy oaths
proclaimed for minor matters.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIX
Description of the procedure for the division of properties
Fire-god said :
1-2. A father that desires to partition ( his properties) ,
should divide (them) either equally among his sons, or (set
apart) a greater portion for the eldest son. The wives that had
not been given private property by their husbands or fathersin-law, should be given a share in the division, if equal divisions
are made ( for the sons) .
3. After having given a little (of the share) to the wealthy
that does not wish to have (the share then), the division
(should be made afterwards). Unequal divisions made by the
father (should be held as) legal.
4. The sons should equally divide (among themselves) the
liabilities of their father afterwards. The outstanding debts of
the mother (should be borne by) the daughters, if they had no
progeny.
5. That which one has earned (by his effort) without the
destruction of the paternal property, (that acquired) from
friends (as a gift) and through marriage, cannot be claimed
by the co-partencrs (for a share) .
f
1 . The poison got Trom the iivga plant.

6. The benefits of a common property should be divided
equally. The sons of different fathers (forming an undivided
family) should take their shares according to (the shares of)
their fathers.
7. Both the father and the son would be entitled to equal
shares in the property or wealth of the land acquired by the
grand-father.
8. If a son is born to a man through his wife of his own
caste after the division of the property, a share should be set
apart, even after the settlement of the accounts after it is seen.
9. One should not give to the co-parceners an ancestral
property that was lost and recovered by him, as well as that
acquired by (his own) skill.
10. The property that has been given to one by his parents
would be his own. But the mother also would have an equal
share in the property that has been divided by the grand¬
father.
1 1 . Marriage of the unmarried sisters should be done by
the brothers already married (in the event of the death of the
father) by giving a fourth part of their share.
1 2. The sons of a brahmin father would be eligible for four,
three, two or one share respectively according to -the caste (of
their mothers) . (Similarly) the sons of a warrior caste (would
be eligible) for three, two or one shares and that of a tradesman
for two or one shares.
13. The property that has been wrongly taken possession
of by somebody and divided should again be equally divided.
That is the practice.
14. A son got by one not having a son by niyoga}- through
another’s wife inherits the properties of both the parents. He
( is allowed) by the codes of law to do the obsequies ( of his
father) .
15. A son born to one through liis lawful wife (is called)
aurasa (legitimate). A daughter’s son (is deemed) to be ranking
1 . A practice prevalent in ancient times which permitted a childless
widow to cohabit the brother or any near kinsman of her deceased husband
to raise up issue to him.

Agni Purdrta
equally with him. A son begotten through the wife of a man
))y one belonging to his own gotra (clan) , or by anyone else, is
known as kfetraja} (a legitimate son) .
16. A son clandestinely begotten in the (paternal) House
(of a woman) is known to be born in secret. A son born to a
virgin (is known as) Ar^tna and is held to be the son of the
maternal grandfather (girl’s father) .
17. A son born (of a married woman by another) , whether
she had menstruated or not, (is known as) paunarbhava. A son
given as adoption by his mother or father would be a dattaka
(an adopted son) .
18. A son sold by them (his original parents) is known as
krita (bought) . A son adopted without the consent of his parents
would be (known as) artificial. A son offering himself (as a
son) to another is (known as) dattdtman (one that offers himself).
A son in the womb (at the time of his mother’s marriage) is
known as sahodaja (son of a woman pregnant at marriage).
19. A son deserted (by his father) and becoming a filial
(of another) is known as apaviddha (abandoned). (All these)
are eligible to offer cakes (at the obsequies) and to inherit their
shares. Among these, the subsequent ones (are eligible) if the
preceding ones do not exist.
20-21. I have described to you the injunctions in the case
of sons (born of the parents) of the same castes. A son got by a
SUdra out of lust through a slave girl would be entitled to have
a share (in the property of his deceased father) . On the decease
of (his father), his brothers should give him half a sliare. Such
a person should take the entire property (after the death of
the father) in the absence of any brothers or son of sisters.
22-23. The wife, daughters, parents, brothers', their sons,
one bom in the same gotrOf a relative, a disciple and co-students
(sire deemed sis heirs to a sonless man), each one of the latter
being eligible in the absence of the former. This rule (holds
good) in the csise of those diea without progeny belonging to all
the castes.
1. One of the twelve kinds of sons allowed by the law for inheritance;
the others being, attrasa, paunarthiaa, dattaka, krita, kftrma, sahad^ja, i^at/iddha,
jSdkatpama, kdnlna, svqyaiHdatta and iaudra. (See Mam IX,, 138-60. 166-80)

24. The preceptor, the good disciple, the fellow religious
student of the same religious order are duly the heirs to the
prop>erties of a vanaprastha (forester), ascetic and a religious
student.
25. A coparcener and a brother may give to a coparcener
or a brother that is born or may take away from a coparcener
or a brother that is dead.
26. The coparcener not born of the same womb should not
inherit the property of one not born of the same womb. A
coparcener not born of the same womb should not inherit the
property of one born of different mother.
27-28. A degraded person, his son, a eunuch, a lame
person, a mad man, a dull person, one suffering from incurable
diseases should be entitled for maintenance but not a share (in
the ancestral property) . The sons of these (persons) , those born
of the same womb and those born to a different mother not
having any of the above defects (are permitted) to get their
share. The daughters of such persons are to be maintained until
they are got married.
29. The wives of men not having sons should be maintained
if they follow pious paths. But those (wives) that are unchaste
and infidels should be banished.
30. The wealth of women is said to be that given by the
father, mother, husband, brother and that presented to her near
the hre and the ddhivedanika.^
3 1 . The presents made to a woman by her relatives at the
time of her marriage would be inherited by her relatives in the
event of her death without progeny.
32. The wealth of a woman not having progeny (would
belong) to the husband after her death (applicable to) all the
four castes such as the brahmins etc. The daughters (would be
the legal heirs) if they had delivered a child. Otherwise it would
go to the father.
33* One who takes away the property given to his daughter
is liable to punishment. (He) is bound to defray the expenses
incidental to her marriage and aintenance. In the event of her
1. Property, gifts etc. made to a first wife upon marrying a second.

670 Agni Purdija
death, he may take away that given to her after checking the
two expenses (mentioned above).
34. A husband need not return the wealth of his wife in
the event of (it being spent to meet) a famine, relfgious obser¬
vance, illness or on account of imprisonment.
35. One should pay an amount of wealth to his second wife
equal with what he has done to his first wife. If he has not given
to the first wife already, he should pay a half now.
36. In case that share has been kept as a secret, the division
has to be made on being attested by his own people and relatives
as witnesses. This should be known as the method by which the
division of the house and property and that relating to the dowry
(is made).
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY SEVEN
Settlement of disputes relating to the
boundaries of fields
Fire-god said :
1^2. In the event of a dispute relating to the boundary of
a field, the guards, the assembly of elders, cowherds, the tillers
of the bordering lands and all the foresters should lay down
(the boundaries) demarcated by coal, husks, trees, mounds, ant¬
hills, slopes, bones, and pile of stones.
3. Four or eight or ten guards wearing (garland of) red
flowers and red dress should be there in each village for laying
the boundaries.
4. (Those that make a) false statement (relating to the
boundaries of a field) should be punished with the madhyamasdhasa.^ In the absence of men familiar with the fields or the
marks of identification, the king himself should demarcate.
5. The same procedure is known (to be applicable) in the
case of groves, temples, villages, reservoirs, gardens, houses and
channels of rain water.
1. One cf three kinds of penalties or modes of punishment.

6. If one transgresses the boundary or encroaches into
(another's) field or removes the boundary, that person is to be
punished with the adhama or uttama or madhyama {sdhasa)?-
7. A minor encroachment should not be obstructed if it is
for the sake of a bridge that benefits (all). (Similarly) one that
encroaches another's field for a well occupying a little space and
providing copious water (should not be obstructed) .
6. If a bridge is built in a field without informing its owner,
the owner will have the right to its use after it is completed.
The king (would have the right to its use) in the absence of an
owner.
9. One who does not cultivate or employ ( someone) to
cultivate in a field that has been tilled should not be given the
fruits of the cultivation and the field should be made over to
another (for cultivation) .
10-11. The owner of a she-buffalo that (trespasses on an¬
other’s field and) causes destruction of the grains, should be
fined eight mdsas (a particular weight of gold). (The owner) of
a cow (should be fined) four {md$as) , of a shegoat two (mdsas)
(for the same offence). (They should be levied) twice that
told above, if they sit (and watch) them grazing in the pasture
land. The same amount (of fine) has to be levied as that for the
she-buffalo, if an ass or camel (trespasses into another's field).
12. The owner of the field would get the same quantity of
grains that has been destroyed (as above). The keeper (of the
animal ) should be beaten and the owner of the cow should get
the punishment already described.
13. But it is not objectionable (if the grazing is' done) on
a field laying along the roadside, or at the end of the grazing
grounds of a village if done unintentionally. But if it is done
wantonly, (the concerned person) deserves to be finished like
a thief.
14. The cows let loose by strong bulls, (the cow) that has
delivered (a calf), the cow that has strayed and those that have
tlie keeper should be freed (i.e. not to be punished) . (So also
cows) injured accidentally or by the king (should also not be
punished).
1. Three kinds of fines of vnrying proportions.

Ag^i Purdffa
15. The cowherd should return the cows in the evening as
entrusted to him (in the morning). A paid servant is boimd to
pay (the price of the animals) that were killed or lost (in his
custody) by his negligence.
16. A cowherd is to be punished in the event of a cow
being killed on account of his negligence. In such cases, he has
to pay a fine of half of thirteen panas {pa^a is a particular coin)
to the master and also (restore a similar) animal.
17. The pasture land should be set apart (at a place)
according to the wish of ( the people of) the village or being
beneficial to the land and the king. A brahmin may collect grass,
fuel and flowers from any land as if it were his own.
18. The extent of the interspace between the village and
the field should be one hundred dhanus^^ while that between
the market- town (and the field) should be two hundred (d^flwuj)
and that between the city (and the field should be) four hund¬
red (dhanus).
19. If a property is sold to another without disclosing its
defects, then (the purchaser) has the right to take it at a lower
price. If it is sold at a higher price than its real value ( the
excess amount has to be returned). If it is sold without defin¬
ing the boundaries, (the disposer is considered) as a thief.
20. (A man) who has found out a lost and stolen
(article) should cause the thief to be apprehended. But if there
was a lapse of time and (was found), at a distant place, (the
owner) should himself apprehend (the thief) and hand him
over (to the authorities).
21. (The purcliaser) gets free after showing the seller (of a
stolen property). The owner (would get) the property. The
king (would get) the fine. The purchaser would get his money
back from the seller.
22. Allowance should be made for wear and tear by way of
addition or enjoyment (for an article). If it exceeds the limit, a
five-fold fine (should be paid) to the king.
23. A man who recovers or takes back a stolen or lost article
from another, without intimating the king should be fined (to
pay) ninetysix panas.
1 . One dhanus is equal to four times the length of the fore-arm.

24. A lost or stolen article recovered by the customs officers
or sentinels (should be given) to the owner if it is less than a
year (after its loss) and thereafter (it should be) with the king.
25. One should pay (as interest) four pa^as for a single
hoofed animal, five for a slave, two for a buffalo, camel and cow
and one fourth of that for a goat and sheep.
26. One may give away ( his possessions ) , except his wife
and son, for interest, without causing hardship to his own family
members, if not objected to by any of them. If he docs not
have the progeny, he may give all his possessions.
27. The acceptance (of a property) should be made public,
especially of an immovable property. After having given the
promised thing that is payable to one, one should not take it
back.
28. A person who gives the seed, iron, vehicle, gem, woman,
milch animal and a man should wait for ten, one, five, seven
days, a month, three days and a fortnight respectively (for inte¬
rest) .
29-31. In the case of gold (that docs not get) reduced in
fire as well as silver, f interest would be) two palas for (every)
hundred palas, eight palas in the case of tin and lead, five in the
case of copper and ten for iron. Interest (would be) ten {palas)
for hundred for wool and cotton. For mediocre quality it is
known to be five palas and in extremely thin varieties it is three
palas. The wastage is known to be a thirtieth part (of the
original weight) in the case of embroidered and woollen mixed
material. No allowance for decay or interest in the case of silk
and bark (garments) .
32 . The experts should declare with certainty the allowance
to be made (on things) after knowing the place (of origin) of
the things, the season, the wear and tear and the strength of
the materials.
33-34. One who has saved the life of his master and has
been forcibly made a slave by thieves and sold should be ma^
free (by the king) even by paying a ransom. A religious mendi¬
cant who has renounced his order is a slave of the king until his
death. For the (four castes) , men of the next natural order of
castes alone could be a slave, but not of the reverse orden

Agni Purd^a
35. A pupil who has completed his studies should stay for
the stipulated period at the house of liis preceptor and has to
serve him for the food got from him.
36. The king should allot |i frontal place to the •brahmins
(in his city), provide for their livelihood by means of the three
Vge/as and tell them, “May you adhere to your own duty”.
37-38. One who adheres to the work agreed upon without
conflicting with one’s own duties should also be protected by
the king with care. One who transgresses the discipline laid
down by the king, who swindles the property of the society and
who breaks an agreement should be deprived of all his posses¬
sions and banished from the country.
39. Everyone should follow the words of those who preach
for the welfare of the society. One who does the contrary should
be made to pay the first {sdhasa) fine.
40. One who is entrusted with a task relating to the society
should offer (to the king) all that he gets. If he himself does
not offer, he should be made to pay a fine eleven times (that
collected by him) .
41. Those who think of public service should be learned
in the scriptures and not greedy. (All) should follow the words
of those who speak for the welfare of the society.
42. ■ The same rule ( holds good) in the case of guild of
traders, assembly of interpreters of the scriptures and those
professing other religions. The king has to maintain the separate
entities of these and govern the former profession.
43. One who does not do a work after having received the
wages (for the same) should pay double the amount ( as fine) .
(If the amount) has not been taken, one has to pay an equal
amount (as fine) . The supplementary grants (given to the
servants) should be retained by them.
44. One who gains by trade, cattle or grains without
obtaining the previous permission should be made to pay one
tenth (of the gain as fine) by the king.
45 . 1 1 is the discretion of the employer to pay ( an employee )
if one does work for more than the stipulated period and does
work beyond the country that was stipulated. More (money)
should be paid if more work has been done.

46 • One’s wages would be commensurate with the work
done by him. If both the parties find it untenable, it should be
done as laid down in the scriptures.
47. A carrier should restore to the owner, the article that
he was carrying but was lost due to causes other than the govern¬
ment or accident. One who causes obstruction to a public
carrier should pay double the amount of the wages.
48. If the carrier abandons the goods at the start, or on
the way or on half the way, (he) would be required to pay one
seventh or one fourth or the entire wages respectively.
49-53. If the stake at gambling is in the multiples of
hundreds, then the king’s share would be 6ve hundred {panas) .
If they are cheats and swindlers, then the king should take one
thousand panas. The manager at the gambling house should run
it properly and pay the king’s share as laid down. The defeated
person should be made to deposit the amount that is payable
to the victor. One should hear the true words (of the gamblers)
patiently. When the king has obtained his share in the reputed
society of the gamblers, he should put the defeated in the
midst of the gamblers to pay the fine. If not, he should not.
They are who see and the witnesses in such transactions.
Those who indulge in false die and fraudulent ways should be
banished by the king along with the marks (on their person) .
There should be only one leader of the gambling house in order
to know the cheats (in gambling) . The same is the procedure
ir gambling with fighting animals and betting after setting
animals to fight.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIinTY-ElGHT
Punishments for making defamatory speeches and committing
other offences
Fire^god said :
1. If a person abuses the sick and men having defective
organs, by means of lampoons, whether true or untrue or
otherwise, he should be fined thirteen and a half pa^as.

A^i PurS^a
2. The king should levy a fine of twentyfive (panas) on one
that abuses another (with the words) *‘I copulate with your
sister or (1 copulate with your) mother**.
3. A punishment should be awarded after due consideration
of the higher or lower caste. (A man of the higher caste commi¬
tting adultery (on women) of the lower caste (should be levied)
half (the fine) and (a man of the lower caste committing
adultery) on (women) of the higher caste (should be levied)
double (the fine) .
4. The men of lower orders of castes censuring the men of
the next higher order should be levied double or three times
the fine. But in the case of censures made by men of the higher
orders on those of lower orders, half the fine should be levied.
5. The fine (that should be levied) on a capable person
uttering words threatening the injury of the hands, neck, eyes
and thighs (of another) should be levied ( the j<f//aja) fine. It is
half the fine, if it relates to the foot, nose, ear and arms.
6. An incapable person who says as above should be levied
a fine of ten panas. So also a capable person should give surety
for the safety of that person.
7. The middle sdhasa fine should be levied on that person
who abuses one ascribing degrading sin (to him) . The first kind
of sdhasa should be levied onunc who ascribes (another) with
minor sin of second degree.
8. The highest sdhasa (should be levied) for offences
villifying the brahmins, kings and gods. Middle {sdhasa) (should
be levided for offences villifying) one*s own relatives and the
members of the village assembly and the first {sdhasa) (for
speaking ill of one’s own) village or country.
9. In the case of charge of murder without witness, (the
judge) should pronounce ( the judgement) after considering the
marks, reasoning and written testimony, in order to safeguard
(himself) from being misled by false marks.
10. The fine for touching (another) with ashes, mud or
dust is said to be ten patjias and for touching with filth or the
heels or spitting, double (that).
11. (For offences against women) of one's own (caste)
single (fine should be levied) and twice that in the case of
other women as well as of higher castes. The fine is half in the

case of (offences against those) belonging to lower castes. (For
offences done) under delusion or the influence of liquor, (there
is) no punishment.
12. The organ of anon-brahmin that inflicts pain on a
brahmin should be cut off. First (sdhasa) punishment (should
be prescribed) for one who raises ( one*s arms and strikes a*
brahmin) and half that ( fine) if one touches.
13. If the hand and the leg are held and pulled, the fine
is ten and twenty (panas) respectively. If (several men) one by
one (hold and pull), the scriptures (prescribe) the middle
sShasa for all of them.
14. The fine for pulling the feet or hair or the garment or
hand is ten panas. The fine for causing affliction or pulling or
dragging after putting cloth around or placing foot (on a
person) is one hundered {panas)..
15. One who causes misery by means of a log of wood etc.
and (if there be) no blood (injury), should be fined thirtytwo
panas. Double that (is the fine), if blood is seen.
16-17. The middle {sShasa) fine is levied for breaking hand,
foot and teeth and cutting ear and nose. Similarly one causing
injurious wounds, (one who) strikes fatally, (one who) impairs
(organs of) movement, eating and speaking, (one who) pierces
eyes etc., and (one who) breaks neck, arm and thigh f should be
punished with) middle sdhasa.
18. If many persons (jointly) assault a man, each one of
them (should be levied) double the (amount of) fine la«d
down before. Articles (forcibly) taken away after a quarrel
should be returned and the fine is said to be double.
19. A person who causes grief should pay the cost of recovery
(of the article) and the fine is said to be the same as laid down
in the case of a quarrel.
20. A ferry-man collecting a land-toll should be punished
(to pay) ten panas. A brahmin (going to dine) at the neigh¬
bour's house uninvited, (shall be liable) for the same punish¬
ment).
21. One has to be fined five, ten, twenty and sixty paijas
respectively for assaulting, piercing, cutting and breaking the
house (of another person).

4^nt PurSna
22. One should be fined sixteen panas for having thrown
into another’s house, an object, that would cause misery or
death to another. The abettor should be fined the middle
sahasa.
23. One should duly be fined two panas onwards for having
caused misery or bleeding injury or breaking the limbs of
the body of a small animal.
24. (One should be fined) the middle {sahasa) and should
pay the price for having cut off the genital organ (of an
animal) or having killed it. In the case of bigger animals, in
these instances, the fine would be double ( the above) .
25. The fine is forty {panas) for lopping the branches,
trunk of the tree or the whole tree that is gp*owing and providing
sustenance.
26. One who causes another to indulge in a violent act
shall have to pay double the fine and one who says that he
would pay (if fine is imposed) and causes another to do (a
violent act) (shall be required to pay) four times (that fine).
27-28. It has been fixed that, a person who reviles or shows
disrespect to a respectable person, one who beats the wife of his
brother, one who does not give the promised gift, one who
breaks the summer-house built in the midst of water and one
who injures the neighbours, shall be fined fifty paijas.
29-32. One who copulates with a licentious widow, one
who assaults (another) uttering abuses, one who abuses
( another) without any reason, a man of the low caste touching
the men of higher castes, a (a man of the fourth caste)
eating the meal at the time of the ceremony of a mendicant
and in the divine and ancestral ceremonies, one who makes an
improper oath, an incompetent person who does the act of a
competent person, one who castrates the bulls or small animals,
one who hides a well-known matter, one who destroys the foetus
of a servant woman, one who disregards any one of the following —
father, son, sister, brother, husband or wife, preceptor and
pupil, that has not been degraded, shall be fined a hundred
{pai}as).
33. A washerman who wears the dress of others (given to
him for washing) should be fined three pa^. It is ten pa^ii

he sells them or requests others to take (them) without any
charges.
34. One who deals with those who make false (marks) on
weights and measures and make counterfeit coins should be
fined the highest {sdhasa).
35. The coin-tester who declares the genuine as counter¬
feit and the counterfeit as genuine should be fined the first
{sdhasa) .
36. A physician who gives wrong medical treatment to
birds and animals, men ( in general) and men of royal ( house¬
hold) , should be punished with the first, middle and the
highest fine respectively.
37. (An officer) who keeps in custody a man that should
not be kept incarcerated and allows an untried (criminal) to
escape, should be fined the highest {sShasa).
38. One who steals an eighth part (of the real weight) of
an article, by means of ( false) scale or (fraudulent) measure¬
ment, should be fined twentytwo pa^as, no matter, whether (the
real weight) has been increased or decreased by that fraction.
39. One who mixes low-standard (material) in medicines,
oils, salts, perfumes, grains and molasses etc. should be fined
sixteen panas.
40. A thousand (pa/fas) is said to be the fine (to be
imposed) on the artisans who collectively (indulge) in affect¬
ing the value (of the goods) (or cause) the decrease or the
increase of the wealth.
41. It is considered to be profitable for the traders to sell
or purchase everyday, goods that are dependent on the king.
42. A trader should take five per cent profit on indigenous
goods and ten percent (profit) on foreign goods that are bought
and sold immediately.
43. (A trader) , after having added the incidental expenses
relating to the goods, to (the price) of the goods, should settle
its price with the seller or purchaser.
44. A trader not delivering the goods to the purchaser from
whom the cost has been collected, should be made to pay (the
amount) along with the profit or the profit (allowed) on the
foreign (goods) if (the goods) have come from the foreign
(country).

Agni Purina
45. Goods that are sold (already) could (again) be sold,
if the previous purclmser has not taken delivery (of the goods) .
The defects in the goods due to the purcliaser’s fault should be
borne only by the purchaser.
46. In the case of any damage to the goods caused by
political disturbances or natural calamities, or due to non-deli¬
very at the desired time, the consequences have to be borne
only by the seller.
47. The fine payable by a seller for the damage or the
apparent damage to goods sold through his agent would be
double the value of the cost (of the goods).
48. A trader who has purchased tlie goods without the
knowledge of the decrease or increase (in their prices) should
not reopen the negotiation. In case he does so, he should be
punished ( to pay) one sixth ( of the value of the whole stock) .
49-50. The profits and losses of traders trading as partners
for the sake of profit, (should be divided) proportionately to
their shares in the capital, or according to agreement made (at
the commencement of the business). (A partner) should make
good the loss sustained by him on account of doing the pro¬
hibited thing or doing a thing that he has not been asked to do
or on account of folly. A partner who has saved (the goods)
from destruction is eligible to get one tenth ( of the value of the
goods).
51. The king shall take a twentieth part (of the value) of
the abandoned goods as tax. The contraband (goods) fit for
royal use and sold (to someone) should go to the king.
52. A deceitful purchaser or seller giving out false measures
and going away from the toll office should be fined eight times
(the value of the goods) .
53. Relatives and rightful heirs who have come should
get the properties of a person on his death or his settlement
abroad and the king (should get) in the absence of them (the
legal heirs) .
54. The (following) injunctions have been laid down for
the officiating priest and ploughman : They should eschew
dishones^. They should not be greedy. They should get the
task done by (employing) another in the case of (personal)
incapacity.

55. A thief is apprehended by constables on finding the
stolen property in his possession, by (his) foot-print, his past
crime and dirty clothes.
56-57. Others that hide their caste, name etc. should also
be held on account of suspicion. Persons addicted to gambling,
wenching and drinking and those who turn pale and speak in
a dry and broken voice (should also be held). Those who
enquire about the properties and houses of others, those who
wander in disguise, those who spend (much) without income,
those who sell lost goods (should also be held) .
58. If one who is held on suspicion for theft cannot
expiate (himself ) , he should restore the stolen property. He
should be punished as a thief.
59. Stolen (articles) should be recovered from the thief
and he should be put to death by different (methods). A
brahmin (convicted of theft) should be branded and banished
from his country.
60-61 a. The headman of a village should be held respon¬
sible for murder and theft, if (the criminal) has not left his
jurisdiction. He should be brought to account in the village
where he sets his foot. Similarly five or ten villages within a
radius of two miles (of the place) (are held responsible) .
6 1 b-62a. Those men who abduct the captives, horses and
elephants and those who murder violently should be put on the
(iron) stake.
62b-64. A stealer of clothes and a pick-pocket should be
deprived of both the hands (ie., hands should be cut off) . (Or)
for the latter offence, one hand and leg should be cut off.
( Putting) a thief or a murderer to death by means of giving
food or stimulant, (or by means of) fire, water, mantra or
weapon is known as excellent punishment. The highest {sdhasa)
(should be) the punishment for causing abortion/miscarriage
by means of a weapon.
65. The highest or the lowest (fine) (should be imposed)
on those who kill a man or a woman. A woman who kills a man
by giving poison should be fastened to a stone and thrown into
water.
66. A woman who kills by giving poison or setting fire to

682 Agni Purd^a
her preceptor or offspring should be deprived of her ears, hands,
nose and lips and killed by (employing) cows.
67. Incendiaries of fields, dwelling houses, forests,, villages,
pasture lands and threshing floors and a person who has had
intercourse with the king’s wife should be burnt by fire fed on
straw placed around.
68. A man should be caught by the hair when he is having
adultery with other women. The highest {sdhasa) is the fine if
(the woman belonged) to his own caste and middle fine ( is
prescribed) if (the woman belonged) to the lower caste.
69a. (But) if (the woman) belonged to the higher caste
(than the adulterer), the man should be killed and the ears of
the woman should be cut off.
69b-71a. One who forcibly removes the garments covering
the waist, breast, navel and braids (of a woman) , and one who
engages in conversation (with a woman) at an inappropriate
place and time and who stays with her (similarly) (is liable to
be fined). If it is prohibited for a woman, she has to pay (a
fine) of one hundred {panas) and (if 'for a man) , he (has to
pay) two hundred {panas). (In spite of the prohibition if they
indulge in the above crimes) , they have to be fined as in the
case of adultery.
71b. A person mating with an animal shall be fined one
hundred {panas), and (one mating) with a woman of low caste
or with a cow (shall be fined) the middle {sdhasa).
72. A person (who mates) with a slave girl ora maid¬
servant held in captivity, though otherwise fit for cohabitation,
should be fined fifty panas.
73. The fine is said to be ten panas if one forcibly copulates
with a slave girl. One who mates with a woman of the last
caste and a woman mendicant should be fettered and banished
(from the country).
74. A person who adds or omits in copying the royal edict
or one who releases a seducer should be fined the highest
{sdhas) .
75a. One who pollutes a brahmin (by mixing) forbidden
food, should be fined the highest ( sdhasa) .
75]>76a. One who deals in counterfeit gold and one who

sells unclean meat should be maimed and fined the highest
(sdhasa) .
76b-77. An owner who releases the wild boars and horned
cattle, though he is capable (of keeping them penned) , should
pay the first sdhasa (as fine) . (If it is accompanied) by shout¬
ing, ( the owner should pay) double (the fine). (A man) whb
calls an innocent man a thief should be made to pay a fine of
five hundred {panas).
78-79. One who utters undesirable words against the king,
one who abuses the same, one who sells things connected with a
dead body, one who beats his preceptor, one who divulges his
(preceptor’s) mantra^ should be banished (from the country)
with his tongue cut off. The fine for a person who rides the
carriage or sits on the seat of the king, is the middle sdhasa.
80. The two eyes should be plucked out in the case of a
person who acts hostile to the king or the nation. A SUdra living
like a brahmin (should be) fined eight hundred {pams) .
81. If one has been defeated in the proper way, thinks
that he is unconquered, he should be defeated ( again) when he
comes and should be punished (to pay) double the (amount
of) fine.
82. A king who has fined a person unjustly should offer
the amount to (lord) Varuna^ and pay thirty times (the
amount) to the brahmins.
83. Piety, wealth, fame, esteem of mankind, favour, love of
the suljjects and permanent residence in heaven, dispensing
justice even as (people) watch are the seven qualities of a king.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINE
The application of the mantras of \he l^gveda
Fire-god said :
1 . I shall (now) describe to you the application (of the
mantras) of the ^g {veda), Tajur (oeda), Sdma (veda) and
1 . Lord of ocean and righteousness.

Agni Purana
Atharva {veda) thaX yield enjoyment and emancipation when
repeated and (are used for making) oblations (as) described by
Piiskara to Rama.
Pufkara said :
2. I shall (now) describe the (religious) rites (relating) to
each one of the Vedas. You listen first to the application of the
F^g (veda) that would yield enjoyment and emancipation.
3. The repetition of the Gayatri {mantraY especially with
(the practice) of prdndydma (regulated breathing), (while re¬
maining) in the water as well as at (the time of making)
oblations confers the fulfilment of heart’s desires.
4. O Brahmin ! The repetition of the Gayatri ten thousand
times by a man eating only in the night and bathing many
times (during the day), destroys all the sins then and there.
5. One who repeats (the mantra) a lakh times while eating
the oblations, becomes fit for emancipation. The pranava (the
syllable Orh) is identical with the Supreme Braman and its
repetition destroys all the sins.
6. One who repeats the syllable Orh while remaining in
waist-deep water and drinks the water becomes free from all
sins.
7. (The pranava consists of) three mdtrds (syllabic instants),
three Vedas y three gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) and three
lires.* The mahdoydhrti^ are the seven worlds*. An oblation made
with these destroys all the sins.
8. Gayatri is the most excellent (among the mantras fit) for
repetition. The mahdvydhrlis are also of similar nature. O Rama !
The aghamarsam {sukla)^ (destroyer of sins) should be repeated
(while remaining) in the water.
9- 11 a. The hymn purohitarii^ (is sacred) for the
Fire-god. One should repeat (this hymn) over a year holding
2. The three sacrificial fires — gdrhapatya, ihavaniya and dakfina.
3. Tlie syllables M if A, bhmh, svah, mahah,janah tapafy and satyam.
4. The same as in footnote 2 above.

the fire on the head, (performing) oblation three times (a day)
with sonia (juice) , living on alms and without lighting the fire
(for cooking) . Then the seven r^s (hymns) known as Vayu etc.
should be daily repeated devoutly. Thus one will realise all his
desires.
11b. One who desires to improve his memory should repeat
the hymn known as sadasaspatim^.
12-1 3a. These nine hymns (beginning with) anvayoyan* are
said to be destroyers of death. One who is a captive or being
obstructed should repeat (the hynm) Suna^ieparh One be¬
comes free from all sins (by this). One who is sick becomes free
from sickness.
13b- 14. One who is desirous of (gaining) permanent
pleasures and the friendship of the wise Purandara (Indra)
should repeat daily the sixteen hymns (beginning with) indrasya.^
One who repeats (the hymn) hiranyastUpam^ will cause affliction
to the enemies.
15- 16a. One who repeats (the hymn) will be
safe on his journey. One who praises lord IS&na with six Rudra
hymns everyday or one who offers oblation to Rudra will have
greatest peace.
16b-17a. One who extolls the rising Sun with (the hymn)
‘ud’’ and offers water with folded palms seven times will be able
to dispel his mental grief.
17b-I8. One who repeats the half hymn dvifantadi^ ending
with yadvipra will get his sin destroyed within seven nights. One
who desires health or one who is sick should repeat (the hymn)
praskannasyottamam^.
2. Not tracable.
3. Not traceable.
5. Probably RV. 10.149. 5a.
7. See Bloomfield, Vtdie Concordance p. 261.
9. Not traceable.

Agni PurUjta
19-20. One who repeats the half hymn uttamastasyd'- in
various postures will get long life; if it is repeated at midday
one will get radiance; if (repeated) at sunset one will afflict
his enemies. One who repeats the hymns na vodka will destroy
his enemies.
21. One who repeats the eleven suparrjicP hymns will
accomplish all the wishes. One who repeats (the hymn) ddhydtmikik kcA will get emancipation.
22-23. (One who repeats the hymn) d no bhadrd^ will get
long life. One should look at the rising moon with (the repeti¬
tion of) the hymn tvam soma and worship with the twig in the
hand. He will certainly get garments. One who desires (long)
life should always repeat the hymn of Kautsa (beginning with)
imath.*
24. By glorifying the Sun at midday with (the hymn)
apanafy Soiucad'^i one gets freed from sin like (a bow) when the
arrow is discharged.
25-26. One’s pathway becomes safe by the repetition of
(the hymn) jdtavedasaP. One gets free from all fears. That person
enjoying auspicious things will get houses. This (hymn) des¬
troys the bad dream of the previous night. One should repeat
(the hymn) pramandina* and (a woman) who is delivering a
child will do so with ease.
27. A man will get free from all sins after bathing with
(the repetition of the hymn) upannindrarfi^^ and offering clarified
butter as oblation (while repeating) the seven Vaiivadeva
(hymns).
28-29. One who repeats (the hymn) imdrrP- always will get
all his desires fulfilled. One who fasts for three nights and
1. Not traceable.
2. Not traceable.
4. Not traceable.
6. Not traceable.
9. RV.lOl.la.
10. Could not be traced.
11. ' Cf. Bloomfield, Vedic Concordance p. 233.

offers the twigs of udumbara ( tree) dipped in clarified butter with
(the repetition of) the two (hymns) mJ nastoka^ etc. after be¬
coming pure will cut all the fetters of death and live free from
disease.
30-3 la. One who having glorified Lord 8ambhu with (the
repetition of) this hymn with arms raised, binds the tuft into a
knot while repeating the hymn mdnastokaf no doubt^ becomes
invincible by all beings.
31b-32a. One should worship the Sun daily at the three
twilights with ( the repetition of the hymn) eitrarh^ holding the
twig. Thus he will get the desired wealth.
32b-33. One will destroy the entire bad dream and get
good food by the repetition of (the hymn) atha soapne^ in the
morning and noon everyday. (The hymn) is said to
destroy the demons.
34. One who repeats the hymn ubfu vdsd^ will get all the
pleasures. A person repeating (the hymn) na sdgarfi will escape
from the murderer,
33. One who repeats (the hynm) kayd iubha* will attain
caste-excellence, and (the hymn)tma}A nrsomath'’ will give all the
pleasures.
36. Conveying obeisance with (the hymn) pita^fl one will
always acquire riches. Oblation made with ghee with (the
repetition of the hymn) agM naya* also shows the path.
37. One who repeats suSloka^^ will always get a progeny of
heroes. One is able to destroy all poisons by (the repetition of)
the hymn kaAkato na?-^
2. Same as above.
5. Could not be traced*
7. Gould not be traced.
8. Gould not be traced.
11. RV. l.tSl.la.

Agni Purd^a
38. One will get all the pleasures by (the repetition of)
the hymn^o jdia^. One will get an excellent friend by (the repe¬
tition of) the hymn gaitandm^.
39-41 a. (One should repeat) the hymnj^o me r&jar? that
destroys bad dream. One who commences a journey* and faces
an unpraiseworthy or praiseworthy enemy should repeat the
(hymn) kuvidaAg(P. One will enjoy all the desired pleasures by
repeating the excellent hymn idhydimika^ consisting of twentytwo verses on the full and new moon days.
41b-43. One should offer an oblation of clarified butter
with concentrated (mind) repeating the hymn kpfnsvcP. One
will take away the lives of enemies and destroy even the
demons (by this) . One should worship daily the Fire (god)
with the hymn pmP. The Fire (god) having a face on every
side Himself protects that person on all sides. One should look
at the Sun, (remaining) pure and (repeating) the (hymn)
hathsafy Sucifad.^
44-47. A man about to cultivate a field should offer obla¬
tions of pot-boiled porridge at the centre of the field as laid
down with the five (hymns) svani svdhil*. A farmer should
derive his plough in the approriate manner (and oiler obla¬
tions) to ( the gods) Indra, Maruts, Parjanya and Bhaga. One
should then worship Indra and these deities with perfumes,
garlands and * prostrations (after having worshipped) the
ploughshare (saying) (the yoke) has been fastened for the sake
of grains. Agriculture will thus always thrive and the work
relating to sowing (the seeds), cutting, threshing and ploughing
will yield profuse results.
48-49. One will get the desired things from the Fire (god)
5. Ckmld not be traced.
9. Gould not be traced.

by (the recitation of) the hymn samudrSt^. One who worships
the Fire (god) with the two hymns (called) viSodnara*, sur¬
mounts all difficulties, gets undiminishing fame, abundant
wealth and unsurpassed victory.
50. One gets the desired riches by propitiating (the Fire
god) with (the hymn) agne tvam^. A person desirous of having
progeny should repeat the three hymns of VaruQa daily.
51-52. (Each) morning, one should recite the three svasti*"
hymns, whereby one (will) always secure great prosperity. By
the recitation of (the hymn) soasH panthOm^ one will have safe
journey. One who desires to conquer (should repeat the hymn)
Danaspate*f ( by which) enemies will be laid down with disease.
(By the recitation of the same hymn) a woman having a dead
foetus will have a good delivery.
53. One who is desirous to get rain should employ the
hymn acekavada^ after fasting and wearing wet clothes. It will
rain in no time.
54. A person who desires to have a cow should repeat (the
hymn) manasah kHma.^ One who desires to have progeny
should bathe (reciting the hymn) kardameneP^ after becoming pure
and practising vow.
55-56. A man who wants to acquire kingdom should bathe
with (the repetition of the hymn) edDap&rvdThy^. A brahmin
should bathe (standing) on a deer-skin as laid down. A king
(should bathe standing) on a tiger-skin and a man of the
merchant class on a goat (skin) in the same way. It has been
declared that ten thousand oblations (should be done) in each
case.
4. cr. Bloomfield, Vedk Concordanet pp. 1053*4.

Agni Purd^a
57. If a person desires to have (the herds of cattle) always
undiminshing (in his cowpen) , he should worship the cow, the
mother of the worlds, in the cowpen with (the recitation oQ
the hymn dgdvo^.
58. A' king should consecrate the (royal) drum with the
three (hymns beginning with) upa^. (By this) he will get
radiance and strength and rout the enemy.
59. One who is surrounded by the demons should repeat
the hymn raksoghnarrfi holding grass in the hand. By re¬
peating the hymn ye ke ca jameP one will gain long life.
60. One should consecrate the constituents of his army by
the hymn jimUtefi first like a lihga. Then the king will destroy
the enemies in the battle.
61-62. One will gain undiminishing wealth by (the recita¬
tion of) the three hymns (beginning with) dgneya^. One may
fix goblins by (the repetition of) the hymn amlvaha^ in the night.
One should repeat this hymn in danger, difficulty, when caught
in a fort, taken as a prisoner, while setting out some time,
while running away, or when held as a captive.
63-64a One should fast for three nights with self-control,
boil sweat gruel and cast one hundred oblations with that with
(the repetition of) the hymn tiyambaka^ in honour of (Lord)
iSiva. One will thus live happily for hunderd years.
646*65. One should worship the rising Sun and the Sun
at the middle (of the day) after bathing and with the hymn
if one desires to have longlife. The hymn (called)
indri (when repeated), is said to destroy the enemy.
66. A person who has lost his vow by mistake or on account
2. Gf. Bloomfied, V$die Ctmardanu pp. 2 64-68.
4. Gould not be traced.
6. Gf. Vtdk Cofwtrdamu p. 155.
10. Gf. Bloomfield, FtfdiV Concordance p. 225.

of association with the wr&tyas^f should fast and offer oblation
with clarified butter with (the recitation of the hymn) tvamagn*
wratapd^.
67. A person who repeats the hymn dditya^ and samrdja^
will get victory in debate. One will become free from great fear
by (the repetition of) the four (hymns beginning with) moAi®.
68. One will get ail the pleasures by the repetition of the
hymnyadi hyetat*. One will destroy his enemies by the repetition
of the forty two aindra^ hymns.
69-70. One gets good health by repeating (the hymn)
vdcdmahl^. A person who eats food repeating the two (hymns)
Sanno bhavefi after becoming clean and controlling the senses
and touches the heart with the hand will not be attacked by
diseases. One will destroy the enemy by offering oblations with
(the hymns) uttamedatii^^ after bathing.
7 1 . One will get food by making oblation with the hymn
tamo' gnir^^. One will get free from the defects of the quarters
(on journey) by (repeating) the hymn kanydvdrarf^K
72. One is able to subjugate the whole universe by the
repetition (of the hymn) yadetya kavya^^ at (sun) rise. One’s
speech gets refined by the repetition of (the hymn) yadvdk^*.
73. One gill get good speech by repeating ( the hymn)
vdeo vidarh^^. The pdvamdnya^* hymns are considered to be most
sacred.
1. A man of the first three classes who has lost caste owing to the
non-performance of the principal purificatory rites enjoined.
3. Cf. Bloomfield, op. cit. pp. 162-63.
6. Could not be traced.
7. Could not be traced.
10. Could not be traced.
13. Gould not be traced.
15. Gould not be traced.

Agnt Purdna
74. The thirty vaikhanasa^ hymns are considered to be
extremely sacred. O Foremost among the sages ! the parasva^
hymns arc said to be sixtytwo.
75. The sixty-seven hymns — svddistay^ — are declared as
destroyers of all sins, purifiers and conferrers of welfare.
76. The six hundred and ten hymns of pdvamanye^ when
repeated and used for making oblations will enable one to
conquer the dread of death.
77. One should repeat (the hymns) dpohisfha while stand¬
ing in the water to destroy the fear of sin. A man passing
through a desert should repeat ( the hymn) pradeuanna^ after
the control (of senses).
78. When one is haunted by the fear of death, one will
get ( the end of) his life quickly. One should repeat the single
hymn prdveydbhi* mentally in the night.
79. (If it is repeated) at dawn or at sunrise one will get
victory in gambling. One who has lost his way will find his way
by (repeating the hymn) md pragdma^.
80-8 la. If one thinks that the life of a friend of himself
is running out, he should bathe and touch the head of the
friend (reciting the hymn) yatteyamP thousand times for five
days. He will thus find him long-lived.
81b-82. A wise man should offer a thousand oblations
with ghee with (the repetition of the hymn) idam medhya*. One
who desires to have cattle ( should do it) at the cowpen and
one who desires riches, at the crossroads. One who repeats ( the
hymn) vaya^L supar^d^^ will acquire wealth.
1 . Gould not be traced.
6. Gould not be traced.
7. Gould hot be traced.

83. One will become free from all sins by the repetition of
(the hymn) His diseases will get cured and the
digestive power increased.
84. (The hymn) y& ofodhaya^^ (when repeated) is a means
of securing prosperity and' curing all the diseases. One who
wishes to have rain should employ (the hymn) brhaspate ati*.
85. (The hymns) sarvatraf' and are known (to
confer) supreme peace. (The recitation of the hymn) sUla
saAkdiyaparh^ daily is commended for a person desirous to have
progeny.
86. A person who (recites the hymn) ahath rudra^ becomes
an eloquent speaker. ITie learned person who recites (the
hymn) riti^ in the nights is not born again.
87. The person who recites the fdtrisUkta* in the night
spends the night safely. By doing the recitation of (the hymn)
kalpayanti^^ daily (one will be able to) destroy the enemies.
88. (The recitation of) the great Ddkfdya^a^^ hymn confers
longevity and radiance. A person who has undertaken a vow
should recite (the hymn) uta that will destroy the
diseases.
89. When there is fear from fire, one should recite the
hymn One should repeat( the hymn )flratiy<«i^* in
the forests to destroy the fear therein.
90. (One who recites the two hymns) with devotion to
1 . Gf. havifmattr im& ipah Taitt. Sam. 1 .3. 12. 1 a.
4. Cknild not be traced.
5. Could not be traced.
6. ■ Gould not be traced.
7. C£. ahaip rudrebhir KV, 10. 125.1 SL.
9. Gould not be traced.
10. Gould not be traced.
11. Could not be traced.
13. Gf. <&am agnt jaritd RV. 10.142.1a.
15. Could not be traced.

Agni PwrlbuA
(goddess) Br&hml (the goddess of speech) (and makes use of)
brdhni and iatSvari ( the two herbs) together with water or ghee
separately will gain intelligence and wealth.
91. One who desires to conquer his enemy in the battle
(should recite the hymn) mSsa^. (The repetition of the hymn)
brahma^* gttib sarhviddnath^ prevents the death of the child in the
womb.
92. After getting pure one should recite the hymn apaihP,
that destroys (the effects of) bad dreams. One gains supreme
concentration by the repetition of (the hymn) yenedarbP.
93. (The recitation of the hymn) nuyo bhUrvdto* is an
excellent means of securing the welfare of the cattle. One will
ward off sorcery or jugglery by (the repetition of) this (hymn).
94. One should repeat (the hymn) mahl trindmaoaro' stu*
for securing one’s welfare on his journey. One should repeat
(the hymn) agnaye vidvifoii^y which will destroy the enemies.
95-96. The presiding deities of the houses should be
worshipped with the hymn vdsto^pat^. The procedure relating
to the repetition has been told. That relating to the oblation
has to be known as different. The (prescribed) fee has to be
paid at the end of the oblation. (There will be) expiation of
the sin by (offering) an oblation. The oblation done with food
appeases by the offer of food and gold as gift.
97-99. The blessings of brahmins will be unfailing. One
should bathe outside in every case. Oblations made with the
white mustard, barley, grains, milk, curd, ghee and the twigs
of the kflravfkfa-s^y yield all the pleasures. The twigs of thorny
(trees), black mustard, blood, poison and stone (are used as
oblation) in incantation. SaktiP^, milk, curd, food collected as
}. C!ould not be traced.
2. Gould not be traced.
4. Gf. Vtdic Concordant* p. 802.
7. Gould not be traced.
9. The four trees — rffogjndha, udtmboray aJoatAa and madhUka
10. The flour of barley first fried and then ground.

alms, fruits and roots are the food while offering an oblation.
Thus the use of the hymns oi^gveda has been explained.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY
The use of ths hymns of Tajurveda
Puskara said :
1*2. I shall describe the use (of the hymns) of Tajur {oeda),
that yield enjoyment and emancipation. Listen (tome) :0
Rama : The great vydhftis^ are considered to be preceded by
the syllable orh. They destroy all sins and yield all pleasures.
A wise man should worship the gods with thousand oblations
of clarified butter.
3. O Rama : This confers the desired pleasures. One who
desires peace should offer (oblation) with barley. (One should
offer) with sesamum for the destruction of sin.
4. (One should offer oblation) with grains and white
mustard that will confer all the pleasures. (Offering oblations)
with the twigs of udumbara (tree) is commended for one who
desires cattle.
5. One who desires food (should offer oblation) with curd
and one who desires peace (should) with milk. One who
desires plenty of gold (should offer oblation) with the twigs of
apamdrga.
6. One who seeks a maiden should offer oblation of jdti
flowers that have been strung together in pairs and soaked in
ghee. One who desires to have (governorship over) a village
should offer (oblations of) sesamum and rice.
7. The oblations (of the twigs) otSdkhofa^ vdsd and apdmdrga
(trees) (are commenclcd) for bringing (others) under control.
O Son of Bhrgu (Paralurama) : (oblation) of twigs mixed with
poison and blood (should be made) for causing the death of
one after becoming sick.
1. The syllables bkabt bhuwbt svab, maha^, jenab satffom-

Agni Purity
8-9. One who is angry (should act) perfectly in the above
manner in order to kill his enemies. O Brahmin : having
made an image of the king made up of rice one should offer
a thousand oblations. The king will thus be subjected to one*s
control. Flowers (are to be used) by one who desires clothes.
(The offering of) dUrvd (grass) destroys disease.
10. It is laid down that strong scents (should be used) by
one who desires to gain the splendour of a realised soul. Obla¬
tion should be offered with the ash of husk and thorns in
retaliatory enchantments.
11-12. (In incantation) to cause animosity, the wings of
a crow and owl (should be offered). O Brahmin I One should
offer the ghee of a black cow to 6rc at (the time of) the lunar
eclipse and partake of it after having mixed it with the residue
of powdered vacd (a kind of aromatic root) after incantation a
thousand times. This will make him intelligent.
13- 14a. A peg of eleven inches made of iron or khoHra
(tree) should be buried in the house of the enemy after repea¬
ting (the hymn) duifato vadho*sP. This act of magical incanta¬
tion for (the destruction of) the enemy has been narrated to
you.
14b-15. By the recitation of (the hymn) cakfu^^ one will
get back lost eyesight. (The repetition) of the section (of
the hymn beginning with) upayufljataP will procure food. One
will be free from difRculties by offering oblation of dOrvH
(grass) (with the recitation of the hymn) tanUnapdgne sat*.
16-18. Oblation made with curd and clarified butter (with
the recitation of the hymn) bhefajamasi* will cure the sick¬
ness of domestic animals. Oblation (made with the recitation
of the hymn) tryambakarh yajdmake* will increase one’s fortune.
(One who makes an oblation with this hymn) pronouncing the
name of a maiden', will seciure that maiden. One who repeats
2. Cf. cSkfu/matj^j^a svihd TB. 3.10.7.1.
3. Could not be traced.
4. Cf. Bloomfield, Vtdie Concordance p. 397b.

(this hymn) daily when he is stricken with fear, will get free
from fears. By making an oblation with the dhUtUra flower along
with ghee (repeating this hymn), one will get all the pleasures.
O Rama ! One who makes an oblation with guggulu (a fragrant
gum resin) (with the recitation of the hymn) will see Sai^ara
(Siva) in the dream.
1 9-20. One will get long life by repeating the section
yuhjate mma^. (The repetition of the hymn) vi^orardfath*
destroys all the obstacles. It is capable of destroying demons.
It also confers victory. (The repetition of the hymn) its
agniJ^^ yields victory in battle.
21-22. (The hymn) (when repeated)
wliile bathing is capable of destroying sins. If one buries an irmi
nail of ten inches length at the tlireshold (of the house) of a
maiden with (the repetition of the hymn) viivakarmarmu hatfis^
she will not be given (in marriage) to somebody else. One who
makes an oblation with (the repetition of the hymn) devasavitah^ will get food.
23-24. O Knower of virtue ! The excellent brahmin who
desires strength should do oblation with sesamum, barley, rice
and (twigs of) apdmdrga with (the recitation of) agnau svdhd
( oblations to fire) . O Brahmin ! One will win the affection of
the people by making a mark ( on the forehead) with gorocand
(yellow pigment got from the belly of cow) after having made
the incantation (of the sacred syllable) a thousand times.
25-28. The repetition of the Rudra (hymns)’ is capable
of destroying ail the sins. The oblation (made with that hymn)
accomplishes all tasks and ensures peace everywhere. O
Bhargava ! Knower of virtue ! when the goats, sheep, horses,
elephants, cows, men, kings, children, women, villages, cities
and countries are being attacked or afflicted by diseases, when
5. Gf. Bloomfldd, Vedic Coaeordanet p. 878a.
7. nomas to rudra mat^avt Tautt. Sam. 4.5.1.1a; ViJ. Sam. 16. la.

Agni Puriiia
there is the outbreak of plague and there is fear from the enemies,
then (the offering) of oblation with Rudra hymns with sweet
porridge and ghee (will confer) supreme peace.
29*30. One gets free from all sins by offering oblation
with pumpkin and ghee (with the Rudra hymns). Excellent
man ! One gets free from ( the sin of) killing a brahmin by
eating the flour of barley, barley or alms in the night and
bathing for a month outside. One will get everything by offer¬
ing oblation with (the repetition of) the hynm madhuvdtd^.
31. One will certainly get childern by offering oblation
(with the recitation of the hymn) dadkikrdvna.^ Similarly (obla¬
tion made) with ghee (with the recitation of the hymn)
ghfUwati^ will give life.
32. (The recitation of the hymn) suasti na indra^ would
destroy all difficulties {and the hymn) iha g&vah prajayadhvarh^
would increase the strength.
33-34. A thousand oblations made with ghee (with this
hymn) will ward off ill-luck. (Oblations made) with (the twigs
of) apSmdrga and rice (with the recitation of the hymn)
sruoena devasya tvdP will without any doubt free one quickly from
the deformities inflicted by incantation. One would get gold by
(oblations) with the twigs of paldSa with (the hymn) rudra pdtti’
(Rudra protect) .
35. One should offer oblations with rice with (the recita¬
tion of the hymn) iivo bhava^, (The repetition of the hymn)
yS^ seniP removes the fear of thieves.
36. O Brahmin 1 One who makes a thousand oblations with
black sesamum with (the recitation of the hymn) yo asmabhy6. Could not be traced.
7. Could not be traced.
9. Gould not be traced.

amaydtiySt^ will become free from deformities caused by inca¬
ntation.
37. One will get food by offering an oblation of food with
(the recitation of the hymn) annapate^. The repetition of (the
hymn) hathsa^ iuci^atP (while remaining) in the water destroys
sins.
38. (The repetition of the hymn) catvdri irdgd(i* (while
remaining) in the water will remove all sins. By the repetition
of ( the hymn) -devd yajna!^ one will be respected in the world of
Brahma.
39. One will obtain the favour of the Sun by offering
oblation with clarified butter with (the repetition of the hymn)
vasanta*. The rites relating to (the use of the hymn) supar^'sP
are the same as for the (seven) vydhftis^.
40. One will get released from bondage by repeating
namah svdhd^ three times. By repeating (the hymn) drupadd?^
three times (while remaining) in the water will destroy all sins.
41. The sacred formula iha gdvak prajdyadhvadt^^ is capable
of sharpening the intellect when oblations are offered with
clarified butter, curd, milk and sweet porridge.
42. Oblations made with leaves and fruits with (the recita¬
tion of the hymn) S(Uam yo^^ confers health, wealth and long
life.
43. (The recitation of the hymn) osadhih pratimodadhvaih^'^
while mowing and cutting will give returns. Oblations made
with sweet porridge (with the repetition of the hymn) aivdpat^*
will secure peace.
5. Cr. dtvdyejtiam nayantuKV. 1.40.3d; MS. 4'9,ld; 120.10.
6.. vaj. Sam. lO.lOj Taitt. Sam. 4.3.3. 1.
8. See note to verse 1 above.
10. Cr. drupaddd iva Vaj. Sam. 20. 20a.

Agni Purina
44. One will be released from bondage by (the repetition
of) the sacred formula tasmi^. One will get excellent dress by
(repeating the hymn) yuvi suvdsd^^,
45. (The recitation of the hymn) rmheantu md Sapathydt^ is
capable of destroying all the enemies. Oblation of sesamum
(while reciting the hymn) is capable of destroying
enemies.
'46. (Oblations of) ghee and sweet porridge (with the re¬
petition of the hymns) namo'stu sarvasarpehhyo^ and krnudhvarh rdjefi
destroys magic incantations.
47-49. One can control an epidemic in a village or coun¬
try by making ten thousand oblations of pieces of dUrvd grass
with (the recitation of the hymn) kdn^dt kdnddt’’. One who is
suffering from a disease will be cured and the grief-stricken (will
become free) from grief (by this). ORama ! A person who offers
a thousand twigs of ttrfttmiara (tree) as oblation with (the recita¬
tion of the hymn) madhumdnno vanaspatihfi will get wealth. One
will also get great fortune and victory in litigation.
50-51. One will make the gods rain by offering oblations
(of the same) with (the recitation of the h.yma)apdih garbharh?
O Knower of virtue ! By making oblations of curd, ghee and
honey (with the repetition of the hymn) apah pinve^^ one will
make it rain heavily. (The repetition of the hymn) namaste
rudrdS^ destioys all misfortunes.
52-53. (The above hymn) is also said to ensure all peace
and destroy great sins. One who is afflicted by a disease is pro¬
tected by (the repetition of the hymn) adhyavocat.^^ It is also
capable of destroying demons, increasing fame, long life and

strength. One will be happy by scattering white mustard and
repeating this (hymn) on the journey.
54-55a. O Knower of virtue ! One will get long life and
undiminishing food by worshipping daily the sun morning and
evening unweariedly repeating (the hymn) asau yasidmt^,
55b-56. Weapons are consecrated by the six (hymns)
pramunca dhanvanas^. It will frighten enemies in battle. One need
not entertain any doubt. ( The repetition of the hymn) mdno
mahdntarf? confers peace on children.
57. One should offer oblations of black mustard soaked in
pungent oil (with the repetition of) the seven sections (beginn¬
ing with) namo hiranyabdhavt^ that will destroy enemies.
58. One becomes a sovereign by offermg oblations of a
lakh lotuses with (the recitation of the hymn) namo vah HrikebhyoP. By similar (offerings) of bilva (leaves) (one will acquire)
gold.
59. One will obtain wealth by oblations of sesamum with
(the repetition of) ima rudrayaP. Oblations with dUnd grass (will
make one) free from all diseases.
60. (The hymn) diuh iUdnd^ {is \xscd) in the protection of
weapons. O Rama ! It is said to destroy all the enemies in
battle.
61 . O Brahmin ! Knower of virtue ! One thousand oblations
of clarified butter with (the repetition of) the five (hymns)
rdja sdmaP will cure the eye disease (of a person) .
62. The oblation (done with the hymn) Sanno vanaspaU gehe^
will destroy the defects of a building. One will not earn enmity
8. Ck>uld not be traced.
9. Gould not be traced.

702 Agni PurS^
with anyone by offering oblations of clarified butter (with the
repetition of) agna ayUrti^i^.
63. One will gain victory by the oblation of fried paddy
(with the hymn) aparhrpheruP, He who has defect! ve^ense-organs
will get sound ones by the repetition of (the hynm) bhadrSP.
64. (The hymn) agniica pjrthim ceP (is) an excellent charm.
One who repeats the hymn adhoma^ will be victorious in
litigation.
65. (The hymn) brahma rdjanyarh^ accomplishes the task
(when repeated) at its commencement. One will be free from
disease by the oblation of ghee a lakh times (with the repetition
of the hymn) sarfa)atsaro*sP .
66. (The hymn) ketwh kjrnsan^ will confer victory in battle.
(The hymn) indro' gnirdharma^ ensures fair play in battle.
67. The hymn dhanvand gd^^ is excellent for the bow wiclder.
The hymn yufijita^^ is known (to be used) in consecrating (the
bow) .
68. The hynm dhiratha^^ should be used for the consecration
of arrows. Bahvindrh pitd^^ is said to be the hymn for consecrating
quiver.
69. Tunjanti^* is said to be the hymn for arranging horses.
(The hymn) dJufi iiMna^^ is said ( to be used) while commencing
a journey.
2. Cf. apSm phenenaVay Sam. 19.71a.
6. Cf. brahma r&jany&bhydm Vaj. Sam. 26.2c.
9. Could not be traced.
11. Could not be traced.
1 2. Could not be traced.
14. Cf. Tuhjanti bradhnam Tait. Sam. 7.4.20.1a.

70. The hymns viftfoi^ krarru^ (is said to be) excellent for
one who boards a chariot. (The hymn) SjaAghanti* is said (to be
used) for whipping the horses.
7 1 . One should repeat (the hynm) send ahhitvari^ when
facing the army of the enemy. The war drums are beaten with
(the recitation of the hymn) dmdubhya*.
72-73. One will become victorious by offering oblations
earlier with these hymns. A wise man who offers one crore
oblations with (the recitation of the hymn) yamna dattanfi will
soon produce a chariot that will give victory in the battle. The
ceremonies relating to (the hymn) d are similar to that
of the vydhftis (Jbhdl^ etc.) .
74. One will get the composure of mind by the repetition
of (the hymn of) iivasaAkalpa’ . One will get fortune by making
five lakh oblations (with the repetition of the hymn) ^anconadya^,
75. One should wear a golden (plate) after making incan¬
tations one thousand times with the Yiymnyad abaddinan ddkfdyat^.
It will ward off the enemies.
76. One will not have the fear of thieves by throwing stones
and lumps of earth in all the four directions in the house (after
repeating the hymn) imadi jivebhyalO^^
77. (The hymn) pari me gdmanefata^^ is excellent for charm¬
ing. One who has come to kill will be subdued.
78. O Knower of Dharma I A person will be brought under
one’s complete control soon by giving him food, betels, flowers
and other things charmed (with this hymn).
3. Gould not be traced.
4. Cf. Vedie Concordanct p. 485b.
7. Could not be traced.

Agni Pttrd^
79-80. (The hymn) icumo mitral always confers peace every¬
where (when repeated). One will be able to charm the entire
world by making oblations of all grains ( with the repetition of
the hymn) geu^ndrh tva ganapatbfi^ at the junction of •four roads.
The hymn hiranyavar^lfi iucayafp (is used) in consecration.
81-82. (The hymn) Sarmo deuir abhiffayt^ (is) excellent for
conferring peace. There is no doubt that one will appease the
planets and get their grace by offering oblations of clarified
butter in parts ( to the respective planets) with (the repetition
of) the hymn ekacakrtP. One who makes oblations of clarified
butter with the two (hymns) gSvo bhago* will get cows.
83. (The hymn) pravdddrfifah sopaP is used in the propitia¬
tory rite in the house. (The hymn) deoebhyo vanaspate^ is pres¬
cribed (for use) in the rite for the consecration of a tree.
84. (The hymn) tad vipioh paramarh padarffi is known to be
the gdyatri for (Lord) Vi^nu. It is capable of destroying all the
sins and granting all the pleasures.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-ONE
The use of the hymns of Sdmaveda
Pufkara said :
1. I have described the use of ( the hymns of) Tajur (oeda) .
I shall (now) describe the use of (the hymns of) Sdma {veda).
One will get all the pleasures by repeating the oaifi^oi hymns.
7. Gould not be traced.

2. One pleases (Lord) l^aAkara (Siva) by repeatii^ the
chdndasi (S^man) hymns well. One will get the grace by repeat¬
ing the skdndi and paitri hymns. '
3. (The repetition of the hymn) yata indra bhay&mahe^ is
capable of destroying the harmful effects (of incantations). One
who has broken the vow of continence will be released (from
the fault) by repeating ( the hymn) agnistigmena-.
4. (The repetition of the hymn) paritofarh ca^ ' is known to
be capable of destroying all sins. One who has sold (a thing)
that should not be sold, should repeat (the hymn) ghrtavati*.
5-6. (The hymn) adyd nodeva savitafi^ is known to be capa¬
ble of destroying bad dreams. O Rama ! The foremost offihrgus !
It is- laid down that the girdle may be tied with the remnant of
the ghee that has been sprinkled with ( the hymn) abodhyagnih*
as laid down, in the case of the women who have a mis¬
carriage.
7. Then it should be tied on the wrist of the child that is
born, with (the repetition of the hymn) somarh rdjdnarh^. This
will make the child free from all diseases.
8-9. By the use of sarpasdma^ one will not have the fear of
serpents. A brahmin will not have any fear from weapons by
tying the latdvari (a herb) after making a thousand oblations with
(the hymn) mddya tvd vddyaU*, One will get plenty of food by
making oblation (with the hymn) dirghatamaso*rka}^.
10. One who repeats (the hymn) samamadhydyanti^^ will not
die of thirst. One will not get a disease by repeating (the
hymn) toamimd ofodhib^*.
3. Of. partto fifUatd SV. 1.512a.
7. Cr. Ve die Concordance p. 1033b.
8. Could not be traced.
9. Could not be traced.
10. Gould not be traced.
1 1 . Gould not be traced.

Agni Pur dm
U. One will become free from fears by repeating (the
hymn) devavrata^ on the journey. Oblations offered with (the
hymw) yadindro munaye tvd^ increase fortune.
12. O Rama ! Collyrium applied to the eyes (with the
hymn) bhago na citra* will increase fortune. There need be no
doubt.
13-14. The repetition (of the hymn) indreti vargr^ will also
increase fortune. A man who seeks the love of a woman should
make her listen to (the hymn) pari priyd divah kavih^. O Rama !
There need be no doubt that she will love him in return. (The
repetition of the hymns) rathantara* and v&madevya^ increases the
divine splendour.
15. A child should be fed with the powder of vacd soaked in
ghee daily with the repetition of (the hymn) indramidgdlhino^ . It
will give him good memory.
16. There is no doubt that one will get progeny after re¬
peating* (the hymn) rathantara^ and offering oblations. The hymn
mayi irlh^^ has to be repeated for the increase of fortune.
17. The repetition of the eight vairUpya^^ (hymns) daily
confers fortune. One will get all the desires fulfilled by repeating
the saptdffaka^^ (hymns) .
18. One who worships cows daily morning and evening
(with the repetition of the hymn) gavyofuijo^^ unweariedly will
always have cows in his house.
19. One who offers a dro^a (a measure) of barley soaked in
1. Could not be traced.
2. Could not be traced.
4. Could not be traced.
1 2. Could not be traced.

ghee into fire (with the repetition of the hymn), vdta dvdtu
bhe^ajarii^ as laid down will ward off all spells.
20-2 la. Oblations of sesamum with ( the repetition of the
hymn) pra daivo ddso^ destroys witchcraft. (Repeating the hymn)
abhi tvd purva pitaye^ followed by the syllable vasaf while offering
oblations made with perfumed fuel will yield victory in battle.
2 lb-24. A wise man should make good figures of elephants,
horses and men with flour and represent the chief men of the
enemy with oily cakes of flour and cut them into pieces with a
knife. Then the knower of the sacredibrmulas should offer obla¬
tions (with these cakes) soaked in mustard oil with wrath while
reciting the hymn abhi tvd SUranonuma^.* The wise man gets
victory in battle by this act. The hymns garuda^, vdmadetya^*
rathantara'* and brhadratha^ are without any doubt said to destroy
all sins.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-TWO
The use of the hymns of Atharvaveda
Pufkara said :
1 . The application of the hymns of Sdma (veda) has been
described. I shall describe to you ( the application) of (the
hymns of) Atharva {veda) . One gets peace by offering oblations
with the hymns of the peace class.
2. One will get rid of all the diseases by offering oblations
to ( the gods of) the remedial class. One will get free from all
sins by offering oblations to ( the gods of) the trisaptiya cl^s.
5. Could not be traced.

Agni Purina
3. One will never get fear by offering oblations to ( the gods
of) the protection class. O Rama ! one will never be born by
offering oblations to (the gods of) the apardjita (unconquered)
class.
4. One will ward off untimely death by offering oblations
to ( the gods of) the life-giving class. One will get welfare
everywhere by offering oblations to (the gods of) the welfare
class.
5. One will get united with good fortune (by propitiating
the gods of) happiness and armour group. One will remove the
defects of a building by offering oblations to the class of deities
presiding over the foundations of a house.
6. In the same way one will remove all the defects by
ofiering oblations to ( the gods of) the Raudra class. Oblations
(arc to be offered to) these ten classes in eighteen propitiatory
(rites) .
7-9. (The goddesses) Vaisnavi, Santi, Aindri, Brahmi,
RaudrI, Vayavya, Varuni, Kauberi, Bhargavl, Prajapatya,
Tva^trl, Kaumarl, Vahnidevata, Marudgana, Gandhari, Santi
Nairftaki, 8&nti Ahgirasi, Yamya and Parthivi ( are the eighteen
propitiatory items) that yield all pleasures. The recitation (of
the hymn) yastvd mjrtyup^ conquers death.
10. One will never be afflicted by serpents by offering
oblations with (the hymn) supamastviP ! (The hymn) indrena
daitmfp confers all the pleasures.
1 1 . (The hymn) indxtna dattam^ is capable of destroying all
obstacles. The hymn imd devl^ is an excellent all-appeasing
(hymn).
12. (Thchymn) devd manttaP confers all the pleasures. (The
hymn) yama^a lohdi"^ is excellent for removing (the effects of)
bad dreams.
4. ' See note 3 above.
5. Could hot be traced.
6. Could not be traced

13. (The hymn) indra^ca paHeaaa^ijd^ is excellent for profit
in trade. Oblations offered with (the hymn) kdmo me odji* in¬
crease the fortune of women.
14. Oblation offered a lakh times with (the repetition of
the hymn) tubhyamevajarimarP and with (the hymn) agne gobhir
na*‘ will promote the intellect.
15. Offering oblation with (the hymn) dkruoarh dhruveif^a^
will ensure the acquisition of land. The repetition of ( the
hymn) alaktakajivcfl will ensure prosperous agriculture.
16. (The hynm) aharfi te bhagna’ increases fortune. (The
hymn)j?« secures release from bondage.
17. Oblation offered with the repetition of (the hymn)
Sapatvaharfi destroys enemies. (The hymn)lmm»Wawam'® is capa¬
ble of increasing fame and intellect.
18. (The hymn) yathd rnTgamati^^ increases the good fortune
of women. (The hymn) yena cehadiiarh^^ is advantageous for
conception.
19. (The hymn) ayarh teyonih^^ is favourable for progeny.
(The hymn) iivah Siv&bhi^^ increases good fortune.
20. (The repetition of the hymn) brhospatima^ paripdtu^^
secures safety on the journey. ( The hymn) munedmi tvd^* is said
to ward off untimely death.
1. ^Could not be traced.
2. Gould not be traced.
6. Gould not be traced.
7. Gould not be traced.
8. -Gould not be traced.
9. Gould not be traced.
10. Gould not be traced.
1 1 . Gould not be traced.
12. Gould not be traced.

Agni Purib^a
21. One who masters the atharvaHrjas^ becomes free from
all sins. I have described to you some procedures relating to
some important hymns.
22-24a. The first material for oblations is the twigs of trees
suitable for such rites. O Bhargava ! Clarified butter, rice, white
mustard, unbroken rice, sesamum, curd, milk, darbha (grass) ,
durvd (grass), bilva (leaves) and lotuses are always said to be
the materials that promote peace and prosperity.
24b-25. O Knower of righteousness ! Mustard oil, blood,
poison, twigs of thorny (trees) should be used in magic in¬
cantations. One who knows the employment should repeat the
sage, deity and metre (relating to the hymns).
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-THREE
Appeasing rites for portents
Pu^kara said :
1. The Srisukta of edich Veda is known to be capable of
increasing fortune. The fifteen hymns (beginning with) hirat^yavar^drh harinim^ (are considered to be conferring) fortune.
2. The four hymns rathe^vaksefu vr^abhc? in the Tajur {Veda)
(are said to confer) fortune. The Sdma hymns srdoanttyeakP is
the irisUkta in the Samaveda.
3. In the same way, (the hymn) Sriyarh dhdtarmayi dhehi^
in the Atharvaveda is said (to be conferring fortune). One who
repeats the irisUkta with devotion and offers pblation gets
fortune.
4. One will get fortune by oflfering oblations of lotuses,
biloa (leaves), clarified butter and sesamum. The puru^asUktcfi
is the same for each one of the Vedas, It gives everything.
1. The Atharva^a hymns.
4. Gf. Srdvanta u«a, Vaj. Sam. 33.41a.

5. If libation of water is presented with ( the recitation
of) each one of the hymns, it will make one free from sin. One
will destroy his sins by offering flowers to Vi^r^u with each one
(of the hymns) after bathing.
6. One would get all the pleasures by giving away a
fruit with each one ( of the hymns) after bathing. By the re¬
petition of the PurufasBkta major and minor sins are destroyed.
7. One gets everything by repeating the krcckra (hymns)
and offering oblations (with them) after becoming clean by
bathing. Three other appeasing (hymns) besides the eighteen
appeasing (hymns) are excellent.
8-10. Amrta, abhaya and saumya destory all the calamities.
Amrta (is governed) by all the gods. Abhaya (is governed) by
Brahma and Saumya by all gods. Any one (of them will)
confer all the pleasures. O Foremost among Bhrgus ! The
wristlet with the Varuna (hymn) is to be prepared for the
abhqyd appeasement. Similarly Satakd^4a is’ (for the wristlet)
for amrld and conch for saumya. In order to accomplish ( the
desired results ) the respective hymns of the deities should be
used for the wristlets.
11-13. These are capable of destroying the calamities
relating to the heavens, atmosphere and earth. Listen to me !
(I shall describe) the supernatural events relating to the
heavens, atmosphere and the earth. You learn from me tliat
(the phenomena) relating to the heavens are caused by the
ruling asterisms of the day. (Those) of the sky are the fall of a
meteor, scorching glow in the directions, the halo around the
sun or moon, (the appearance of) fairy towns and rains. (The
phenomena) relating to the earth are the extraordinary events
affecting the movable and immovable things and earthquake.
14. The portent will not bear any fruit if it rains within
seven days. A portent without any appeasement within three
years is very dangerous.
15- 16a. The images of gods will dance, shake, glow, shout,
weep, perspire and laugh. (These are portents. ) The changes
in the images can be pacified by worshipping (Lord) Prajapati
(Brahma) and offering oblations.
16b-17. When there is blaze in a country without fire.

Agni Purdifa
with loud noise and without fuel that burns, that country will
be tormented by kings. O Son of Bhrgu ! The change in the fire
is appeased with the hymns of Fire (god) .
18. When the trees bear fruit out of season, ooze out milk
and blood, one should do the appeasing rite for the portents
after worshipping ( Lord) Siva.
19-20a. Both excessive rains and draught are considered to
give rise to famine. Rain occurring consecutively for three
days out of season is known (to be a portent) of danger. The
change in (the pattern of) rain is nullified by the worship of
Parjanya (Rain god). Moon and Sun.
20b-21. If rivers recede from the cities or come near them,
if they flow gushing forth or get dried up, then the Varuna
hynm should be recited as also in the case of deterioration in the
(state of) the reservoirs.
22-23a. The women may deliver prematurely or may not
deliver at the appropriate time. They may deliver children
with deformities or deliver twins etc. One should worship the
women and brahmins in the case of such deviations in the
delivery (as above).
23b-25a. If a mare or she-elephant or cow gives birth to
twins or to deformed younger or to ones different from the
species, it will die within six months. In the case of deformed
youngs there will be danger from hostile forces. The recitation
and oblation as well as worship of brahmins should be done
(in such cases).
25b-26a. If vehicles run without being yoked (to steeds),
if (vehicles) yoked (to steeds) do not run, or trumpet sounds
(are heard) in the sky, then it forebodes great impending
danger.
26b>30a. If wild animals and birds enter village and those
of village enter forest; land (animals) enter water and water
(animals) enter land, vixens howl at the threshold of a palace,
cocks crow at pradofa (the time preceding the nightfall) ; vixens
howl af the residence or at the rising Sun; dove enters the
house, carnivorous birds stoop down on the head; bees make
sweet (sound); crows mate in sight; strong arches of palace.

garden, door-ways, corridor and mansions fall without an
obvious cause, it forebodes evil. _(It forebodes) the death of the
king.
30b-31. If the quarters are hlled by dust or smoke, if
(the country is) under the influence of the descending node,
if spots in the moon and sun are visible, or if the stars and
planets are not to be seen, it also indicates fear.
32. Where the fire does not glow, the waterpots ooze,
there is the fear of death and witchcraft as the result of the
portents. The portent is appeased by the worship of brahmins
and gods, recitation of hymns and offer of oblations.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FOUR
Worship of gods to ward off the effects of portents and mode of
offering the Vailvadeva ball
Puskara said :
1 . I shall describe the mode of worshipping the gods and
other rites that destroy (the effects of) portents. One should
offer respectful water of libation to (Lord) Visrm with the
three (hymns beginning with) dpo hi ^fhiP after having bathed.
2. O Brahmin ! Water for washing the feet (should be
offered) with the three (hymns beginning with) hirai^yamrr^ .
Water for sipping ( is offered with the recitation of the hymn)
ianna 3po^ and for bathing with (the hymn) idam&paht.^
3. Perfumes (are offered) with the three (hymns) rathe
akse^ and dress with (the hynm) ytwa^. Flowers (are given)
with ( the recitation of the hymn ) pufpavatify'^ and • incense with
( the hymn ) dhupo*si.^
5. Rathe akfefu, AV. 6.38.3m.
6. Gf. Bloomfield, Vedie Concordance pp. 792-93.
8. Of. dkar asi. Tail. Sam. 1. 1.4.1.

Agni PurS^a
4*6. (The hymn for offering) the lamp is tejo\si^ and for
the madhuparka^, dadhi^. O Foremost among men! The eight
hymns (beginning) with hiranyagarbhafy* aie said to be (used) in
offering eatables ( to gods) , cooked rice, drinks,, perfume,
chowrie, fan, shoe, umbrella, chariot and seat. Whatever other
thing has to be offered should be accompanied by the recitation
of (the hymn) of (god) Savitf. The purufosSkta^ should be
repeated and oblations should be offered with the same (hymn) .
7. In the absence of an image (of Lord Vi?Eiu) ( the deity
should be invoked) on the altar or in water or - in ’a pot full
(with water) or on the banks of a river or in a lotus. One
would thus accomplish the propitiation by worshipping (lord)
Vi§nu.
8-12. Then the oblations should be offered to the glowing
fire with the entire food being collected and offered with ear¬
nestness after cleaning the ground, sprinkling water and spread¬
ing sand and kula grass. (One should say) (obeisance) to
V^udeva, to the lord, to the master, to the immutable, to the
Fire (god) , to Soma*, to Mi tra, to Varuna and to Indra. O
Fortunate one ' Obeisance to Indra and Fire (god), the Visvedevas’ and to the lord of the beings. Oh 1 Rama I Then (one
should say) (obeisance) to Anumati*, to Dhanvantari*, to
Vasto?pati^®, to the goddess, to the Fire that accomplishes the
sacrificial rite. After having made the oblations (thus) with the
names ending in the dative case, a part of the offering is given
away as gift.
13-14. O SonofBhrgu! Knowerof righteousness I Taksa
and Upatak$a towards the east, then the horses and the hairs
2. CSonsisting of curd, clarified butter, water, honey and candied
sugar.
6. This and the following three are different celestial gods.
7. A particular group of deities ten in number and supposed to be
sons ofVisvli.
8. A female deity.
9. The physician of the gods.
10. The deity that presides over the foundation of a house.

(on the south), NirundhI and Dhumrinlka (on the west) and
Asvapanti and Meghapatrd (on the north) are the names of all
those (to be worshipped) all around (in a circle) .
15-16. The Fire-god and other gods should be located in
( the places of ) the goddesses. O Son of Bhrg^ ! (goddesses)
Nandini, Subhagya, Sumangall, Bhadrakali, Sthuna, Sri, HiV*-
anyakeli and Vanaspati are worshipped.
17-22. Offering is made to Dharma and Adharma at the
door, Dhniva at the centre of the house, Mrtyu outside, Vanina
at a reservoir, the goblins outside (the house) , the god of
wealth at the house, Indra and companions on the east, , Yama
and his attendants on the south, Varuna and his companions
on the west and Soma and his attendants on the north. (Offering)
is made to Brahma and his attendants at the centre. (Offerings)
should be made in the sky, above, on the floor and on the
earth during the day (for the spirits) that wander during the
day and in the night for those that wander during the night.
Offering should be made (to the spirits) morning and evening
daily outside. Then offering of balls of rice is made (for the
manes). It should not be* done in the evening.
23-28. Offering is first made to(the dead) father, then to the
grandfather and great-gradfather, then to one’s mother, paternal
grandmother and paternal great-grandmother. The manes should
thus be worshipped on the kula (grass) having their tips facing
the south. The offerings of balls of rice to the crows are made
with the repetition of the sacred formula stating 4et the crows
partake in the directions of east, west, north-west, south and
south-west’. (Similarly) the ball of rice to the dogs is offered
(with the repetition of the sacred formula, ‘I am offering
the ball of rice to the dogs in the family of Sun that are black
and of variegated colours. May it protect me always on the
path to the next world’). (Then offerings are made to the
cows with the following words ; ) ‘Accept this oblation of mine,
O cows, the daughters of the celestial cow, that are good for
all, holy, destroyer of sins and the mothers of the three worlds’.
After having offered the food to the cows and • bidding adieu,
one should offer the alms. After having 'worshipped the guests
and the poor, the householder should himself eat. One should
say, *Orh, bhUfjt oblations. Orh bhtwait oblations. Or/isvai^ oblations.

Agni Purdna
Otiibhurbhuvafy svah oblations. Orh oblaticuis, you are the atonement
for sins done by the gods. Orh oblations, you are the atonement
for sins done by the manes. Orh oblations, you are the atone¬
ment for sins done by me. Orh oblations, you are the atonement
for sins done by men. Oblations, you are the atonement for all
sins done by the learned meh and the ignorant men. Oblations,
to Fire god that accomplishes the desires. Orh oblations to
Prajapati (lord of beings). I have described to you (the mode
of) worship of (Lord) Visnu and the ofi^ring made to ail gods.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIV^E
The sacred bathing of the deities
Fire-god said :
1 . Listen to me. I shall describe the bathing that accom¬
plishes all objects and that is propitiatory. A wise man should
bathe the planets and (Lord) Visnu on the banks of a river.
2. One who is afflicted by fever as well as one who is
afflicted by planets causing obstacles (should bathe it) in a
temple. One who desires to acquire knowledge (should bathe it)
on ( the banks of) a tank or in the house and one who desires
victory (should do the sacred ablution) at a sacred place.
3. A woman who has a miscarriage should be bathed in a
lotus tank, and one whose issue dies after birth should bathe in
the presence of an aSoka (tree) .
4. One who desires to have flowers, one who desires to
have progeny and who desires to have a house and other for¬
tunes (should bathe) respectively at a place abounding in
flowers, an ocean and in the presence of (the image of Lord)
Vi?nu.
5. Bathing in ( the asterisms) Sravatjuii revati and pufya is
meritorious for all. One who wishes to do the ceremonial
bathing has to observe a purificatory vow for seven days prior
to that.

6.-8a. (The herbs) punarnavdy rocandf iatddga, gurunitoak,
madhukat the two sorts of rajaniy tagaray ndgakeiaray amhariy man^
jiffhdy mdrhsiy ydsakoy kardamay priydngUy mustardy kuffhay baldy
brahmiy saffron and the five things got from a cow should be
mixed with the flour of barley and rubbed (on the body). One
should then bathe.
8b- 1 1 a. (Lord) Vi§nu should be worshipped on the pericarp
of a circle, (Lord) Brahma on the right side and (Lord) l§iva
on the left side. (Lord) Indra and others should be drawn from
the east onwards in order together with their weapons and
associates. Bathing circles should be drawn in the different
directions and the intermediary directions. (Lords) Vi§nu,
Brahma, Ila (§iva), Sakra (Indra) and others and their we¬
apons should then be worshipped and oblation offered. One
hundred and eight twigs, sesamum and ghee (are offered) to
each one (of the gods).
I lb-13. The pitchers 6 Wra, subhadray siddhdrthay amoghay
citrabhdnUy parjanya and sudariana that give prosperity should be
placed on the ground. (The gods should be invoked in them as
follows) : “May the Asvins, Rudras, Maruts, ViSvedevas,
Demons, Vasus and Munis and other gods get pleased and enter
these pitchers.**
14-16, Tht htrbs jay anti y .vijaydy jaydy iatdvariy iatapu^pd,
visifukrdntdy apardjitdyjyotismati, atibaldy sandal, uHray ^«/ara,musk,
camphor, bdlafaiy pairaka, tvaky jdtiphala (nutmeg), clove, earth
and the five things got from a cow should be put into the
pitcher. Then the person (who desires to have the ceremonial
bath) should be made to sit on the auspicious seat and bathed
by brahmins.
17-18. Then oblations should separately be offered to the
gods with the sacred formulas used in the anointing of' kings.
Then the final oblation should be made and the fee paid to the
preceptor. In olden times (Lord) Indra was able to kill the
demons being (thus) bathed by the preceptor. (I) have des¬
cribed ( to you) the bathing of the guardians of the (jHrections
(that give) victory in the- battle and other things.

Agni Purina
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SIX
The mode of performing the ceremonial bathing to
wash off obstacles *
Pufkara said :
l-6a. I shall describe the bathing that would be beneficial
for those afflicted by (the evil spirit called) Vin&yaka. The
spirit Vinayaka was commissioned by (Lords) Kelava (Vi^nu),
l^a (Siva) and Pit^maha (Brahma) as the leader of the
attendants in order to fnistrgite the work of men. One who is
possessed by Vinayaka dreams as if he is . bathing in water
excessively, sees shaven heads, rides the demons (in a dream)
and as he goes thinks that he is being followed by others. The
fruitless beginning (of a task) leads to frustation and (the
body) emaciates without any reason. A girl does not get a
(suitable) bridegroom, a married woman does not get pro¬
geny, a brahmin does not become a preceptor and a pupil does
not get instruction. A trader does not get profit and a culti¬
vator, the produce. A king does not get a kingdom. In such
cases a (ceremonial) bath has to be done.
6b-9a. (It should be done) on an auspicious seat in (the
asterisms) hastOf pu^a, aSvinly mrgaSirsa and irava^a. Levigated
powders of white mustard mixed with clarified butter, all herbs
and perfumes should be besmeared on the head ( of the person
concerned). He should be bathed with (the waters in) four
pitchers into which all herbs have been put. Earth brought
from stables of horses and elephants, anthill and confluence of
rivers as well as resin got from a cow, perfumes and gttggulu
should be put (into the pitchers) .
9b-17. (The bathing is done with the repetition of the
following sacred formulas) ** SahasrOksam SatadhOram ffibhib
pSoanarh krtarh^. I bathe you with the waters that have been
made holy by the sages. May the removers of sins protect you.**
Bhagath te oarupo rdjd bhagarh sdryo bfhaspatip bhagamindraSca vdyvdca
bhagath saptarsayo dadub^. **May Varuiia, the Sun, Brhaspati,

Indra, Vayu and the seven sages give you wealth.” “May the
misfortune that sticks to your hair, the parting line of the hair,
head, fore-head, ears and eyes always be removed by the
water.” Then the preceptor should hold the leaf of the darbha
{ grass) on the left hand and pour the mustard oil on the head
of the person that has bathed with a ladle made of udunAara
(tree). Then oblation should be made holding the ktiia grass
on the head with the left hand (repeating) the names Mita,
Sammita, Salaka, Kapfhaka, Ku$manda and Rajaputra together
with (the word) oblation, the sacred formulas for oblation
and obeisance. Then after having spread the kula (grass) every¬
where at the crossroads, one should offer cooked and uncooked
rice, meat, food, large quantities of raw fish, coloured flower,
wine, mUlaka^ cake, sweet cake of flour, garland of en^aoikd (?),
curd rice, sweet porridge ( ptyasa) , piffaka (a cake made of any
grain) , modaka ( a kind of sweetmeat in the form of balls ) and
treacle on a winnowing basket.
18-20. Then Ambika (mother goddess; consort of Siva),
the mother of Vinayaka, should be worshipped after having
offered durvd (grass), mustard and flowers and the final obla¬
tion is made. (The following request is made) : O Fortunate one !
You give me beauty, fame, good fortune, progeny, wealth and
all desired things. The brahmins should be fed and a pair of
clothes should be given to the preceptor also. One would get
the fruit of his action and wealth after worshipping the (spirit)
Vinayaka and the planets.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SEVEN
Ceremonial bathing known as MdheSoara and other
kinds of ablutions
Pufkara said :
1. I shall describe the bathing (known as) Maheivara that
has been described by Uianas (preceptor of demons) to Bali,
the king of demons, in olden days and that would promote the
victory of a king and others.

Pur&na
2. When the sun has not risen the votary should be bathed
on a seat with ( the waters of ) pitchers (with the repetition of
the following words) : Orh obeisance to Lord Rudra a^d to Bala
besmeared with ashes of grey colour. Victory ! Victory !
Trample, down all the enemies of a weak man in wars and
arguments. Orh ! Crush down all the (hostile) marchers. Let
that god who desires to barn (all the worlds) at the end of the
yuga (period), and who having terrible form (accept) this
worship. Let that god having thousand rays and white (in
complextion) protect your life. May that (Lord) Siva, the
destroyer of Tripura^, who resembles the samvartaka^ fire and is
of the form of all the gods, protect your life; likhi., likhi, khili
oblations. After bathing, oblations should be done with scsamum and rice with (the repetition of the above) sacred
formulas.
3. After having bathed with the pahcdmfta^j the trident
bearing lord should be worshipped. I sliall describe ( to you)
the other kinds of ablutions that would always be for your
victory.
4. Bathing with ghee is said to be excellent for the length¬
ening of life. (Bathing) with cow-dung would be (conferring)
fortune. (Bathing) with cow’s urine would destroy the sins.
5. (Bathing) with milk would be (giving) strong intellect
and with curd, would further fortune. One would be destroying
the sins by bathing with kuSa grass and would get all the things
by bathing with the five things got from a cow.
6. One would get everything (by bathing) with Satamfila.
One would destroy the sins (by bathing) with the waters
(touched by) the horns of a cow. One would get everything
by bathing with palaia^ bilvoy lotus and kuSa (grass).
7-8. Bathing with vaedy two varieties of haridrd and musta
(is spoken as) excellent for killing the demons. One would gain
long life, fame, righteousness and intellect by ablution with
washings of gold. It would be auspicious ( to bathe) with the
1. The three cities of the demons T&rak&kfa, Kamal&k^a and Vidyunm&lin.
2. The fire that destroys the universe at the end.
3. The five sweet things — milk, sugar, ghee, curd and honey.

washings of silver and copper. One would gain victory and
fortune respectively by bathing with the washings of gems
and all perfumes.
9. One would gain health and excellent fortune respec¬
tively (by bathing) with water containing fruits and water with
dhairi. One would get wealth and fortune respectively (by
bathing) with sesamum and wiiite mustard .ind priyaAgu.
10. (One would gain) wealth (by bathing with water
containing) lotus, blue lotus and kadamba. (One would gain)
strength (by bathing) with the water containing (the twigs of)
the bald tree. Bathing with the water that has washed the feet
of (Lord) Visnu is the best among all kinds of ablutions.
11 -13a. (At the time of bathing) one should repeat the
hymn ekakdmdya^ alone duly. A band made of (the herbs)
kuffha, pdfhd, vacd, sunfki^ conch and iron etc. should be tied
round the wrist with (the repetition of) the hymn dkrandayati.^
Lord Hari (Visnu) is the master of all desires. One would
enjoy all the pleasures by worshipping Him.
]3b-14. By bathing (the image of Lord Visnu) with ghee
and milk and worshipping Him, one would get rid of biliousness.
By offering an oblation of five kinds of pulses one would get
free from dysentry. By bathing (the image) with the five things
got from a cow, one would get rid of rheumatism.
15-16. Bathing 'wiih.dvisruha (ghee and water) with intense
devotion would remove derangement of phlegm. Ghee, oil and
honey ( is said to be) the Irirasa (three fluids mixed together)
that is excellent for bathing. Ghee and water mixed for bathing
(is said to be) dvisneha. Ghee and oil (mixed for bathing is said
to be) samala, Bath water with honey, the juice of sugar-cane
and milk is known to be trimadhura (three sweet things).
17-18. Bath water with ghee, juice of sugar-cane, oil and
honey (is known to be) trirasa (three fluids) (good) for wealth.
An unguent of the three white (things) — camphor, uiira(a. frag¬
rant thing) and sandal (should be used for bath). Sandal,
agallochum, camphor, musk and saffron are the five unguents
for (Lord) Visnu that yield all the pleasures.
1. Could not be traced.

Agni Purina
19. The three fragrant things are camphor, sandal and
saffron. Musk, camphor and sandal (used as an unguent) yield
all the pleasures.
20-22. Nutmeg, camphor and sandal ( are said to be) the
three cooling things. O son of Bhrgu! The five colours are in¬
dicated as yellow, blue, white, black and red. Blue lotus, lotus
and jdti ( flowers ) (are spoken to be) the three cool things (that
are commended) for the worship of (Lord) Visnu. Saffron, red
lotuses and red lilies are the three red things. Men would get
peace by worshipping (Lord) Vi?nu well by (showing) incense,
lamp, etc.
23. One would duly get all peace by worshipping the
planets with the gSyatri^ (hymn) after offering a lakh or crore
oblations of sesamum, clarified butter, barley and other grains
in a square sacrificial pit (done) by eight or sixteen brahmins.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-EIGHT
Mode of worshipping Indra, doing nirdjana
( relating to King^s expedition) and other rites
Pufkara said :
1-2. 1 shall describe the rites to be performed by the kings
in the course of a year. On (the day of) the birth-asterism He
(Lord VisQu) should be worshipped. The Sun, Moon and
other gods should be worshipped every month at the time of
sun*s entry into one of the signs of the zodiac. Agastya should
be worshipped at the time of the rise of Agastya (Canopus).
(Lord) Hari (Vi§riu) should be worshipped for four months.
Festivities should be had for fifteen days in connection with the
lying down to sleep and waking up from sleep (of Lord Vispu)*.
2. These arc respectively the periods corresponding to Junc-July and
September-October.

3-5. A mansion should be made ready (by the king) on the
east of his army camp in the bright fortnight of the month
(ruled by the asterism) Proftbapada (i.e. Bhadrapada**
September-October) for (worshipping) Jndra from the first
lunar day. The banner of Indra should be raised therein. (Lord)
Indra and (his consort) Sad should be worshipped (therein).
Those two and the flag-staff should be led to the proper place
accompanied by the sounding of musical instruments on the
eighth day. He should fast on the eleventh day, raise the flag
staff (on the twelfth day) and worship the flagstaff, as well as
the Lord of celestials (Indra) andSaci in a pitcher covered by a
cloth etc. (repeating the following words) ;
6-12. ‘*0 Indra ! You flourish ! Conqueror of the enemies !
Killer of (the demon) Vftra ! Punisher of the demon Paka !
Lord of lords ! Most fortunate one ! You have come to the
earth. You are the master, the eternal one and one who is bent
on the welfare of all the beings. You are a person who has end¬
less lustre and splendour. You are the one who increases fame
and victory. May these gods increase your lustre. O Sakra
(Indra) ! One who causes good rain! May (the Lords) Brahma,
Vi$nu, Mahefa (Siva), Kartikeya (son of Siva), Vinayaka (son
of Siva), (the twelve) Suns, (the eight) Vasus, (the eleven)
Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Bhrgus, the (different) quarters,
group of Maruts, the protectors of the world, planets, the
Yaksas (a kind of semi-divine beings), the rivers, the oceans,
(goddesses) Sri (the consort of Vi?ou), Earth, Gauri (consort
of Siva) , Candika (a form of the consort ot Siva) and Sarasvafl
(goddess of speech; consort of Brahmk) increase your radiance.
Hail O Indra ! Consort of Sadi ! May auspicious things accrue
to me daily by your victory. Always extend thy grace to the
kings, brahmins and people. May the earth abound in grains
by your grace. May there be prosperity without any obstacle.
May calamities come to an end.*’
13-1 6a. After having worshipped Indra with (the
above) sacred formulas, one will conquer the earth and reach
the heaven. (The picture of) Bhadrakali (a benevolent form of
the consort of Siva) should be drawn on a cloth on the eighth
day of the bright fortnight in the (month of) Aivina (OctoberNovember^) for victory. In the same way, the weapon, bow.

Agni Parana
banner, umbrella, the insignia of the king such as the arms
(should be worshipped) with flowers. After remaining awake in
the night, the offering should be made. ( She) is again wor¬
shipped on the second day. O Bhadrakal! ! Mahakali ! Durga !
Remover of all difficulties ! Conqueror of the three worlds !
Candi ! Be successful in (conferring) peace on me !
16b-20. I shall describe the mode of performing the
nlrSjand^ (rite) . A chamber should be got ready in the north¬
eastern direction. Three arches should be erected therein and
the gods should be worshipped daily. The worship should be
done from the moment Sun leaves (the asterism) Citra and
enters (the asterism) Svati and stays therein. (The gods)
Brahma, Visnu, Sambhu (Siva), Sakra (Indra), Fire-god,
Wind-god, Vinayaka and Kumara( the two sons of Siva) , Varuna,
Dhanada (god of wealth), Yama (god of death), Viivedevas
(a group of gods) and the eight elephants of Vailravasa (son
of Viiravfis)^such as Kumuda, Airavana, Padma, Puspadanta,
Vamzma, Supratika, Afijana and Nila, should be worshipped in
the chamber.
21-23. The priest should offer as oblation clarified butter,
twigs, white mustard and sesamum. After worshipping eight
pitchers, the excellent horses and elephants should be bathed
with them. The horses should be bathed (first) and the balls
of rice offered. Then the elephants should . be led out first
through the arches but should not be made t6 cross the prin¬
cipal gateways etc. Then all should set out. The insignia of the
king should be worshipped in the chamber. After having
worshipped (Lord) Varuna on the west, the offering to the
spirits should be made in the night.
24-26. When the Sun has entered (the asterism) Visakha,
the king should stay in the hermitage. The chariot should be
specially decorated on that day. The royal insignia that has
been worshipped should be placed in the hands of the respec¬
tive men. O Knower of righteousness ! An astrologer should
then consecrate the elephant, horse, umbrella, sword, bow, war
1. Lustration of arms, a kind of military and religious ceremony, per¬
formed by kings or generals before they set out.

drum, flag staff and flag (of the king). After consecration they
should be made to be carried on the elephant.
27-30. The astrologer and priest should then ride the ele¬
phant. (The king) should ride the consecrated horses and set
out through the arch. After setting out he should ride the ele¬
phant and go out through the arch. After having offered the
oblation, the king riding the elephant and remaining calm
should circumambulate (the city) thrice as the collection of
fire-brands illuminate the different quarters of space, the four¬
fold army keep company and the entire army shout ( victory) .
After doing this, (the king) having offered water with the
palms should go back to the palace. This is the appeasing rite
(called) nirajand that would make (a king) prosper and kill the
enemy.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SIXTY-NINE
The sacred formulas for the co}isecration of
the umbrella and other royal insignia
Puskara said :
1-3. I shall describe the sacred formulas for (the consecra¬
tion of) the umbrella and other things, the worship of which
(would confer) victory and other things. “O One with great
intellect ! One having the splendour of jasmine ! One haviilg
the lustre of snow, jasmine and moon ! You be glorious by the
true words of Brahma, Soma, and Varuria and the power of the
Sun. May you shield the king for the achievement of success
and promotion of health in the same way as the cloud covers
the earth for its welfare.
4-9a. O Horse ! You were born in the race of the
Gandharvas (a kind of semi-divine beings) . May you not be¬
come a defiler of the race. You be glorious by the true words
of Brahmi, Soma and Varupa and the power of Fire (god) as
well as the splendour of the Sun, the penance of the sages, the

Agni Purd^a
continence of Rudra (Siva) and the strength of the Wind
(god). You remember that you are of royal birth. You
remember the kaustubha gem. May you not incur the sin
that would accrue to the killer of a brahmin, or to a patricide
or to a matricide or to a person who utters a lie for the
sake of (gaining) a land or to a man of the warrior-class
who turns his back (upon the battle), although you may
swiftly move that way. O Horse ! May you not meet with
adversity in the battle or on the road. May you be happy to¬
gether with your master after killing the enemies in the battle.
9 b-13. O Banner of Indra ! Suparna of great valour has
taken his position on you. The lord of birds. Son of Vinata,
One (seated) on the banner of NSrayai^ (Vi?9u), A progeny
of (sage) Kaiyapa, One that carried away the nectar, The
Enemy of the serpents, the Vehicle of (Lord) Visnu, Immeasur¬
able one. Unassailable in the battle, Destroyer of the enemies
of the celestials. One having great strength, One having swift
speed. One possessing a huge body, One who drinks the nectar.
The winged one, One who has the swiftness of Maruti (son of
Wind, Hanumat) is always present in you. You have been
fixed by (Lord) Visnu, the lord of lords, for the sake of Indra.
May you always give me victory, prosperity and strength. (You)
protect the warriors together with their lu>rses, armours and
weapons. You bum our enemies.
14-23. Kumuda, Airavana, Padma, Pu^padanta, Vamana,
Supratlka, Afijana and Nlla^ are the eight (elephants) of
divine origin. Their sons and grandsons constitute eight forces.
You remember Bhadra, Manda, Mrga and Sahkir^a that have
been born in the different forests and have become great ele¬
phants. May the (eight) Vasus, (eleven) Rudras, (twelve)
Adityas, the group of Maruts protect you. O King of ele¬
phants ! Protect the master ! May the obligation be discharged !
(Lord) Indra, the lord of the celestials, riding the Air&vata
(the elephant of Indra) and wielding the (weapon) thunder¬
bolt following you, protect you. May you gain victory in the
battle and march always in good state. May you get the
strength of Air&vata (elephant of Indra) in the battle. May
1. Supposed to guard the quarters.

you get wealth from Soma, strength from Vi?niu, splendour from
Sun, speed from wind, firmness from mountain, victory from
Rudra and fame from Lord Purandara (Indra). May the ele¬
phants protect you in the battle. May the quarters in the
company of Aivins (the two physicians of the gods) and
Gandharvas (semi-divine beings) protect you in all the direc¬
tions. May the Manus (the first representative of man-kind) ,
Rudras, Vayu, Soma, the great sages, Nagas (serpents),
Kinnaras (semi-divine beings), Gandharvas (semi-divine be¬
ings) , Yaksas (semi-divine beings) , the hosts of spirits, planets,
goblins with Adityas, the Lord of the goblins with the (divine)
mothers, Indra, Skanda (son of Siva) the commander-in-chief
(of the celestials) and Varuna resting in you burn all the
enemies. May the king gain victory.
24-28a. May the festoons used by the enemy for deco¬
ration everywhere, fall down being struck by your splendour.
In the same way as you have shone at the time of killing (the
demon) Kalanemi,^ the destruction of Tripura®, the battle with
Hiranyakasipu® and the killing of all the demons, may you
shine now. You remember the opportune moment. May the
enemies of the king be destroyed quickly. (May the enemies)
be conquered by different kinds of terrible diseases and wea¬
pons. May (the names) Putana, Revati, Lekha and Kalaratri
that we have read (as terrible forces) burn all the enemies
quickly with your help.
28b-33. (O sword!) You have been created by the god of
gods, the trident-bearer, (Lord) Sarva (Siva) out of the essence
of the world at the great sacrifice in which everything was
offered. The destroyer of the enemies ! Remember the
foremost form of Nandaka (the sword of Lord Kr§na). One
having a dark complexion like the petals of blue lotus I Dark
one I Destroyer of bad dreams ! (Lord) Brahma has declared
the following as your eight names : asih, viSasana^i, khadgah,
tik§nadharah, durasadah, irigarbhab, vijaya^ji and dharmapalab. Krttika is your asterism. Lord Mahe^vara (Siva) is
1. A demon killed by Vifpu.
2. The three cities destroyed by Siva.
3. A demon killed by Vifnu.

728 Agni PurSi^
your preceptor. Gold is your body. Janardana ( Visnu) is your
lord.
34. O Armour ! You cause (the enemy fojces) to feel
ashamed in the battle. I will have fame in the army today. O
Sinless one ! Protect me, worthy of being protected by you !
Obeisance to you.
35-38. O War drum ! You cause the hearts of enemies to
tremble by your sound. You act in such a way that you may
achieve victory for the king’s army. Just as the excellent elephants
get delighted on (hearing) the sound of the (colliding) clouds,
in the same way (let us) rejoice on (hearing) your sound. You
bring us joy. Just as the rumbling clouds cause fright in women,
so also let our enemies get frightened by your sound in the
battle. (These) should always be worshipped with sacred
formulas. They should be employed for victory etc. Every year
(Lord) Vi§nu should be anointed with ghee and water. The
king should be given the ablution by an astrologer and priest.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
A hymn to Vifnu that destroys Evil
Pufkara said :
1. O Foremost among brahmins ! This (hymn) Vi§nupafijara was prescribed by Brahma for the protection of Siva,
who was desirous of destroying Tripura in olden days.
2. It was told by Vagina (Brhaspati, the preceptor of the
celestials) to Indra, who was making efforts to kill (the demon)
Bala. 1 shall describe its form. You listen to that which will
give you victory.
3-4. (Lord) Vi$nu is stationed in the east bearing the disc.
(Lord) Hari (is stationed) in the south bearing the mace.
(Lord) Vijnu (remains) in the west bearing the bow. (Lord)
Vi^nu (is stationed) to my north bearing the sword. (Lord)
Hr$ikeia is in the angular points and (Lord) Janardana in the
inter-spaces. (Lord) Hari (is stationed) on the earth in the

form of a tortoise and (Lord) Narasiriiha (man-lion form of
Vis^u) in the sky (above) me.
5. This sharp-edged and stainless Sudai'sana disc (of
Visnu) revolves. His garland of rays is imperceivable. “May
you kill the evil spirits and those who wander in the night.”
6. This mace has the lustre of the flames given out by the
Sun. It is capable of destroying the demons, goblins, spirits and
female spirits.
7. May the bow of Vasudeva (Vi§nu), that is striking
suddenly, kill all my enemies, such as birds, men, kU^mSi^ia and
the spii'its of the dead.
8. Those who have been shaken by the shining lustre of
the stroke of the sword, let those assembed (enemies) be subdued
at once, like serpents by Garuda (vehicle of Vifi^u).
9-1 2. May the ku$man4tiSy yak§ast demons, the night wan¬
derers, spirits of the dead, Vinayakas, cruel men, jambhagas
(jackals ?) , birds, lions and other animals, serpents and others
become good being struck by the sound of the conch of Vi§nu.
Those that take away my thinking faculty, those men who affect
my memory, those who affect my strength and splendour, those
who cast their shadow, those who affect my pleasures, those who
destroy my traits, may those ku$md^4<^ get destroyed by the
sound of the disc of (Lord) Visnu.
13. May my intellect, mind and sense-organs be healthy by
the singing of (the glory of) lord of lords, Vasudeva.
14. May (Lord) Janardana, Hari, be behind me, in my
front, on the south and north and at the angular points. One
that makes obeisance to (the Lord) Janardana, one worthy of
worship, I Sana, endless and undecaying will not have grief.
15. Just as (Lord) Hari is the Supreme Brahman, that
Kelava is above the form of the universe. May my three kinds
of inauspiciousness get destroyed by the truth of singing the
name Acyuta (imdecaying).

Agtii Purdpa
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-ONE
The different recensions of the Vedas
Pttfkarasaid :
1. The number of hymns of the (wrfa), Tajur (veda),
SOma {veda) and Atharva {oeda) that yield all (the desires) and
confer the four ends of the human life^ is one lakh.
2. {The ^gveda) is divided into two branches, Sahkhyayana
and Aivalayana. The br&kman^s (of this Veda) (contain) two
thousand one hundred and ten hymns.
3. The J^goeda is considered as the authority by the Dvaipayanas and others. The hymns of the Tajurveda number one
thousand nine hundred and ninetynine.
4-5. Their branches are one thousand eightysix. The
branches of the Tajur {veda) are (known as) Kanvi, Madhyandiid, Ka^hi, Madhyakathl, Maitrayani, Taittiriya and Vaisampayana,
6-8a. The first (branch) of the Sdmaveda is known as
Kauthuma and the second as Atharvanayanl. The songs of this
Veda consist of dranyaka^ uktha and uha. The extent of the
{Sdmaveda) is said to be a collection of nine thousand four
hundred and twentyfive.
8b-9a. Sumantu, Jajali, Slokayani, Saunaka, Pippalada, Mufijake^a and others (are those who represent the
branches) oi Atharva {veda).
9b-10. The Lord (Visnu) in the form of (sage) Vyasa
divided the ten thousand and six hundred hymns and one
hundred Upani^ads into different recensions. (Lord) Visnu also
made the divisions of the Epics and Purdnas.
11-12. The bard Lomaharsana got it from Vyasa. Sumati,
Agnivarcas, Mitrayu, Simiapayana ( Sarhsapayana ?) , Krtavrata
and Savarni were his disciples, ^amsapayana and others were
the makers of the collection of Puranic texts.
13. The Brahma {purdna) and other Purd^s are eighteen.
(They are known to be) learning relating to (Lord) Hari
1 . Righteousness, material prosperity, pleasures and beatitude.

( Visnu) . (Lord) Hari remains in the form of learning in the
great PurQifa (called) Agni.
14. One would get enjoyment and emancipation by wor¬
shipping and praising Him, who is immanent, transcendent
and bears the gross and subtle forms.
15. (That) all-pervasive, triumphant (lord) wishing for
prosperity is of the forms of Fire, Sun etc. (Lord) Vi§5iu, that
is the mouth of the gods in the form of the Fire (god) , is the
supreme state.
1 6. The embodiment of sacrifices is praised in the Vedas
and Purdnas. The Agneya-purdr^a is tlie greatest of the forms of
Visjriu.
1 7-22. The composer and listener of the Agn^a-purdna is
(Lord) Janardana (Vi?nu) . Hence the Agneya-purdna is great as
that made up of all the Vedas. It is of the form of all learning,
meritorious, of the form of all knowledge and excellent. It is of
the form of all the beings and of (Lord) Hari (Visnu) . (It is
meritorious) for the men who read and listen to (its narration) .
It gives knowledge to those who seek knowledge. It yields
material prosperity to those who seek material prosperity. It
confers kingdom on those who desire to have kingdom. It yields
righteousness to those who seek righteousness. It confers heaven
on those who seek heaven. It blesses those who seek progeny
with progeny. It gives cows to those who seek cows. Those
who seek a village would be blessed with a village. Those who
desire pleasures would be getting pleasures. It gives all good
fortune. It gives good qualities and fame to men. Those who
seek victory would get victory. It gives all things to those who
seek everything. Those who desire emancipation would be
blessed with emancipation. The Agnipurdna destroys the sins of
smners.

Agni Pur&ifa
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-TWO
The meritoriousness of making gifts of the different Purdnas
Pu?kara said :
1-2. (The Pwrd^a) that was narrated by Brahma to Maiici
in olden days in fifty thousand verses (is said to be) Brahmapurdiia. One who desires to attain heaven should write and give
it as a gift on the full moon day in (the month of) Vaiidkha (MayJune) together with water and a cow. The Padma pwrdna that
contains twelve thousand verses should be given (on a similar
day) in (the month of) ^fif/Aa(June-July) together with a cow.
3-4a. (Sage) Parasara narrated the Vaisnavapurdm based on
the accounts of the Vardhakalpa^ in twenty thousand verses. One
who makes a gift (of the same) together with water and a cow
in (the month of) Afd^ha (July-August) would reach the place
of (Lord) Visnu.
4b-5. The Vdyaoiya {purdnd) (that contains) fourteen thou¬
sand (verses) (is) dear to (Lord) Hari (Vi§nu). The Wind
god has narrated the righteous way in this ( Purdna) with refer¬
ence to (the incidents of) the Svetakalpa. It has to be copied
and given as a gift to a brahmin together with the molasses and
a cow (on the full moon day) in (the month of) ^rdvam (AugustSeptember) .
6-7. It is said to be the Bhdgavata {purdm) in which the
virtues have been explained with reference to the gay atri"^ {mantra)
and also the killing of the demon Vrtra during the Sdrasvatakalpa has been described. It should be given as a gift in (the
month of) Prosfhapadi ( September-October) together with a
golden lion. It contains eighteen thousand (verses).
8-9a. It is said to be the Ndradiya {purdria) consisting of
twenty five thousand (verses) in which (the sage) Narada des¬
cribed the virtues based on the Bfhatkalpa. One can have the
supreme attainment by making a gift (of the same) (on a full
moon day) in (the month of) iliotna (October-November) to¬
gether with a cow.
1. There are thirty^two kalpa periods each equal to 432 million years
of mortals.

9b- 10a. The M0rka$4eya {purS^a) (contains) nine thousand
(verses) in which there is a discussion of righteousness and un¬
righteousness relating to the enemies. It should be given as a
gift (on the full moon day) in (the month of) Kdrttika (November-December).
lOb-11. ThsLt (Purd^) is Agneya th&t was spoken by the
Fire-god to (sage) Vasi$tha. (It contains) twelve thousand
(verses) and imparts all knowledge. It should be copied and
offered as a gift in (the month of) MdrgaSir^a (DeccmbcrJanuary) . It yields everything.
12. The Bhavisya (Purdna) (contains) fourteen thousand
(verses). It had its origin from the Sun. (Lord) Bhava (3iva)
narrated it tO Manu. It should be offered as a gift in (the
month of) Pausya (January-Fcbruary) together with molasses
etc.
1 3-1 4a. The Brahnamivarta (purdjfa) was narrated by Savarni
(Manu) to (sage) Narada (dealing) with the history of
Rathantara and the boar (manifestation of Visnu) in eigh¬
teen thousand (verses). One who gives it in (the month of)
Mdgha (February-March) as a gift would reach the world of
Brahma.
14b- 15. The Lidga (Purdna) is that in which the great Lord
(3iva) residing in the fiery Khga in the Agneyakalpa described
the virtues in eleven thousand (verses). One who makes a gift
of the same in (the month of) Phdlguna (March-April)
together with sesamum and cow would have the vision of (or
attain to) l§iva.
16- 17a. The Vardha (purdifa) was narrated by (Lord) Vi^^u
in fourteen thousand (verses) . The account of the boar (form
of Vi§nu) was propagated by (Lord) Vi$nu on the earth (assuming
the form) of a man. (One who makes a gift of it) together
with a golden (image of) eagle in (the month of) Caitra (AprilMay) would reach the place of (Lord) Vi?nu.
17b- 18a. The great Skdnda (pUTdna)v/2t& narrated by (Lord)
Skanda in eighty-four thousand (verses) on the virtues in the
Tatpurufa kalpa. One should make a gift (of the same).
ldb-19a. The Vdmana (purlpfa) narrates the story of (Lord)
Hari ( Vi$nu) relating to Dhavmakalpa in ten thousand (verses)

734 Agni Purdna
dealing with the virtues and material prosperity should be given
(as a gift) during autumnal equinox.
19b-20a. The Kurma {purdna) was narrated by the tortoise
(form of Lord Visnu) in eight thousand verses in tonnection
with (the story of) Indradyumna in the nether world. It should
be given (as a gift) together with a golden (image of) tortoise.
20b-21a. The Matsya {purdtfa) was narrated by (Lord Visnu
in the form of a) fish to Manu at the beginning of the kalpa
(period). It should be given (as a gift) at the time of the
equinox together with a golden (image of) fish.
21b-22a. The Garuia {purana) was narrated by (Lord)
Visnu in the Tdrksakalpa describing the birth of Garu<?a (the
vehicle bird of Lord Visnu) from the universal egg. It should
be given (as a gift) together with a golden (image of) hariua
(swan).
22b-23a. The Brahmdntjia (purd^) is that in which (Lord)
Brahma described the greatness of the universe in twelve
thousand (verses) . It should be given (as a gift) to a brahmin.
23b-26. The reciter of the {Mahd) bharata should be hono¬
ured with clothes, perfumes, garlands and other things after
the completion of each parvcm{each. one of the eighteen divisions)
and brahmins should be fed with sweet gruel. After (the
recitation of) each parvan is complete cows, land, village, gold
and other things should be given (as gift) . After ( the recital of
the text) o( Bharata is complete, a brahmin and the Samhitd texts
should be worshipped. Then the book should be wrapped in
silken cloth and kept at a sacred place. (Lords) Nara and
Narayaiia^ and the books should be worshipped with flowers and
other things. The recitation should be completed by making
gifts of cows, food, land and gold and feeding (the brahmins).
27-29. Great gifts should be made and different kinds of
gems should be given. Two or three md§akas (a particular weight
of gold) should be given every month. It is laid down that gift
(should be given) to the reciter at the commencement of the
solstice. O Brahmin ! The reciter should be worshipped by all
1 . Originally regarded as identical but in mythology and epics camidered as distinct beings, Arjuna being identified with Nara and Kfsna with
Nftr&yapa.

the listeners. One who makes a gift of the Epics and Purajjxis (in
the above manner) after worship would get long and healthy
life and would attain emancipation and heaven.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-THREE
The description of the solar race
Fire-god said:
1-4. I shall describe to you the genealogies of the solar
and lunar races and of other kings. (Lord) Brahma was born
from the (navel) lotus of (Lord) Hari (Visnu). (Sage) Marici
was the son of (Lord) Brahma. (Sage) Kasyapa was born from
Marici and Sun from Kasyapa. He (Sun) had three wives — Samjha,
R.ijni and Prabha. Rajfii was the daughter of Raivata. She
gave birth to a son (called) Revanta. Prabha (gave birth) to
Prabhata through the Sun. Samjna, the daughter of Tvasfr
(Vi^vakarman) (gave birth) to a son (called) Manu. The
twins Yamuna and Yama were born ( to Rajfii) . Chaya gave
birth to Savarni, Sani, Tapati and Vi^ti. Saihjiia gave birth to
Vaivasvata Manu and again the Asvins^.
5-6. Vaivasvata Manu had eight sons best of all but not
equal to him — Iksvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsfa, Saryati, Nari^yanta,
Prarh^u, Karusa and Prsadhra. They were of great prowess
and lived in Ayodhya.
7. Ila was the daughter (of Manu) . Pururavas (was born)
to her through Budha. That Ila (again) became Sudyumna (a
male) after delivering Pururavas.
8- 10a. The three kings Utkala, Gaya and Vinataiva
were from Sudyumna. The country of Utkala was given to
Utkala, the western part (of the earth) to Vinatasva and all
the quarters to the foremost king Gaya (with his capital at)
Gayapuri. Sudyumna obtained Pratisfhana by the words of
1 . For an account relating to and Cb&yfi See Ling. P. 65.

736 Agni Purd^
Vasi9(ha. After getting the kingdom, Sudyumna gave it away
to Pururavas.
1 Ob-11. !§akas (were) the sons of Nari^yanta. Ambari$a,
a devotee of (Lord) Vi^nu (was the son) of Nab'kaga and a
protector of the people. The race of Dhar$(aka (was) from
Dhr^ja. Sukanya and Anarta (were the sons) of Saryati. King
Vairohya (was the son) of Anarta.
12-16. Kuiasthali became the domain of Anarta. The
virtuous Raivata, known as Kakudmin was the eldest among
the himdred sons of Reva. He got the kingdom of Ku^thali.
He heard the science of music from Brahma in the company of
his daughter. In moment of the god passed ages of the world of
mortals. He returned to his city hurriedly surrounded by the
Yadavas. He made the beautiful Dvaravati (Dvaraka) having
many doors (as his capital) guarded by the Bhojas, Vr$pis and
Andhakas led by Vasudeva and others. He gave away (his
daughter) Revat! of spotless beauty in marriage to Baladeva.
Then He performed penance on the peak of the Sumeru moun¬
tain and reached the abode of (Lord) Visnu.
17. Nabhaga had two sons, that were VaUyas, who became
brahmins (later on). Karu^as (were born) from Karu^a, who
were of the warrior caste that were invincible.
1 8. Pr^adhra became a iadra on account of killing the cow of
his preceptor. Vikuk^i, the divine ruler, was born from Ik^vaku,
the son of Manu.
19-20. Kakutstha was bom from Vikuk^i and Suyodhana
was his son. Prthu was his son. Vi^vagaiSva was the son of Prthu.
His son was Ayus. Yuvanaiva was his son. Sravanta was bom
from Yuvanaiva. The city of iSravantika in the east (was his
capital).
21 . Brhadafva was born from Sravanta. Kuval&fva was the
next king. He got the name Dhundhum&ra (as he killed a
demon) named Dhundhu^ in olden days.
22. The three kings Drdl^aiva, Da^d^ and Kapila (were
the sons) of Dhundhumara. Haryafva and F!ramodaka (were
bom) from DrdHafva.

23. Nikumbha (was born) from Haryalva and Saihhatasva
from Nikumbha. Akr^a^va and Rari&lva were the two sons of
Samhat^va.
24. Yuvanaiva (was the son) of Rankiva. Mandhktr (was
born) from Yuvanaiva. Purukutsawas (born) fromMandhatr.
Mucukunda (was his) second (son).
25. Trasadasyu and Sambhuta^ (were born) from Purukutsa
through Narmada. Sudhanva was (bom) from Sambhuta. Then
Tridhanva (was born) from Sudhanva.
26. Taruna (was born) from Tridhanva and Satyavrata
(was) his son. Satyaratha (was bom) from Satyavrata.
Hariscandra (was) his son.
27-29. Rohitalva (was bom) from Harilcandra. Vrka was
(born) from Rohitalva^.Bahu (was born) from Vfka and Sagara
from Bahu. His dear (wife) Prabha v^'is the mother of sixty
thousand sons. (His other wife) Bhanumati^ (gave birth) to
Asamafijasa from that king by the grace of the pleased (sage)
Aurva. The sons of Sagara were burnt by Vijpu (Lord V49u
in the form of sag^ Kapiia) as they were digging up the earth.
Aihsuman (was bom) from Asamafijasa. Dilipa was (born) from
Amsuman.
30. Bhagiratha (was born) from Dilipa. He brought down
the Ganges (from the heaven). Nabhaga (was born) from
Bhagiratha and Ambarl^a from Nabhaga.
31. Sindhud^pa (was bom) from Ambarisa. Srutayu is
known to be his son. Rtuparpa was (born) from Srutayu.
Kalma^pada (was) his son.
32. Sarvakarma (was born) from Kalma^apada. Anaranya
was (bom) from him. Nighna (was born) from Anarariya,
Anamitra (from Anaranya) and Raghu (from Anamitra).
33. Dilipa was (born) from Raghu. Aja (was) the (next)
king (born) from Dilipa. Dirghabahu (was born) from Aja and
Kkla and Ajapala were (born in order).
1 . Differs from Vi. P. IV. 3. 1 7 Anaranya was bom from Trasa¬
dasyu.
2. The list here omits certain names. See Vi. P. IV. 3. 25.
3. The names of the wives of Sagara difler frmn Vi, P. IV. 4. 1.

Agni Purana
34-35. Then Dasaratha was born. He had four sons who
were all partial manifestations of (Lord) Narayaiia (Vi§nu).
Rama was the eldest among liis (sons). That foremost of the
Raghus was the ruler at Ayodhya and the Killer of fthe demon)
Ravana. (Sage) Valmiki composed his life accounts after hear¬
ing that from (sage) Narada.
36. Kusa and Lava, the furtherers of the family, (were)
the sons of Rama through Sita. Atithi was born from Ku4a.
Nisadha (was) his son.
37. Nala was born from Nisadha. Nabha was born from
Nala. Pundarikawas (born) from Nabha. Then Sudhanva was
born.
38. Devanika (was born) from S\idhanva and Ahinasva
was his son. Sahasralva (was bora) from Ahinasva and Candraloka was born then.
39. Tarapida (was born ) from Candraloka. Candraparvata
fwas born) from him. Bhanuratha (was born) from Candragiri
( parvata) . Srutayu ^vas his son. These are known to be the
descendants of the Iksvakii family that bore (the name of) the
Solar race.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-FOUR
Description of the Lunar race
Fire-god said :
1 . I shall describe the Lunar race. It would destroy the
sin of one who reads it. Brahma was born from the navel-lotus
of (Lord) Visnu. .(Sage) Atri was the son of Brahma. (Soma
was born) from Atri.
2-5. Soma performed the Rajasuya (sacrifice) and gave
away (the suzerainty over) the three worlds as the fees (for
the priest) . When the final (bathing) was finished, the wives
of the mortals who desired to look at his (beautiful) form
served him being tormented by the arrows of the god of love.
(Goddess) Lak$mi deserted (lord) Naraya^a. Sinivali, Dyuti,

Pusfi, Prabha, Kuhu, Kirti, Vasu and Dhfti respectively
deserted Kardama, Vibhavasu, the undecaying Dhata, Prabhakara, Havisman, (the husband) Jayanta, Marica Kalyapa and
(husband) Nandi and entertained Soma alone then.
6-7. Soma also bestowed his afiection on them as if they
were his wives. The husbands of these (women) were not able
to curse him or (punish him) with the weapons, although he
had done a misdeed, as he had obtained suzerainty over the
seven worlds by means of his penance.
8-10. Being influenced by their submission his mind
faltered. Soma seduced hastily the glorious Tara, the wife of
Brhaspati (the preceptor of the celestials) and thus insulted the
son of iKhgiras ( Brhaspati) . On account of this (incident) there
was the battle well-known as Tarakamaya (involving the
celestials) between the celestials and the demons causing great
destruction to the world. Brahma (intervened and) prevailed
upon Usanas (preceptor of the demons) (to shed his wrath)
and entrusted Tara to (the care of) Ahgiras (Brhaspati).
II. Guru (Brhaspati) finding her pregnant said to her
“Shed the child in the womb”. The child that was delivered
was effulgent and said “I am the son of Moon”.
12-13, Thus Budha was born from Soma. Pururavas was
his son. The nymph Urvasi deserted heaven and was enamou¬
red of him. O Great sage ! The king spent fiftynine years with
her.
14. There was only one fire in days of yore which was
made into three by him.^ Pururavas practised yoga and reached
the world of the Gandharvas.
15. Urvaiii (wife of Pururavas) gave birth to the kings
Ayus, Drdhayus, Asvayus, Ghanayus, Phrtiman, Vasu, Divijata
and Satayus^.
16-19. Nahusa, Vrddha^arman, Raji, Darbha and Vipapma
were the sons of Ayus. Raji had a hundred sons known as
Rajeyas. Raji having obtained a boon from (Lord) Visnu killed
1. For a detailed account «ee Vi. P. IV. 6. 77-94.
2. Sons are said to be only six in the Ptirdpas and MBh. — ^Ayu, DhimSn,
Am&vasu, Drdhftyu, and Satfiyu. See MBh. Adi. 75.24-25.

Agni Purina
the demons on the request of the celestials. He gave the status
of a son to Indra and bestowed his kingdom on him and ascen¬
ded the heavens (to fight with the demons). But tlje kingdom
of Indra was usurped by the wicked sons of Raji. Brhaspati
deluded the sons of Raji and restored that (kingdom) to Indra
by means of performing the appeasing (rites) of the planets.
Then they (the sons of Raji) became the followers of their own
dharma.
20. Nahusa had seven sons — Yati, Yayati,Uttama,Udbhava,
Paficaka, l§ary&ti and Meghapalaka.
21-23. Yati, even as a boy, contemplated on (Lord) Visnu
and attained Him. Then Devayani, the daughter to Sukra ( the
preceptor of the demons) , became the wife of Yayati. Then
Sarmi$tha, the daughter of Vrsaparva (became the wife) of
Yayati and had five sons. Devayani gave birth to Yadu and
Turvasu. Sarmis^ha, the daughter of Vrsaparva (gave birth) to
Druhya, Anu and Puru. Yadu and Puru, among them, (became)
the founders of dynasties.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENT\'-FIVE
Description of the dynasty of Tadu
Fire-god said :
1. Yadu had five sons — Nilafijika, Rz^hu, Krostu, Satajit
and Sahasrajit and Sahasrajit was the eldest among them.
2. ^atajit had three (sons) — Haihaya, Renuhaya and
Haya. Dharmanetra (was the son) of Haihaya. Sariihana (was
the son) of Dharmanetra.
3. Mahima was (the son) of Sariihana. Bhadrasenaka
(was bom) from Mahima. Durgama was. (bom) from Bhadrasena. Kanaka was (bom) from Durgama.
4. Krtavirya, Krtagni, Karaviraka and Kftaujas were the
four (sons) of Kanaka. Arjuna (K&rtaviry&rjuna) (was born)
from Krtavirya.

5-9. Suzerainty over the seven continents of the earth,
(possession of) thousand arms and invincibility by the enemy
in the battle and certain death at the hands of (Lord) Vi^^u in
case of leading an unrighteous life were conferred on (K^tavirya) Arjuna who was doing penance. That king Arjuna per¬
formed ten thousand sacrifices. By the remembrance of him*
(his name) there was no loss of property in the kingdom. The
kings would not certainly attain the position of Karta\irya by
(doing) sacrifices, (giving) gifts, (performing) penances, by
valour and by learning. Among the hundred sons of Kartavirya
(the following) five (were) foremost — Surasena, Sura, Dhrsjokta, Krsna and Jayadhvaja. (Jayadhvaja) was a great king
among the Avantayas.
10-11. Talajahgha (was born) from Jayadhvaja. The sons
ofTalajahgha formed the five branches of the Haihayas— -
Bhojas, Avantas, Vitihotras, Svayamj5tas and Saundikeyas.
Ananta was (born) from Vitihotra. Durjaya (was) king from
Ananta.
12. I shall describes the race of Kros|:u in which (Lord)
Hari Himself was born. Vrjinivan (was bom) from Kro^pi.
Svaha was (born) from Vrjinivan.
13. Ru$adgu (was) the son of Svaha and Gitcaratha (was)
his son. Saiabindu (was born) from Citraratha. He was a
great monarch and a staunch devotee of (Lord) Hari.
14-15. Among the ten thousand intelligent, handsome,
wealthy and radiant sons of Sa^bindu, PfthuSrava was the
foremost. Suyajfiaka was his son. Ufanas (was) the son of
Suyajiia. Titiksu (was) the son of Uianas.
16-18. Marutta was (born) from Titiksu. Kambalabarhisa
(was born) from him. (Rukmakavaca was bom from him) .
Fifty (sons) were (bom) from Rukmakavaca (among whom)
Rukmesu, Pfthurukmaka, Havis, Jyamaj^ha and P&paghna
(were) most prominent. Jyam^ha was a hen-pecked husband.
Vidarbha was (born) from Jyamagha through Sevya. Kaufika,
Lomap&da and Kratha (were) his sons. From- the excellent
Lomapada, Krti (was born) and Cidi (was) the sonof Kaufika.
His successor kings were hence known as Gaidyas.
19. Kunti (was born) from ELrath^, the son of Vidarbha.

Agni Purina
Dhrstaka (was the son) ofKunti. Nidhrti (was the son) of
Dhr§ta. His (son was) known as Udarka. Viduratha (was his
son).
20. Vyoma (was) the son of Da0rha (Viduratlia). It is
said that Jimuta was (born) from Vyoma. Vikala was the son
of Jimuta. Bhimaratha (was) his son.
21. Navaratha (was born) from Bhimaratha. Dfdharatha
was (born) then. Sakunti (was born) from Drdharatha. Karambhaka (was) from Sakunti.
22. Devarata was from Karambha. Devaksetra was his
son. (A son) by name Madhu (was) from Devaksetra. Dravarasa was from Madhu.
23. Puruhuta was from Dravarasa. Jantu was his son.
Satvata, the Yadava king of good quality, (was) the son of
Jantu.
24. Bhajamana, Vfsni, Andhaka and Devavrdha were the
four (sons) of Satvata. Their races were renowned.
25-26. Bahya, Vfsti, Krmi and Nimi were (the sons) of
Bhajamana. Babhru was from Devavrdha. The following verse
is sung about him: “We hear his virtues sung close by (in the
same way) as we had heard from a distant place. Babhru is the
foremost among men and (considered) by the celestials as
equal to Devavrdha.”
27. Babhru (had) four sons. (Those were) kings and
devotees of (Lord) Vasudeva (Hari). (They were Kuhura,
Bhajamana, Sini and Kambalabarhi;.
28. Dhr?nu (was the son) of Kuhura. Dhrti (was) the son
of Dhrsnu. Kapotaroma was from Dhrti. Tittiri (was) his son.
29. Nara (was) the son of Tittiri. Candanadundubhi (was)
his (son). Punarvasu (was) his son. Ahuka (was) the son of
Ahuki (wife of Punarvasu) .
30-33. Devaka was born from Ahuka and Ugrasena was
born then. Devavan and Upadeva are known to be the sons of
Devaka. They had seven sisters. (Devaka) gave them in
marriage to Vasudeva. They were Devaki, Srutadevi, Mitradevi,
Yaiodhara, Sridevi, Satyadevi and Surapi. Ugrasena had nine
sons among whom Kaihsa was the eldest, (the others being)
Nyagrodha, Sun&man, Kahku, ^anku (the protector of earth),
Sutanu, R&9trapala, Yuddhamu^fi and Sumu^tika.

34, Viduratha, the chief among the charioteers (was) the
son of Bhajamana. The powerful king Sura was the son of
Viduratha.
35. Sonalva and Svetav^ana (were) the two sons of that
mighty monarch. Sami, Satrujit and others were the five sons of
Sonasva.
36-37. Pratik?etra (was) the son of Sami and Bhojaka
(was the son) of Pratiksetra. Hrdika (was) the son of Bhoja.
Hrdika had ten sons — Krtavarma, Satadhanva, Devarha,
Bhi^ana and others. Kambalabarhis (was born) from Devarha.
Asamaujas was (then born from Kambalabarhis).
38-39. Sudaiiistra, Suvasa and Dhr^ta were (born) from
Asamaujas. Gandhari and Madri were the wives of Dhr?ta.
Sumitra was born to Gandhari. Madri gave birth to Yudhajit.
Anamitra and Sini (were the descendants) from Dhr§ta.
Devamidhu§a (was born) then.
40-43. Nighna (was) the son of Anamitra. Prasenaka and
Satrajit (were the sons) of Nighna. When Prasenawas wearing
the syamantaka }e.yfc\ got from Sun god by Satrajit and wander¬
ing in the forest, a lion killed him and carried away the
gem. The lion was killed by Jambavan (the king of bears) and
Jambavan was conquered by (Lord) Hari (Visnu). He got the
jewel and Jambavati ( the daughter of Jambavan) and went to
the city of Dvaraka (on the western coast of India in Gujarat).
(He) gave (the gem) to Satrajit. Satadhanu killed him
(Satrajit) . The famous Kfsna killed Satadhanu, recovered the
gem and entrusted the gem to Akrura in the presence of Bala
(deva) and the Yadava chiefs.
44. Kr§na thus got rid of the false accusation on him that
he had killed Satrajit. One who reads (this account) would go
to the heaven. Satyabhama (the daughter of Satyajit) became
the wife of Kr?pa.
45. Sini was born Irom Anamitra. Satyaka (was) the son
of Sini. Satyaki was bom from Satyaka. Dhuni was (born)
from Yuyudhana (Satyaki).
46. Yugandhara (was) the son of Dhuni. Svahya was
(born from him). He was invincible in battle. IRsabha and
K^etraka (were) his (sons). Svaphalkaka (was born) from
]^$abha.

Agni Purd^
47. Akrura (was) the son of l§vaphalka. Sudhaiivaka (was
born) from Akrura. Vasudeva and others (were bom) from
Sura. Prtha (Kunti) was the wife of Pandu.
48. Yudhisthira was born to Kunti (wife) of Pandu, from
Dharma (god of virtue), Vrkodara (Bhimasena) from Vaya
(Wind god), Dhanahjaya (Arjuna) from Indra and Nakula and
Sahadeva to Madri (the other wife of Pandu) .
49-51. (Bala) rama, Sarana and Durdama (were born) to
Rohini from Vasudeva. Susenaka was born first . to Vasudeva
through Devaki. (The other sons were) Kirtiman, Bhadrasena,
Jarukhya, Vimud^aka and Bhadradeha. Kaziisa killed these
six childern. Then Bala (rama) , Kr^pa, Subhadra, that speaks
sweet and C^desna (were born) . Slunba and others were the
sons of Jambavati from Kr^pa.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTYSIX
The manifestations of Lord
Fire-god said :
1-2. (The patriarch) Ka^yapa manifested as Vasudeva
and Aditi (his wife) as the excellent Devaki. Kripa was born
to Devaki and Vasudeva being endowed with penance for the
sake of the protection of righteousness, removal of unrighteous¬
ness, protection of the celestials and others and the destruction
of the demons and others.
3-5a. Rukmipi, Satyabhama, Satya, Nagnajiti, Gandhari, Lakfmapa, Mitravinda, Kalindi, J^bavati, Suiila,
Madri, Kausalya, Vijaya, J&yh and others were the sixteen
thousand wives (of Krfna) among whom Satyabhama served
(Lord) Hari(Kr9na).
5b-6. Pradyumna and others were bom to Kr^^a
through Rukmi^i, Bhima and others through Satyabhama,
Siunba and others through J&mbavat! and thus were among
the one hundred thousand sons of that wise man.

7-9. Yadavas were eighty thousand that were protected by
(Lord) Krsna. Pradyumna (son of Kr§na) had Aniruddha, who
was fond of war, as his son through Vaidarbhi. The mighty
Yadavas Vajra and others (were the sons) of Aniruddha. Thus
there were three crores and sixty lakhs of Yadavas. He (Knpa)
appeared for the destruction of the demons that afi9iicted men.
(Lord) Hari (Visnu) is born as a mortal in order to regularise
the duties (of men).
10. There were twelve battles between the celestials and
the demons for the sake of their (legitimate) portions. The first
(war of Visnu was in) the man-lion form. The second war (was)
as a dwarf.
11. The battle (fought) as the boar (was) the next one.
The fourth one was for the churning of the nectar. The sixth
one was the battle involving all the celestial bodies for the sake
of resuscitation.
12. (The seventh one was the destruction of) the three
cities. (The eighth one was for) the destruction of (the demon)
Andhaka. The ninth one (was) the killing of (the demon) Vrtra.
The deadly (poison of) halahala was conquered (in the tenth
one). (The demom) Kolahala (was subdued in the next one).
13. (The next one was) the form as the man-lion, the
protector of the celestials in olden days, that pierced the chest
of (the demon) Hiranyakafipu with his nails and made
Prahlada the king.
14. In (the dispute between) the celestials and the demons,
(the Lord) was bom of Kaiyapa and Aditi as a dwarf, deceived
the powerful (demon) Bali and restored the kingdom to Indra.
15. The manifestation as a boar (was made by Lord Vifnu)
and the demon Hiranyaksa was killed, protecting the celestials
thus. He lifted up the earth that got submerged and was
praised by the celestials.
16. (The mount) 'Mandara was made the churning rod,
(the serpent) Vasuki as the string and (the ocean) was churned
by the celestials and the demons. The ambrosia (that was
obtained) was given to the celestials.
17. The celestials were in the same way protected at the
time of the battle of the stars after preventing Indra, Guru, the

746 Agni PwSvia
celestials and demons (from a combat) and thus the Lunar
race was made to flourish.
18. (The sages) Vi^vamitra, Vasistha, Atri and Brahma
protected the celestials in the battle after warding off the
demons that were having infatuation and hatred.
19. Lord Hari (Vignu) was the refuge of (Lord) Isana (Siva)
that had (Lord) Brahma as the charioteer of the earth, the
chariot. The protector of the celestials and the destroyer of the
demons burnt the three cities.
20. (Lord) Rudra (Siva) was attacked by (the demon)
Andhaka desirous of carrying away Gauri (consort of Siva).
(Lord) Hari, who was fond of (his beloved) Revati killed the
demon Andha.
21 . (Lord) Visnu became the foam of the water at the
time of the battle between the celestials and the demons and
killed (the demon) Vrtra that afflicted the celestials, and pro¬
tected the virtues of the celestials.
22. (Lord) Hari, (manifested as) Parasurama, conquered
the demons such as Salva and protected the celestials after
killing the wicked ksatriyas (kings).
23. Madhusudana (the destroyer of demon Madhu) took
away the demon of HMahala poison from Mahesvara and des¬
troyed the fear of the celestials.
24. The demon Kolahala was conquered by Him at the
battle of the celestials and demons. All the celestials were
protected by (Lord) Visnu by protecting righteousness.
25. The kings, princes, sages and the gods are the mani¬
festations of (Lord) Hari, whether (their names) have been
narrated or not (in the traditional list) .

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-SEVEN
Th^ narration of the lineage of Ahga
Fire-god said :
1 . Varga (was) the son of Turvasu. Gobhanu was his son..
Traisani was (born) from Gobhanu. Karandhama (was the
son) ofTaraisani.
2. Marutta was (born) from Karandhama. Dusyanta (was)
his son. Varutha was ( the son) of Dusyanta. Gandira (was born)
from Varutha.
3. Gandhara(was born) from Gandira. The mighty five
peoples — Gandharas, Keralas, Colas, Pandyas and Kolas (were
born) then.
4. Druhyu and Babhrusetu^ (were the sons of Gandhara).
Purovasu(was born) from Babhruselu. Then Gandhara (was born)
and Dharma from Gandhara. Ghrta was (born) from Dharma.
5. Vidu.sa (was born) from Ghrta. Pracetas (was born)
from him. He had a hundred sons (among whom) Anadra,
Sabhanara, Caksusa and Paramc^uka (were foremost).
6. Kalanala (was born) from Sabhanara. Sriijaya, was
born from Kalanala. Puranjaya (was the son) of Srftjaya.
Janamejaya was his son. ^
7-8. Mahasala (was) his son. Mahamanas was his son.
O Brahman ! Uslnara (was) from him. He had then a son
Nrga through (his queen) Nrga, (a son) Nara through (his
queen) Nara and (a son) Krmi (through) Krmi. Suvrata was
born (to him) through Dfsadvatl.
9. Prthudarbha, Viraka, Kaikcya and Bhadraka were the
four sons of Sibi. There were prosperous regions in their names.
10. Titiksu was born from Usinara. Ru^adratha (was born)
from Titiksu. Paila was (born) from Rusadratha. Sutapa (was)
the son of Paila.
1 1 . The great ascetic Bali (was born)' from him. Anga,
Vanga, Mukhyaka, Pundra and Kalinga (were the sons) of
Bali. Bali, the ascetic, (generated them) by means of his power.
1. Given as two separate names and subsequent names also differ. See

Agni Purdipa
12. Dadhivahana was (born) from Anga. Diviratha (was
the next) king after him. Dharmaratha (was born) from Divi¬
ratha. Citraratha (was) his son.
13. Satyaratha (was born) from Citraratha. Lomapada
(was) his son. Caturahga (was born) from Lomapada. Prthulaksa (was) his son.
14. Campa was (born) from Prthiilaksa. Haryahgaka was
from Campa. Bhadraratha was from Haryahga. Brhatkarman
(was) his son.
15. Bfhadbhanu was born from him. Brhatmavat (was)
from Bfhadbhanu. Jayadratha was from him. Brhadratha (was
born) from Jayadratha.
16. Vi^vajit (was born) from Brhadratha. Karna was from
Visvajit. Vrsasena (was the son) of Karna. Prthusena was his
son. These are the kings born in the race of Anga. Describe
me the race of Puru.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-EIGHT
The description of the lineage of Puru
Fire- god side :
1 . Janamejaya was (born) from Puru. Pracinavan was his
son. Manasyu was from Pracinavan. Vltamaya (was) the
(next) king from him.
2. Sundhu was from Vltamaya. Bahuvidha was the son of
Sundhu. Sariiyati (was) from Bahuvidha. Rahovadl^ (was) his
son.
3-4. Bhadrasva (was) his son. Bhadrasva had ten sons —
Rkseyu, Krscyu, Sannateyu, Ghrteyu, Giteyu, the noble
Sthandilcyu, Dharmeyu, Sannateyu (?) , Krteyu and Matinara.
5. Tamsurodha, Pratiratha and Purasta were the sons of
Matinara. Kanva was (born) from Pratiratha. Medhatithi was
from Kanva.
i. Names differ from VI. P. IV. 19.

6-8. Dusyanta. Pravira, Sumanta and Vira (were) the
four (sons) from Tamsurodha. Bharata was (born) from
Dusyanta through l§akuntala. The descendants known as
Bharatas were mighty. When the sons of Bharata were lost on
account of the wrath of the mother, then the Maruts (gods)
brought Bharadvaja, son of Brhaspati and made (him) to meet
(Bharata). Vitathawas born as a consequence of rituals (done
by Bharadvaja).
9-11. That Vitatha also generated five sons — Suhotra,
Suhotr, Gaya, Garbha and the great Suketu, Kapila had two
sons — Kausika and Grtsapati. The brahmins, warriors, trades¬
men were the sons of Grtsapati. The Dirghatamas were the sons
ofKasi (Kausika?). Dhanvantari was (born) then. Ketuman
was his son.
12. Hemaratha (was born) from Ketuman. He was wellknown as Divodasa. Pratardana (was) from Divodasa. Bharga
and Vatsa (were born) from Pratardana.
13. Anarka was from Vatsa. K^emaka was born from
Anarka. Var$aketu (was) from K^emaka. Vibhu is remembered
( to be) from Var§aketu.
14. Anarta was the son of Vibhu. Sukumaraka (was the
son) of Vibhu. Satyaketu (was born) from Sukumara. Vatsabhumi (was born) from Vatsaka.
15. Bfhat (was) the son of Suhotra. AJamIdha, Dvimidha
and the brave Purumidha were the three sons of Brhat.
16. The valorous Jahnu was born to Ajamidha and Kesini.
Ajakalva was born from Jahnu. Balaka^va (was) his son.
17. KuSika (was the son) of Balakasva, and Gadhi, the
Indra, (was born) from KuiSika. Satyavati (was) the daughter
of Gadhi and Visvamitra his excellent son.
18-20. Devarata and Katimukha were the sons of Vi£vamitra. SunahSepa (known also as) A$(aka (was) the other
(son). Santi was born as son to Ajamidha through Nilini.
Purujati (was born) from (Su) iSanti. Bahya^va (was bom)
from Purujati. The five kings Mukula, Sffijaya, Brhadi^u,
Yavinara and Krmila (were) from Bahyaiva. They were known
as the Paftc&las.

Agni PurJ^a
21-23. (The descendants) of Mukula, (known as) the
Maukulyas were brahmins endowed with property. Gahcalva
was born from Mukula. Gaficasva had the twins — Divodasa and
Ahalya. iSatananda (was born) from SaradvaCa through
Ahalya. Satyadhrk (was born) from Satananda. Then a pair,
Krpa and Krpi, (were born from Satyadhrk). Maitreya (was
born) from Divodasa and then Somapa (from Maitreya).
Pahcadhanus (was born) from Srfijaya. Somadatta was his son.
24. Sahadeva (was born) from Somadatta. Somaka (was
born) from Sahadeva. Jantu was from Somaka. Pr^ata (was)
the son of Jantu.
25. Drupada (was) from Prsata. Dhrs^adyumna (was)
from him. Dhrstaketu was his son. ^k$a was born to Ajamidha
through Dhumini.
26. Saihvarana was born from Rk$a. Kuru (was) then
(born) from Saihvarana. He migrated from (the city of)
Prayaga and founded (the kingdom of ) Kuruk^etra.
27. Sudhanva, Sudhanu, Pariksit and Arimejaya (were the
sons) of Kuru. Suhotra was from Sudhanva. Cyavana was born
from Suhotra.
28-29. Seven other sons such as Brhadratha, Ku^a, Vira,
Yadu, Pratyagraha, Bala and Matsyakali, were born through
(his queen) Girika by propitiating (the sage) Vasistha.
Ku^agra was from King Brhadratha. Vrsabha was born from
KuiSagra and Satyahita was his son.
30. (His son was) Sudhanva, Orja was his son. Sambhava
was (born) from Crja. Jarasandha (was) from Sambhava.
Saliadeva was his son.
31. Udapi (was born) from Sahadeva. Srutakarmaka
(was born) from Udapi. The righteous Janamejaya was the
descendant of Pariksit.
32. Trasadasyu (was born) from Janamejaya. Suratha,
Srutasena, Ugrasena and Bhimasena (are) the names of the
sons of Jahnu.
33. Janamejaya had two sons Suratha and Mahiman.
Viduratha was born from Suratha. Rk?a was born from
Viduratha.

34. Bhimasena was the son of Rk$a^ the second. Pradpa
(was) from Bhimasena. Santanu (was the son) of Pradpa.
35. Devapi, Balhika and Somadatta (were born) from
Santanu. Somadatta, Bhuri, Bhurisravas and Sala were born
from Balhika.
36-38. Santanu had Bhl$ma through Gahga and Vicitraviryaka through Kali ( Satyavati) . Kfsna Dvaipayana begot
Dhrtarafp'a) Pandu, and Vidura through the wife of Vicitravirya. Yudhi^(hira, Bhimasena and Arjuna were the three sons
of Panqlu through Kunti and Nakula and Sahadeva through
MadrI by divine agency. Saubhadra (Abhimanyu born to
Subhadra) (was the son) of Arjuna. Farik^it (was born) from
Abhimanyu. •
39-40. BraupadI was the wife of the Pandavas. Through
her Prativindhya was born to Yudhisthira, (Srutasena) from
Bhimasena, Srutakirti from Dhanahjaya (Arjuna), Srutavarma
from Sahadeva and l^atanlka was the (son) of Nakula.
Ghatotkaca was another (son) of Bhimasena through Hidimba.
41 . These are the past and future kings. There is no count
of their numbers. O Brahmin ! They have gone along with
the passage of time. Lord Hari (Vi^nu) is really the time.
Hence one should worship Him. Hence one should offer obla¬
tion to fire intended for Him that would yield all the desires.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND SEVENTY-NINE
The description of the potent remedies
Fire-god said :
1 . I shall describe the science of medicine, that was pro¬
pounded by lord Dhanvantari to SuJruta, the essence that
would revive the dead.
Suiruta said :
2. Describe to me the science of medicine that would cure
1 . See verse 25 for Rksa, the first.

Agni PurSna
the diseases of men, horses and elephants and also the potent
combinations and potent charms that would revive the dead.
Dhanvantari said :
3-7. One that is having fever should be made to fast by
the physician protecting his strength and then feed him with
gruel made of fried paddy and dry ginger. The patient having
thirst at the end of the fever (should be given) water boiled
with mttsta (cyprerus rotundus), parpafa (oldenlandia), tdira
(the fragrant root of a plant), sandal, udicjfa (a kind of per¬
fume) and dry ginger. After six days, (the patient) may be
made to drink pungent food certainly. After the disorder has
subsided, (medicated) oil should be rubbed (on the body).
Then purgative should be given. Old nivSra (rice grown
without cultivation), saspika (a kind of rice), red paddy
and pramodaka (a kind of rice) and similar things and barley
converted into any form arc the favourite (fo(^) at (the time
of)fev.er. Green gram, masura (a kind of pulse), chick-pea,
horse-gram, saussurea, adhaka (a kind of pulse), ndraka (?),
karkofaka (a kind of paddy) ^ kafolbaka (?), snake-gourd, neem
together with the fruitSj parpafa and pomegranates (could safely
be used by a patient) having fever.
8. An emetic is commended in the case of downward
hemorrhage and a purgative in upward (hemorrhage). The
six constituents^ except the dry ginger (should be given) as the
drink.
9-10. Flour of barley, wheat, fried paddy, barley, Sdli {a
kind of rice), masura^ makuffha (a kind of i^ice), chick-pea,
green-gram and eatables (made) of wheat mixed with ghee and
milk are beneficial. Honey and the juice of vj-^a (a kind of
drug) are good. Eating old Sdli rice is beneficial in dysentry.
11. The food .that does not cause excessive (motion), and
that mixed with the barks of lodhra (a kind of tree) are
commended. One should avoid taking food that causes excess
of wind. One should always make (extra) efforts in (treating)
the enlargement of spleen.
12. (Those suffering from dropsy) should take fried barley
with milk. VdsiOka (chenopodium album) mixed with ghee,
1 . These are musta, parpafeka etc. noticed in verse 4 above.

wheat, /5/i rice and bitter things are beneficial for those liaving
dropsy.
13- 1 4a. Wheat, Sdli rice, green gram, cow’s urine, rksa^
kkadiray abhaydy paticakola (the five spices — long pepper etc.),
venison, neem, dhdtri (a variety of myrobalan) , snake-gourd,
the juice of citron, nutmeg, dried radish and saindhava (a kind
of rock-salt) (are good for dropsy) .
14b- 16. Water (boiled) with khadira is commended as a
drink for those affected with leprosy. (Similarly) masura (a
kind of pulse) and green-gram (with water should be given)
for drinking. Old idU rice may be eaten. The juice of venison
(mixed) with neem and parpafaka and vegetables, vidaiiga
(embelia ribes) , black pepper, musta^ ku^fha, lodhra^ natron (are
also good) . Paste of red arsenic and vacd (a kind of aromatic
root) with (cow’s) urine cures leprosy.
17-19a. Cakes, ku^fhoy kulmdsa (black barley) and barley
etc. are beneficial for diabetes. Things made out of
cooked barley, green gram, horse-gram, old MU rice, vegetables
that are bitter and astringent, bitter green things, oils (extract¬
ed) from .sesamum, Ugru (the leaves of a kind of tree), vibhitaka
(a kind of myrobalan) and iflgudi and greengram, barley, wheat
and grains stored for a year (are also good).
1 Ob-21. The juice of venison is commended as food for
those suffering from pulmonary consumption. Horse-gram,
green-gram, black pepper etc. and dry radish compounded with
venison or cakes or bird’s flesh or compounded with curd and
pomegranade juice, dressed with the juice of citcon, honey,
grapes and vyosa (dried ginger, long and black pepper) and
cooked barley, wheat and Sdli rice should be given as food to
an asthma patient.
22. Decoction made of the ten kinds of drugs (such as
etc.), Art/a, rajnJ and horse-gram should be drunk with
cakes in order to get relief from breathing (difficulty) and
hiccough.
23. One should take dr>' radish, horse-gram, mUla (tlie
root of long pepper) and juice of venison mixed with cooked
barley, wheat and Sdli rice and old uSira.
24. One who is having a swelling should eat molasses

.1^1 Purdjia
together with pathyd (the long pepper) or molasses with dry
ginger. Both buttermilk and citraka{a kind of root) are excellent
remedies for diarrhoea.
25-26. Old barley, wheat, sdli rice, juice of venison, greengram, dmalaka (one variety of myrobalan), dates, grapes, jujube
fruits, honey, clarified butter, milk, sakra^ neem, parpataka, vrsa^
buttermilk and arista ace always commended for rheumatic
patients.
27-28a. Purgatives should be given to those having heart
disease. Long pepper is beneficial for those having hiccough.
Buttermilk, gruel made from the fermentation of boiled rice,
spirit distilled from molasses together with cold water (arc
also beneficial). MuklaSy natron and wine are commended in any
distemper due to drunkeness.
28b-30a. A person who has been injured (on the chest)
should drink lac together with honey and milk. Wasting
diseases could be cured by eating the essence of meat and by
protecting the digestive power. One should cat red ^a/i, nivara
and kalama varieties of rice, cooked barley, meat, vegetables,
natrum and Safi.
30b-31. In the same way pathyd (is beneficial) for piles. Its
scum (should be used) with buttermilk and water. Musta should
be repeatedly used. Ointment with turmeric and citraka should
be applied. Modified forms of boiled barley, Sdli rice, vdstuka
(chenopodium album) and natrum (are also beneficial).
32. Water-melon, cucumber, and wheat mixed with milk,
(juice of) sugarcane and ghee are commendable for painful
discharge of urine. Scum and wine etc. (are commended) for
drinking.
33-34. Fried paddy, flours of fried barley, honey, flesh
roasted on a stick, brinjal and gourd are drinks for remedying
vomitting. Cooked Sdli rice, water and milk simply heated or
boiled (would be beneficial for the same). Pills of tnmta and
molasses held in the mouth would remove thirst.
35-37a. Modified forms of cooked barley, cakes made of
dried radish, vegetables, snake-gourd and tender shoots of
cane would remedy the stiffness of thigh. One should take food
consisting of old wheat, barley, Sdli rice together with soup
made of green-gram dihaka and mas&ra (different kinds of

pulses) , scsamum, juice of venison, saindhava (a kind of rocksalt) , ghee, grapes , dried ginger, dmalaka (a kind of myrobalan)
and black pepper.
37b-38. One who is having a dry spreading itch (should
use) juice of pomegranate together with candied sugar, honey
and grapes. Red paddy, wheat, barley, green-gram and other
such light (eatables are also beneficial). shoots of
cane, vdstnka and natrum\(may also be used).
39. Water, candied sugar and honey are commended for
remedying acute gout. Duivd (a kind of gras.s) soaked in ghee is
beneficial in nasal diseases.
40. Oil made up of the juice of bhrngardja (a kind of shrub)
or the juice of dhdtri (a variety of myrobalan) (may be used)
as sternutatory in all diseases relating to the head.
41-42. O Brahmin ! The eating of sesamum and drinking
cold water and eating cold food are said to strengthen teeth
and also give supreme satisfaction. Gargling with sesamum oil
would also strengthen teeth. The powdered vidcihga (mixed
with) goat’s urine is used in destroying all worms.
43. The fmits of dhdtri (a variety of myrobalan) and clari¬
fied butter are excellent as an ointment for head for the dest-.
ruction of all diseases relating to head. The food should consist
of oily and hot things.
44. Filling ear with oil or the urine of goat is excellent for
the destruction of pain in ear. O Brahmin ! All kinds of oysters
(may also be used).
45-48. A wick made by compounding red chalk, sandal,
lac and buds of mdlati (a kind of jasmine flower) would cure
the whiteness in eye. Vyofa (dried ginger), long pepper and black
pepper) mixed with the triphald (the three myrobalans taken
collectively), and water with blue vitriol would cure all eye
diseases. The collyrium of blue vitriol will also produce the
same result. (If collyrium) fried in ghee,, ground on a stone
together with lodhra^ sour gruel and natrum is sprinkled, it
would be beneficial in all the diseases of eyes. Application of
ointment of red chalk and sandal is commended for the exter¬
nal eye. One should always use triphald (the three kinds of
myrobalans) for curing the diseases of the eyes.

Ag/?i Purdna
49-51 a. One who desires to have a Ion," life should take (a
mixture of) honey and clarified butter every night. Milk and
ghee boiled with the juice of Satdvari arc known to be the
givers of vitality. Similarly kalambikdSy black-gram,# milk and
ghee increase vitality. Triphald is known to be the giver of long
life (when used) with madhuka as before. (The same) together
with the juice of madhuka would arrest all senile dcigeneration.
5 lb-52. O Brahmin ! Ghee heated with vacd would destroy
the defects due to goblins. Food offered to manes would give
intellect and secure all objects. A decoction made of the paste
of bald is beneficial when besmeared.
53. Oil together with rdsnd and sahacaya (is good) for
deranged wind. Food that does not cause excessive phlegm is
commended for abscess.
54. Flours of fried barley made into balls as well as amid
are commended (for making the abscess) to ripen. The pulve¬
rised neem (is used) to make (the ripened abscess to) open and
for healing,
55. The treatment of women after delivery consists mainly
of offering oblations to all the creatures. The use of amiilet for
women after the delivery as well as for animals is always
beneficial.
56-60a. Chewing the leaves of neem is the remedy for one
bitten by a snake. The (shoots of ) palmyrah, ke{ya^ old oil, old
barley and old ghee (are also good for the same). A fumigation
with the plumes of peocock with ghee (is good) for one bitten
by a scorpion, A plaster of the seeds of paldSa ground with the
juice oiarka (plant) (is also beneficial). Black pepper or yellow
myrobalan with the three kii>ds of myrobalans (is beneficial) for
one bitten by a scorpion. If the juice of arka (plant), gingelly
oil, flesh and molasses in equal proportion is drunk, it would at
once destroy the poison due to (the biting of) a dog that is
difficult to cure. The root of rice (if ground) with equal part of
trivrt (three kinds of myrobalans) and clarified butter and drunk,
it would destroy quickly the poisons due to snakes, and other
insects even if they are very powerful.
60b-61. (A mixture of) sandal, padmaka, kuslha^ latdmbu (?),
fZ/fra, pdfaldt nirgunijli, Sdrivd and selu (?) would destroy the poison
due to spiders. O Brahmin ! Molasses and dried ginger are

commended as eliminator (of toxic matter) from head.
62. Nothing excels oil or ghee for anointing, as a drink or
as diuretic. Fire is the best sweating agent. Cold water is the
best astringent.
63. The trivft (the three myrobalans) is the best purgative.
So 2l\so madam is the best emetic. Oil, clarified butter, and
honey are the best remedy for (deranged) wind, biles and
phlegm, as diuretic, and emetic.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTY
The remedies for all the diseases
Dhanvantari said:
1 a. Diseases are considered to be (of four kinds such as),
relating to the body, relating to the mind, arising accidentally
and arising naturally.
1 b-2a. Fever, leprosy and the like (are considered) to be
relating to the body. Anger etc. are considered to be relating
to the mind. Those that are due to a blow etc. (are known) as
accidental. Hunger, old age and the like (are known) as
natural.
2b-3'. One should give ghee, molasses and salt along with
gold to a bralunin on a Sunday in order to get rid of the
diseases relating to the body and those that are accidental.
One who makes a gift of oil for bathing to a brahmin on- a
Monday would become free from all diseases.
4. Oil should be given on Saturday. One who makes a gift
of food with cow’s milk in the (month of) Aioina (OctoberNovember), (would also get rid of the diseases). One who
bathes the liAga (representative symbol of Lord Siva) with
ghee and milk would become free from diseases.
5. One should offer unto fire durvS (grass) dipped in the
three sweet things (sugar, honey and clarified butter) with ( the
recitation of) thegtyatri {mantra). One should bathe and make
the offering in thatasterism in which one got the disease.

Agni Purdna
6. A hymn to (Lord) VUt^u would remove the diseases that
are mental. Listen to me. (I shall describe) the defects (of the
humours) wind, bile and phlegm as well as the ingredients of
the body (such as blood). •
7. O Susruta ! The food that is eaten gets two forms after
leaving the stomach. A part becomes secreted and the other,
the constituent fluid of the body.
• 8. The part that is secreted is the impurity such as feces,
urine, sweat, rheum of the eyes, the mucus of the nose, the earwax and the bodily impurity.
9-1 Oa. From the constituent fluid, serum (is formed) which
again is turned into blood. Flesh (is formed) from blood and then
fat and bones from fat. Sap (is formed) from bones and then
semen. From semen, complexion and strength (are got) .
10b- 11a. One should render treatment (to a patient) after
examining (the nature of) the country, the disease, the strength,
the stamina, the season and the nature (of the patient). Then
the strength of the remedy (should also be examined).
11b- 14. One should reject the rikta^ days, Tuesdays and
Saturdays and baneful (combination) (and begin treatment) after
worshipping (Lord) Hari (Vi§iiu), a cow, a brahmin, the Moon
and the Sun and the celestials. O Learned one ! Listen to this
sacred formula (that has to be recited) before commencing the
treatment. May (the gods) Brahma, Daksa, Alvins, Rudra,
Indra, the Earth, the Moon, the Sun, the Wind, the Fire, the
sages, the collection of herbs and the hosts of spirits protect you.
Let this medicine be like the elixir of life of the sages, the
nectar of the gods and the ambrosia of the outstanding
serpents.”
15-16. A coimtry abounding in trees and hslving plenty of
water is known as an upa (marshy) and would produce (excess
of), wind and phlegm. (A country) that is devoid of (the above
features) (is known ai) jifigala (rural or picturesque). A country
that has trees and water in moderate proportion is known as
sSdhdrat^ (ordinary). (The country known as) jdAgala (pro¬
duces) excessive bile. The sddhSrana (type) is known as
moderate.
1. The fourth, ninth and fourteenth days of a lunar fcfftnight.

1 7. It is said that wind is dry, cool and unsteady, bile is
hot like the three kinds of astringents and phlegm is steady,
acid, unctuous and sweet.
1 8. They get increased by things having the same (qualities)
and get abated by things having the opposite (qualities).
Things that have sweet, sour and saline taste generate phlegm
and destroy wind.
19. Those that arc pungent, bitter and astringent produce
wind and destroy phlegm. Similarly those that are pungent,
sour and saline are known to increase bile.
20. Those that are bitter, sweet and astringent destroy
bile. This is not the effect of the taste but only of its chemical
action.
21. O Susruta ! Those that are stimulant and hot destroy
phlegm and wind. Those that are cold destroy bile. They (the
herbs) exert their influence according to their qualities.
22. It is said that phlegm gets collected, deranged and
subsided in winter, spring and summer respectively.
23. O Susruta ! wind is said to get collected, deranged and
subsided in the nights of summer, rainy season and autumn
(respectively).
24. Bile is said to get collected, deranged and subsided in
the rainy season, autumn and fore-winter (respectively) .
25. The three (seasons)^ beginning with the rainy (are
said to be) visargas. The three (seasons)^ beginning with winter
and ending with summer (are) adana.
26-3 la. The visarga relates to the moon and the dddna is
stated to be relating to the fire. The moon going round the
three seasons such as the rainy etc. by turns produces the three
tastes — sour, saline and sweet in order. The sun going round
the three seasons such as winter and the like increases the three
tastes — bitter, astringent and pungent flavours in order. As the
duration of night increases, the strength of men also increases.
When they decrease, (the strength) also decreases. During the
beginning, middle and end of nights, eating, days and one’s
1 . Rainy season, autumn and fore-winter.
2. Winter, spring and summer.

Agni Purit^a
age, phlegm, bile and wind get deranged. They are said to get
collected before the beginning of their derangement and get
appeased after their derangement.
31b-34a. O Brahmin ! All the diseases are caftsed by
excessive eating or not eating or forcing or retaining the flow
( of urine etc. ) . Two parts of the belly should be filled with
food, one part with drink and one part should be left free for
the wind etc. to work. A remedy is only that which is the
opposite of the cause of a disease. This is what should be done.
I have described to you the essence.
34b-36a. (Though) it is said that phlegm, bile and wind
have their places above and below the umbilical region and
the regions of the anus and the buttocks (respectively) in the
body, they are capable of coursing through the entire body.
Especially wind (can do so). Heart is at the centre of body
and it is known to be the place of mind.
36b-39a. It is said that a man of windy temperament
would be emaciated, have scanty hair, be fickle-minded,
garrulous, have uneven wind, and feel - flying in the air in his
dream. A man of bilious temperament is said to be having
ultimely grey hair. He would be irritable and would perspire
copiously. He would be fond of sweets and would see glowing
things in dream. A phlegmatic man would have strong body
and firm mind. He would be brilliant. He will have glossy
hair on the head. He would see clear water in dream.
39b-40a. O The foremost among the sages ! Men of windy,
bilious and phlegmatic temperaments are known to be tdmasa
(inactive), rdjasu (passionate) and sdtlvika (virtuous) (respec¬
tively) .
40b-43a. Raktapitta (haemoptysis) (is caused) by excessive
coition and engaging in doing hard (physical) work. The wind
in the body gets deranged on account of eating bad food or on
account of grief. O Brahmin ! Bile gets deranged on account
of internal heat, eating hot food, making a journey as well as
due to fear. Phlegm gets deranged due to excessive drinking of
water, eating heavy food and lying down after eating. A lazy
man also gets his phlegm deranged.
43b. After knowing the diseases caused by (humours) wind

and the like from their characteristics, one should remedy them
(as below).
44. The characteristics of the disease due to the (derang¬
ed) wind are — pain in the bones, bitter taste in the mouth,
parched state of feeling in the mouth, yawning and bristling
of the pair.
4"). A disease due to (deranged) bile is marked by yellow¬
ness in the nails, eyes and veins, bitter taste in the mouth, thirst
and burning heat (in the body) .
46. Tlie characteristics of disease due to phlegm are
languor, flow of water (from the mouth), heaviness (of the
body), sweet taste in the mouth and longing for heat.
47. (Eating of) oil and hot food, anointing the body with
oil and bathing and drinking of oil and the like would appease
(deranged) wind. Clarified butter, milk, sugar and the rays of
the moon and the like would counter (deranged) bile.
48. The oil of the three myrobalans together with honey
and doing exercises etc. would remove (deranged) phlegm.
Contemplation on (Lord) Visnu and His worship would
appease all the diseases.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDERD AND EIGHTY-ONE
The description of the characteristics of the different tastes and the
qualities of the herbs
Dhanvantari said : —
1 . Listen to me ! I shall describe the tastes and the other
characteristics and merits of the herbs. A physician who knows
the properties of the herbs, such as taste, strength and flavour,
will be able to save kings and other people.
2. O One possessing powerful arms ! The tastes such as
sweet, sour and saline are stated to come from the moon. The
tastes — bitter, astringent and pungent — arc (known to be) from
fire.

Agni Purdjjia
3. The herbs have three flavours — bitter, sour and saline.
The strength (of the herbs) is said to be of two kinds — hot and
cold.
4-5a. O Foremost among the brahmins ! The effect of the
herbs is indescribable. Those that are sweet, astringent and
bitter are said to be having cold potency. The rest are stated
to be hot.
5b-6. Although gu^uci has the bitter taste, it is hot on
account of its high potency. O One who shows respect ! Pathya,
though an astringent, is (considered) hot. Although meat is
sweet, it is said to be hot.
7. The saline and sweet teistes would become sweet flavour.
The sour things that are hot are also said to become so. The
rest would have pungent flavour.
8. One has to determine the drugs that have got modified
in their potency and flavour from their efficacy. Honey, although
sweet, is said to be pungent in flavour.
9. (The herb) should be boiled with water, sixteen times
its proportion, until it comes down to four times the proportion.
This is the general rule for (preparing) a decoction wherever
(something else) has not been stated.
10-12. The decoction (thus prepared) (should be composed)
of water alone. In a decoction prepared with oil, it should be
four times that of the drug. A wise man should take equal
quantity (of water) to that of the herb. Then the herb and oil
should be added. Oil should be one-fourth the measure of the
substance. The herb that is free from water would be (known as)
extraction in oil. The process of preparing decoctions of tlie
herbs in oil has been explained. O Susruta ! (The method of
preparation) of the lambative is also similar.
13-15a. The decoction that is clear and having little
medicinal ingredient would be as above described. (The dosage)
for pulverised drugs is stated to be an ak^a (a particular measure
of weight equal to l^rnAfas) and four palas (a particular weight)
for the decoction. This measure is said to be middling. There is
no hard and fast rule about the dosage. O Fortunate one ! The
measure of the dosage has to be decided according to the age,
time, strength, digestive power, place, herb and disease.

15b>16a. Those tastes are known to be which
increase the quality of the ingredients. Those that are madkurdfy
arc specially known to increase the quality.
16b>17a. That substance which has the qualities in equal
proportion to the defects would be for betterment. The opposite
would subdue the effect.
1 7b-20. O Foremost among men ! There are said to be
three functions in this body, such as, eating, sleeping and
coition. One has to pay attention to these always. One would
get destroyed if there is no indulgence or is over-indulgence ( in
any one of these). An exhausted body has to be strengthened.
Obesity of a person should be reduced. The middle type has to
be protected. These are considered to be the three different types
of bodies. Gratification and non-grati6cation are said to be the
two courses of action. One should moderately eat (food) that is
good (for health) after the food already taken had been
digested.
21 -24a. O Foremost among men ! The remedies are classi¬
fied into five groups — ^juice, levigated powder, the distilled,
the cold and decoction. Juice is known to be that got by press¬
ing. Levigated powder is got by pulverising the drug after
heating. The distilled is that got after boiling. The cold one is
that allowed to cool the previous night. Decoction is that
distilled immediately after boiling. There are one hundred and
sixty ways of doing so. One who knows the ways would become
inconquerablc. That person is skilled in the preparation of
mixtures.
24b. The purity of food is for the sake of digestion. A goqd
digestion is the root cause of the strength of men.
25-30a. One should eat the three myrobalans together
with the rock-salt, that would give good complexion to a king.
(One would get similar benefit by using) the juice of venison
together with rock-salt or curd or small quantities of milk. One
whose constitution is windy should eat (a food) that has either
more juice or the same proportion of juice. It is said that
massaging (the body) (should be done) in sum'mer. In winter
it should be in equilibrium. It is known to be of middling type
in the spring. The intense massaging in the summer is first done
on the skin and then on the muscles, veins, blood and the body.

Agni Puf&na
The bones would get strengthened and become fleshy. A wise
man should massage well the shoulders, arms, shanks, knees,
collarbones and the chest as before as if (one is attacking)
an enemy. After having massaged the joints well, *one should
stretch them slowly without making a violent jerk.
30b-33. One should not do any physical exercise while the
food still remains undigested nor after taking food, nor after
drinking (water) . One should never do any exercise in the half
of the prahara^ after a quarter part of the day. One should
bathe in cold water (only) once. Bathing intrepid water would
remove fatigue. One should not forcibly retain the breath in
the heart. Physical exercises would remove the (excessive)
phlegm. Massaging would remove the (excessive) wind. Bathing
would remove the excessive bile. (One should not) expose his
body to sunlight or enjoy the company of women (after doing
exercises). Men should not do exercises affecting one’s body
imder the sunlight.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTWO
Description of horticulture
Dhanvantari said ;
1 . Now I shall describe the science of medicine relating
to trees. It is good to have a plak?a{x.Tcc) on the north, a banyan
tree on the east, a mango (tree) on the south and a holy fig
tree on the west.
2-4a. (It is better) to have thorny trees on the south near
the house. A garden should be near the house. Blooming sesa>
mum plants should be gathered and the trees should be planted
after worshipping a brahmin and the moon. The five fixed
asterisms sv&ti^ hasta, rohi^i, iravana and rnUla are commended for
planting the trees.
I. An eighth part of a day.

4b.-5. (The trees) should be planted such that they are
fed by rivers or should be made to be on the banks of a tank.
(The asterisms) kasta, magha^ amr&dM, aivini^ pusya dJidjyeffhS as
well as iatabhUcJi and the three uttaras {uttaraphdlgmiy uttard^d^ha
and uttarabhddrapada) {art good) for beginning (the construction)
of tanks.
6- 7a. It should be done after worshipping (lords) Varuna,
Vi|nu and Parjanya. (Trees such as) ariffa, ahka, punndgay SirUa^
priyangUf plantain, jamba, bakula and pomegranate (should be
planted) as above.
7b.-9. The planted trees should be watered morning and
evening in the summer season, on alternate days in the winter
season and in the night in the rainy (season) if the earth has
become dry. (Trees planted) twenty cubits apart are (deemed as)
excellent and sixteen (cubits) apart are (deemed as) medium.
There should be minimum twelve cubits (distance) in between
one tree and the other. Trees (planted) densely would not bear
fruits. They should first be pruned with a cutter.
1 0. (The trees) should be sprinkled with cold water mixed
with a paste of vidanga and ghee. If the fruits get destroyed,
(cold water should be sprinkled) with (a paste of) horse-gram,
black-gram, green-gram, barley and sesamum.
11-12. One should always sprinkle cold water with ghee
for (getting abundant) fruits and flowers. Sprinkling with the
excrements of sheep and goat and pulverised barley, sesamum
allowed to be soaked in meat and water for seven nights would
also increase the bearing of fruits and flowers in all the trees.
1 3. Sprinkling with the washings of the fish would also
increase the growth of the trees. Fish ^d meat mixed with the
vidaAga and rice would make (them) bear fruits. This would
universally control the diseases of all the trees.

Agni PurUna
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYTHREE
The remedial herbs for all the diseases
Dhanvantari said :
1. A decoction of /a/t, two kinds of niid (turmeric)
and vatsaka is commended for all types of infantile dysentery as
well as defects due to mother’s milk.
2. One should lick pulverised irngi, krs^d and atibalS to¬
gether with honey. (Otherwise) ativifS alone would remove the
cough, vomitting and fever of a child.
3-5a. Vacd should be taken by children together with clari¬
fied butter, or with milk or with oil. The child should drink
yasfikd or iadkha flower together with milk. This would improve
speech, complexion, longevity, intellect and beauty of the child.
Vacd, agniSikhd, vdsd, dried ginger, krfnd (long pepper) , turmeric,
ya^fi and rock salt should be given to a child in the morning for
drinking. It would develop the memory.
5b-6a. A decoction of devadam, mahdiigru, the three myrobalans and payomuca made into a paste with long pepper and honey
would remove all worms,
6b-7. The juice of the three myrobalans, bkrfiga and vUva
soaked in honey, clarified butter, goat’s milk and cow’s urine is
beneficial in the diseases of children. The juice oid&rvd (a kind
of grass) when inhaled is excellent remedy for bleeding of the
nose.
8. (Similarly) filling the ear with the juice of garlic, ginger
and Sigru (would remedy the bleeding of the ears). Extracts of
ginger and nutmeg in oil would remove intestinal colic and also
the diseases of the lipsk
9. The outer skin of the nutmeg, dry ginger, pepper, long
pepper and turmeric would remove the urinary defects. A paste
of mustard made into a decoction in milk dissolved in oil would
remove toothache.
10. The coriander water, coconut, cow’s urine, betelnut and
dry ginger made into a decoction and used for gargling would
remedy the defects in the tongue.
11. The juice of nirgw^dikd with the paste of Idngali prepared
in oil when inhaled would destroy gandamdld and galaga^da.

12. One should rub (the affected part of the skin) with the
leaves of arkat potikd and snuhi together with cow’s urine. (By
this one would destroy) all the defects of the skin.
13. VSkucl and sesamum eaten for one year is a cure fcMr
leprosy. Pathyd, bhall&taki and a lump of molasses in oil would
also conquer leprosy,
14. One suffering from piles should drink buttermilk to¬
gether with the powders of yQthikd, vahniy turmeric, the three
myrobalans and vyofa or should take abhayd with molasses.
15. One suffering from a urinary ailment should take a
decoction of the (three) myrobalans, a variety of turmeric and
vi^a or the juice of the emblic myrobalan or the paste of turmeric
with or without honey should be used.
16. A decoction of vdsd mixed with castor oil would remove
acute gout. The drinking (of the juice) of long pepper, would
cure enlarged spleens.
17-20. One who has an abdominal disorder should take
black pepper that has been soaked well in the milk of snuk or
should drink milk mixed with the paste of rucyay dantyOy agnivi4(inga and vyosa. The granthika, ugra, mustard, long pepper and
vi4anga soaked in ghee (and allowed to remain) in buttermilk
for a month would remove diarrhoea, piles, jaundice, enlarge¬
ment of spleen and worms. The decoction of the three myro¬
balans, amrtdy vdsdy iiktabhunimbaja together with honey would
remove jaundice with acidity. One who is having acute gout
should drink a potion of vdsd together with molasses and honey.
Or (one may drink) milk in which variy grapes, bald and dried
ginger have been dissolved.
21. One who is suffering from consumption should lick
(the compounded powders of) variy viddri, pathyd, the three (kinds
of) balds, vdsaka and Svadarh^fra together with honey and clarified
butter.
22. The essence of the bark of pathyd, Sigru, karahja and
arka together with honey and rock salt would cure abscess as
well as (help) ripening of the intestines.
23-24. Anointing a wound with trivrt, jivati, danti, manjiffhd,
the two varieties of turmeric, tdrkfaja and neem leaves is com¬
mended for fistula. An ointment of pulverised rugghdta, turmeric,

768 Agni Purina
shellac mixed with ghee and honey, and vdsa would be an anti¬
septic and arrest its spread.
25. Oil boiled with fySmS,^ turmeric, lodhra, padmaka^
utpalOy sandal and black pepper, and distilled in milk w'ould
heal a wound.
26. Burnt ashes of the leaves of black holy basil and cotton,
nutmeg, rock-salt and turmeric made into a paste and boiled in
oil in a copper vessel would be a good remedy for ulcers.
27. Kumbhisdra mixed with milk should be heated in fire
and applied on the wound. It could also be cured by sprinkling
with the chops of coconut and ghee.
28. Dried ginger, ajamoda, rock-salt and bark of tamarind
in equal proportions together with mustard in the same propor¬
tion should be drunk with butter-milk or hot water. It would
cure dysentery.
29. In the case of dysentery that is longstanding and accom¬
panied by constipation, discharge of blood and pain, one should
be made to drink water boiled with vatsaka, ativisdy dried ginger,
bilva and musta.
30. One suffering from any type of colic should drink warm
water saturated with rock-salt burnt in charcoal. Alternatively
(one may take a mixture of) rock-salt, asafoetida, long pepper
a^d mustard in the same way.
31 . Katmohiniy long pepper, dtadka and powdered fried paddy
made into a paste with honey that is filtered through a cloth and
held in the mouth would remove thirst.
32-33. A decoction of ^5/^5, ( a variety of turmeric),
skin of nutmeg, grapes and the three kinds of myrobalans to¬
gether with honey if gargled would remedy sore-mouth. A
decoction of long pepper, ahW/a, tiktendrOy ddrUyPdfkd &nd payomuc
boiled with (cow’s) urine (taken with) honey would remove all
throat affections.
34. Drinking of a decoction of pathydy gokfuray dusparfay
rdjavfkfa and Hldbhit together with honey would remedy painful
discharge of urine.
35. A decoction of bamboo bark and vanma would remove
stone in the bladder. One who is suffering from elephantiasis
should take the decoction of idkhofaka tt^ether with honey and
milk.

36. Oil made with blackgram and the milk extracted from
the bark of arka (as well as) rock-salt mixed with honey would
be remedy for the diseases of leg. Clarified butter similarly
(would cure) jalakukkutaja}
37. Powder of dried ginger, natron and asafoetida mixed
with the juice of dried ginger boiled with ghee would remove
sickness and this decoction is known to be efficacious in
improving digestion.
38. One who is having enlargement of spleen should drink
buttermilk together with juices that aid digestion such as natrum,
ngni and asafoetida, or with vi^a and dipyaka.
39. A decoction of emblic myrobalan, snake-gourd and
greengram together with clarified butter would cure dry spread¬
ing itch. Dry ginger, ddru and navd made into a decoction with
milk together with the urine of a cow also (would remove
swelling) .
40. Decoction of dry ginger, pepper, long pepper, k?ara and
the three myrobalans would remove swelling. (Similar effect is
had by using) treacle, Signi and trivrt together with pulverised
rock-salt.
41 . A decoction of trivrt and the three myrobalans together
with treacle would act as a purgative. A decoction of vacd and
three kinds of myrobalan with milk would be an emetic.
42-44. One hundred palas (a measure of weight) each of
the three myrobalans soaked in the essence of bhrAgaja mixed
with ten parts of vi^anga and iron filings and twentyfive palas of
iatdvaiif guduci and agni should be licked with honey, clarified
butter and sesamum oil. (One would be) free from . aging and
greying of hair. He would live a hundred years free from all
diseases. The three myrobalans with honey and sugar is capable
of destroying all diseases.
45-46a. Taking mustard together with honey, ghee, pepper,
the three myrobalans, pathyd, citraka, dry ginger, gudSety muiali^
raja and treacle would remove disease and make (one live) for
three hundred years.
46b-48a. The japd flower (dried) and made into a powder
and then into a ball should be put in water. The oil of the
1 . A disease of the leg.

Agni Purina
paste with water would be like ghee. By the incense (of the
above) one that is old would see things as variegated. One
would see as before by the incense of mak^ika.
48b-49. If camphor, oil (extracted) from leech and frog
and root of pdfali are ground well and anointed on the two feet,
one could walk on the fire after arranging and raising of the
grass (?) and provide entertainment to the spectators.
50-51. (The scope of medicine) is stated to fall under six
heads such as poison, (influence of) stars, ailments (in general),
violent deaths, minor (ailments) and love potents. It leads to
two kinds of accomplishments. Sacred formulas meditation,
medicine, conversation, mudrd (postures of the hand) and sacri¬
ficial worships are the means therein. The four goals (of life)
have been narrated. One who reads (the same) would reach
heaven.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFOUR
Narration of sacred formulas that are medicinal
Dhanvantari said :
1. The syllable ^orh* and others confer longevity, health and
heaven. The syllable *0Tii* is the foremost sacred syllable and
one becomes immortal by repeating the same.
2. The gdyatrl (mantra) is the supreme sacred formula. One
gets enjoyment and emancipation by repeating the same. The
formula Salutations to(Lord) Narayana** shall accomplish
all things.
3-6a. (The sacred formula) **Orh, Salutations to (Lord)
Vasudeva’* yields all (things). The formula **Orh krUrh^ obeisance
to (Lord) Vi$9u’* is the foremost medicine. The celestials and
demons became prosperous and free from sickness by (repeating)
this (formula). It is benevolent for the beings. The dharma (mantra)
is a great remedy — “Virtue, one who does virtuous deeds, and

{mantras). “Conferer of prosperity, lord of prosperity, abode of
prosperity, bearer of wealth, the abode of wealth, lord of pro¬
sperity, the supreme prosperity’* — One would obtain prosperity
by (the repetition of) these (words) .
6b-7a. “One who loves, bestower of desires, desire, the
governor of desires, Hari, happiness, consort of Lak^ini’* arc
the names of (lord) Hari, (which should be repeated) for
(gaining) pleasures.
7b-8. “Rama (one that makes us pleased), Parasurama (the
Rama, with the battle-axe), Nrsirhlia (the man-lion form of
lord Visnu), Vi§nu, Trivikrama (the lord that measured three
spaces with three strides)’’ are the names that are to be re¬
peated by those who desire to conquer. One who desires to
acquire knowledge should repeat daily the name “Purusottama**
(foremost among beings).
9. (The repetition of the name) Damodara (one having a
string around the belly, denotes lord Krsna) would remove
bondage. (The repetition of the name) Puskaraksa (lotus-eyed)
would cure eye-disease. (The name) Hfsikesa (the lord of the
sense-organs) would remove fear. This has to be repeated while
preparing medicines.
10-11. The name ‘Acyuta* (the changeless one) is an
immortal one and confers victory in the battle. One who begins
to cross a water-course (should repeat the name) Narasiihha
(man-lion form of Visnu). One who desires to have welfare in the
east and other directions shobld remember “Cakrin (the bearer
of the disc), Gadin (the wielder of the mace), Sarhgin (the
bearer of the bow), and Kha^gin (the bearer of a sword)”.
(One should repeat) the name ^Naraya^a* at all times. (The
repetition of the name) Nfsimha (man-lion form of Visriu)
would remove all fear.
12. (The repetition of the name) “Garu^avahana” (one
having the eagle on the banner) would remove poison. The
name “Vasudeva” (son ofVasudeva) has to be repeated always.
One should repeat (the names) ^Ananta* (endless) and 'Acyuta*
(changeless) while storing grains etc. and while going to sleep.
13. (One should repeat) *Narayana*'when getting a bad
dream and ( the term) ‘JalaSayin* (one who reposes on the
water) when there is outbreak of fire etc. One who desires to

Agni PuTdim
gain knowledge (should repeat the name) Hayagriva (one
having the neck of a horse, denotes a form of Visiriu) . (One who
desires) to gain progeny (should repeat the word) Jagatsuti
(the progenitor of the universe). (The name) Balabhadra
(the elder brother of lord Kfsna) (should be repeated) during
acts of valour. This single name accomplishes things.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYFIVE
The accomplished recipes that would revive the dead
Dhanvnantari said :
1 . I shall describe to you the infallible recipes that would
revive the dead. They were expounded to me by (the sage)
Alreya. They are divine and arc capable of curing all diseases.
Atreya said :
2. A decoction of the five roots, such as those of bilxa, (is
an excellent remedy) for fever due to (deranged) wind. Other¬
wise (a decoction of) the root of long peppfer, gu4 Hci and dry
ginger is purifying.
3-4. (A decoction of the herbs) cmblic myrobalan, mustard,
black pepper and vahni would cure all fevers. BiloOt agnimantha,
Syondkat Kdimarij pdtaldy sthird^ trikanfnka, priniparni, brhati and
ka^takdrikd are remedies for fever, indigestion, pain on the sides
(of the body) and cough. The root of kuSa (grass) (should also
be added to this) .
5. Gutjidciy parpafi, miista, kirdta and dry ginger should be
given in fever due to (deranged) wind and bile. This is known
as paheabhadra (the five beneficial things).
6. A decoction made, of trivrty viidlay kaftikSy the three
myrobalans and dragvadha is a purifier, loosens the bowels and
has to be drunk to get relief from all fevers.
7. DevaddrUy bald, vdsH, the three myrobalans, cyo^a, padmaka,
and viianga with an equal proportion of candied sugar made
into a powder would conquer five kinds of cough.

8-9. Daiamulif iafi, rdsndf long pepper, bilva, paufkara,
emblic myrobalan, bhdrAgi gu^Sci, nSgavalll and barley compoun¬
ded well and a decoction prepared from that should be drunk.
It would remedy cough, diarrhoea, (pain) on the sides, hiccough
and difficult breathing.
10. The three kinds of salts (as well as) madhuka together
with honey, long pepper together with sugar, and ndgara to¬
gether with treacle would remove hiccough.
11. Kdravytty jOjif pepper, grapes, hog-plum, poih^ranate,
natrum, treacle and honey would remedy all kinds of loss of
appetite.
12. One should be made to drink the juice of SrAgavera
(ginger) together with honey. It would remedy loss of appetite,
difficult breathing and cough. It would also remedy catarrh and
excess of phlegm.
13. (The root of) banyan, red earth, (the bark of)
lodhra, pomegranate, madhuka and honey should be taken with
the scum. It would remove thirst and arrest vomitting.
14. Gudueij vdsaka, lodhra and long pepper together with
honey would remedy fever accompanied by thirst, cough and
expectoration of phlegm together with blood.
15. Likewise the juice of the Juice of mixed
with honey, and pepper infused in the juice of the Sirifa flower
would also be beneficial.
16. (The pulse called) mar fira removes all kinds of pain.
(The washings) of rice would remove excess of bile. jYirgundiy
iilrivdy ielu and ahkola would remove poisons.
1 7 . Dry ginger, amrtdy kfudrd, puskara and granthika made
into powder should be taken with decoction of long pepper when
one suffers unconsciousness and intoxication.
18. Asafoetida, natrum and vyoi^a (dry ginger) and pepper
(each weighing) two palas, an ddhaka (a measure) of ghee soaked
in four parts of cow’s urine would remedy'insanity.
19. ^ahkha flower, vacd and kuffha soaked in the juice of
brdhmi destroys long-standing epilepsy and insanity. It is also
excellent for improving memory.
20-25a. The ghee made up of the five products got from
a cow has also similar effects. The same with mustard is a

Jgni Purdi^a
remedy for leprosy. Snake-gourd, the three myrobalans, neem,
gu^Uclj dhavaniy vf$a and karaHja boiled with ghee destroys lep¬
rosy and is known as vajraka (potent remedy). Neem, snake
gourd, vySghrly gudUci and vdsaka should be taken ten fialas each
and pounded well. (The mixture) should then be heated in
water vessel ( with water) till it is reduced to one fourth (of
its original volume). It should then be soaked in one prastha
(a measure) ghee and boiled with the three myrobalans. This
ghee is known as (five bitter things). This ghee is
capable of curing leprosy. This excellent recipe would cure
eighty varieties of diseases due to (deranged) wind, forty
(diseases) due to (deranged) bile, twenty (diseases) due to
(deranged) phlegm as well as cough, catarrh, piles, wounds and
other diseases just as the sun (would remove) darkness.
25b-26a. One should sprinkle a wound with the decoction
of the three myrobalans and the juice of bhrAgaraja for the
cure of the venereal disease.
26b-2da. The powder of the leaves of snake-gourd and the
five particles of the skin of pomegranate should be pounded
with gaja (a variety of pepper) and the powder of the three
kinds of myrobalans. Oil boiled with the three myrobalans,
grains of iron, mdrkavay h\\x^^ lotus, pepper and rock-salt
would remedy vomitting when used for bathing.
2db-29a. Oil boiled with milk, juice of markavoy two prasthas
each of madhuka and utpala made into one guiava (a measure),
if used as sternutatory would arrest greying of hair.
29b-30. The two compounds— neem, snake-gourd, the
three kinds of myrobalans, gui&ciy khadira and vrsa as well as
bhUnimbay pdthSy the three kinds of myrabolans, guidci and red
sandal would remedy fever, leprosy, tumour and the like.
31. A decoction prepared from snake-gourd, amrlay bhSnimbdy vdsdy ariffaka, parpafa and bark of khadira would appease the
fever due to tumour.
32. The dafamUliy chinnaruhdy mustard, d&rUy pmamavdy Hgru
and dry ginger are beneficial for (remedying) fevers, abscess and
swelling.
33-34. Besmearing with (a paste of) madhuka and neem
leaves would clean the wounds. A decoction of the three my¬
robalans and the leaves of khadirOy ddrviy nyagrodhay atibaldy kuia

(grass), necm, and mUlaka are beneficial in cleaning (wounds).
The juice of karanjay arisfa and nirgwji^i would destroy the
parasites of wounds.
35. Besmearing with a paste (made up) of dh&lakiy sandal,
baldy mang&y madhukay blue lotus, darvi and meda mixed with
clarified butter would heal a wound.
36. Gugguluy the three myrobalans, dry ginger, pepper
and long pepper in equal proportions mixed with ghee would
heal wounds due to affected arteries and painful fistula.
37. The yellow myrobalan boiled in cow's urine with oil
and salt should be used every morning. It would remove excess
of phlegm and wind.
38. A decoction of dry ginger, pepper, long pepper and the
three myrobalans should be drunk with alkali and salt as a
purgative in (deranged) phlegm and wind. It arrests the in¬
crease of phlegm.
39. The decoction of long pepper, the root of long pepper,
vacd, citraka and dry ginger should be drunk to remedying
constipation.
40. One should drink the great remedy — rdsn&y guduci, root
of castor and devaddru in case of rheumatism (that affects) all
the limbs, joints, bones and marrow.
41-43. Otherwise one may drink a decoction of dakamula
together with dry ginger and water. By the use of a decoction
of dry ginger and goksuraka every morning one would get back
digestive power that has been impaired and would get relief
from rheumatic pain in the hip. The oil extracted from the
roots, leaves and branches of prasdrini, an extracted juice or
paste or powder or decoction of guduci would relieve one from
acute gout when used for a long time.
44-45a. Long pepper and castor-oil may be used. One
would conquer quickly acute gout accompanied by burning
sensation by drinking snake-gourd, the three varieties of my¬
robalans, tivrakapuka and amrta boiled with mustard or treacle.
45b-46. Rheumatic pain would be relieved at once by
(drinking) guggulu in warm water or drinking gud&ci with the
three myrobalans in water together with baldy punamavdy castor
seed, the two kinds of brhaiiy gokfuray asafoetida and salt.

Agni Puritfa
47-50a. A kar^ika (a measure of weight) each of the root
of long pepper, the five kinds of salts, long pepper, citraka, dry
ginger, the three varieties of myrobalans, triorty vacS, two sorts
of alkali, iadvalay dantiy svarr^ak^lri and vifdnikd (should ground
well) and kola (a measure of weight) measure of pill should be
drunk with jujube. (This would remedy) swelling. It is an
excellent remedy with trivrt for indigestion and enlargement
of the abdomen etc. Milk together with ddruy varfdbhS and dry
ginger would be excellent for removing swelling. Sprinkling
with a decoction of arka, varfdbhU and bhunimba would remove
swelling.
50b-51. Piles would go without any doubt if the clarified
butter boiled with three parts of ashes of dry ginger, pepper
and long pepper mixed with paldia dissolved in water is used.
Vi$vak$enay lotus flower and nirgn^d^ boiled with salt would also
have similar results.
52-53a. Oil (prepared) with vidangQy analay rock-salt,
rdsndy agrakfdra and daru boiled with four times water saturated
with a pungent material would remove inflammation of the
glands of the neck and would remedy goitre if used as an
unguent.
53b-54a. Decoction of fa/t, kundga and valaya together with
the juice of kfira boiled with the paste of payasydy long pepper
and vdsd would be beneficial for consumption.
54b-55. (A compound of) vaedy mustard, dry ginger,
asafoetida, kusfhay agni dipyaka (mixed in the proportion of)
two, three, six, four, one, seven parts and a fiftieth part res¬
pectively, if drunk would destroy tumours in the abdomen,
(abdominal) colic and coughs.
56. Pills made of pdfhdy nikumbha, pepper, dry ginger, long
pepper, the three kinds of myrobalans and agni boiled with
cow’s urine would remedy abdominal tumour, spleen and the
like.
57. Vasdy margosa, snake-gourd and the three myrobalans
would destroy (deranged) wind and bile. Powdered vi^adga if
licked with honey would destroy worms.
58-59a. The yellow myrobalan together with vi4ailgay rock
salt, k$dra (alkaline salt) and cow’s urine (will also produce
the same effect) . The barks of iallakl, jujube, rose apple, ptydla.

mango and arjwia (trees) soaked in honey and taken with milk
separately would arrest haemorrhage.
59b-60a. Equal proportions of the juice of bUva^ mango
{hwck) , dhdtakif p&tMy dry ginger and when taken with
treacle or butter-milk would arrest severe dysentery.
60b-61a. The drinking of a decoction of kohy curd
water, dry ginger and kfdra (an alkaline salt) together with ghee
would remove pain due to inflammation of anus.
61b-62a. Vidangay ativifa, mustCy ddru, pdfhd and kaliAga
(taken) together with black pepper would cure dysentery
(accompanied by) swelling (of the limbs).
62b-63. One would live for a hundred years happily by
eating two yellow myrobalans (everyday) together with sugar,
rock-salt and dry ginger or long pepper, honey and treacle.
The same would be the result of taking the three kinds of
myrobalans and long pepper together with honey and clarified
butter.
64. One should lick powdered emblic myrobalan soaked in
(the juice of) the same with honey, clarified butter and sugar
and drink milk if desirous of enjoying women.
65-66. Powdered black gram, long pepper, ^dli (a variety
of rice) , barley and wheat in equal proportion should be fried
with long pepper. One should eat them and drink sweet milk
with sugar. (Such a person) would gain strength to enjoy
women ten times like a sparrow.
67. MaAgd, dhdtakl flower, lodhra and blue lotus should be
given to women together with milk. It would remedy pradara
(a disease) of women.
6d-69a. (A mixture of) htja^ kaura^iakay madhukay white
sandal, the roots of lotus and blue lotus, sugar and sesamum is
excellent for arresting miscarriage and causing pregnancy.
69b-70. An urgent of devaddrUy nabhay kufPhay nalada and
dry ginger mixed with sour gruel and oil would remedy head¬
ache. If rock salt mixed with water is poured ( into the ear)
after gently heating and Altering through a cloth, it would re¬
move ear-ache.
71. The juice of garlic, ginger, figru or plantain (may be
taken) separately. One may drink them with (the mixture of)

Agni Parana
baldy iatSvari, rdsna and amrtd together with sairiyaka (?).
72-74a. Clarified butter together with the three myrobalans
is an excellent remedy against blindness. One should drink
ghee boiled with the three myrobalans, dry ginger," pepper,
long pepper and rock-salt. It would strengthen eyesight, loosen
bowels, strengthen heart, stimulate digestion and remedy cold.
The filament of blue lotus together with cowdung and water is
(known as) collyrium. It would be beneficial for day or night
blindness.
74b-77. Tafflmadhut vaca, long pepper and seeds of hufaja
made into a paste mixed with a decoction of necm is a good
emetic. Glossy and greasy barley water should be given as a
purgative. If it is (used) otherwise it would impair the diges¬
tion, make the body heavy and cause loss of appetite. A pulve¬
rised (compound of) mustard, rock-salt and long pepper
should be drunk with warm water. This is an excellent purga¬
tive that would remedy all diseases. This is known as ndrdca
(destructive). The infallible compositions that have been
expounded by Atreya to the sages are capable of curing all
diseases and are declared by Susruta as conferring all boons.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSIX
Collection of medical recipes
Dhanvantari said :
1 . I shall describe the recipes of medicines that would
conquer death, confer longevity and cure diseases. The three
myrobalans and amfld together with honey and clarified butter
would cure disease and would make one live for three hundred
years.
2. (One who uses) one pala^ half a pala or a karsa (a
measure of weight) (would enjoy) the full span (of life). One
who uses the oil of bilva as sternutatory for a month (would
live) for five hundred years and (would become) a poet.
3-4. (The use of) sesamum and bhalldtaka would overcome

disease, premature death and senility. One would overcome
leprosy by (using) a decoction of five parts of powdered vdktfci
with the waters of khadira for six months. (Otherwise) powder
of nilakuru^ta may be used (for the same) . One who eats
kkandadugdha together with milk or honey (would live for)
a hundred years.
5. One who uses a pala (weight) of honey, clarified butter
and dried ginger in the morning would conquer death. One
who drinks milk with the powder of mdn4aki would overcome
old age and live long.
6. One who drinks milk with a karfa of uccdfa and honey
would conquer death. One would overcome disease and death
(by using) nirgun4i together with honey, clarified butter or
milk.
7. One should drink a karfaka of the oil of paUUa together
with honey for six months. Milk may be drunk afterwards. This
would make one live for five hundred or a thousand (years) .
8-9a. One should drink the juice of the leaf of jyotifmati
and the three myrobalans together with milk. Similarly a pala
(weight) of the pulverised iatdvari together with honey and
clarified butter or nirgun4i with honey, clarified butter and milk
would overcome disease and death.
9b-10. Five parts of pulverised neem boiled with the decoc¬
tion of (used) with a karfa (weight) of the juice of
bhrdga ytovXd make one overcome disease and become immor¬
tal. One who drinks milk after taking rudanti with clarified
butter and honey would conquer death.
11. One should take sl. karfa (weight) of the powder of
yellow myrobalan boiled with the juice of bhfAgardja together
with ghee (or) honey. He would live for three hundred years
and conquer disease.
12-14. (One would live) for five hundred years (by using)
a karfa (weight of) vdrdhikd, juice of bhrAga^ oxide of iron,
Satdvari together with clarified butter. Powdered kart a (gold
filings) and boiled with (the juice of) bhfAgardja (used
with) honey and clarified butter would make one live for three
hundred years. Mango, amfldt trivrt in equal proportion (and)
sulphur purified with the juice of kumdrikd (are made into
pills). (One who uses) two (such) pills together with clarified

Agni Purina
butter would live for five hundred years. A pala (weight) of
aSvagandhd used with oil, clarified butter and treacle would make
one (live for) a hundred years.
15. Drinking a pala (weight) of pulverised* punamavd or
aSoka together with honey, clarified butter and milk would
remove one’s ailment.
16. One who uses the sesamum oil with honey as sternu¬
tatory will live for a hundred years ( retaining) the black hue of
the hair. One would live for a hundred years by drinking a
kar$a (weight) of akfa together with honey, clarified butter and
milk.
1 7. After taking mustard with treacle, ghee and sweet
things etc., one who eats rice mixed with milk would have
black hair, be free from disease and live for five hundred years.
18. One who drinks a /»z/a (weight) of pulverised A: fijmdn4ik& together with honey, clarified butter and milk and eats
rice mixed with milk for a month would live for a thousand
years without any disease.
19. The powder of idluka together with the juice of bhrnga,
honey and clarified butter would make one live for a hunderd
years. A karfa (weight) of the oil of kafutumbi (used) as a
sternutatory would make one live for two hundred years.
20. The use of the three myrobalans, long pepper and
dried ginger would make one live for three hundred years. If
the same is compounded with Sat&varl it would make one strong
and live for one thousand years.
21-24. Pills should be made with citraka, dried ginger,
vi^aAga, iron oxide, bhrAgarajOy valOy the five kinds of neem,
khadiray nirgu^4U kantakiri and vdsaka boiled with var^&bhU or its
juice. This powder together with ghee or honey or treacle or
water is an excellent compound. It should be consecrated with
the formula ^'Orh hrdrh sa". It would be a recipe for reviving
the dead and overcoming disease and death. The collections of
recipes were made use of by the celestials, demons and sages.
(I shall describe) the science of medicine relating to the
elephants (that) was narrated by (sage) Palakapya to the king
Anga.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYSEVEN
The treatment of the diseases of elephants
Palak&pya said :
1-3. O Lomapada ! I shall describe to you the characteristics
of the elephants and the treatment (of their diseases) . Those
that have long trunks, deep breath and are of enduring type arc
commended. Those that have twenty or eighteen nails, those
that exude rut (even) in winter, those that have an elevated
right tusk, those that have wide ears resembling the cloud, with
minute dot like (marks) on the skin should be maintained.
Those that are short and have bad features should not be
maintained.
4-5. (Similarly it is not advisable to capture) the sheelephants that bear the foetus on their sides and those that are
stupid. The elephant that has (good) complexion, good nature,
strength, appearance, beauty, firmness and speed would conquer
enemies in the battle. The elephants add beauty to the army
camp and the army.
6a. A king could gain victory by the diligent (employment)
of elephants.
6b-7. In the case of all the fevers (of elephants), they
should be anointed. Bathing them after anointing them with
ghee or oil would remove the wind (in the body). The shoulders
should be treated by the kings as indicated in the case of the
fevers (of elephants).
8. O Brahmins ! Cow’s urine together with ghee and the
two varieties of turmeric (are commended) for jaundice. An
infusion (with the above remedy) soaked in oil is commended
for constipation.
9-10. (a kind of liquor) mixed with five kinds of
salts should be given for drinking. An elephant should be fed
with balls of (mixture of) the three myrobalans, dried
ginger, pepper and long pepper and salt in the case of fainting.
He should be made to drink honey and waiter. The head should
be anointed with oil for headache. A sternutatory is also
commended.

Agni PurSna
1 1 . The diseases affecting the legs of an elephant should
be treated by anointing with oil. Then it is laid down that they
should be cleansed with the paste of sediments of oil.
1 2. An elephant that is suffering from shivering should be
fed with the juice of the flesh of peacock and tittiri (partridge)
mixed with long pepper and pepper.
13. A morsel comprising tender bilvOt lodhra^ dhdtaki to¬
gether with sugar should be given to an elephant suffering from
dysentery.
14. Ghee mixed with common salt should be given as
sternutatory in the case of numbness of the trunk. (Otherwise)
long pepper, dried ginger and the cumin-seed boiled in the rice
or barley gruel together with mtista grass (could be given) .
15- 16a. The juice of the flesh of a pig should be given for
ear-ache. Oil boiled with the ten kinds of roots, the horse beans,
tamarind and kdkamdei would remove the pain due to stiffness of
the neck caused by fetters.
16b-17. Ghee mixed with the eight kinds of salts made into
a paste should be given for drinking in the case of retention of
urine. Otherwise a decoction of the seeds of trdpusa (may be
given) . An elephant should be made to drink a decoction of
the bark of neem or vrfa.
18-19. Cow’s urine and mianga are commended for worms
in the intestines. Milk boiled with dried ginger, long pepper,
grapes and sugar is (an excellent) drink for curing the wounds.
The juice of the flesh is also good. Rice and green gram boiled
together and mixed with dried ginger, pepper and long pepper
is commended for loss of appetite.
20. Oil mixed with dried ginger, long pepper and
pepper, agnidanli^ arka^ lydmd, milk and bigger variety of long
pepper would remedy the enlargement of spleen.
21-22a. All sorts of disorders that arise could be remedied
by means of loosening, enema, anointment, application of oil,
drinks and oily enemas. One could be given yoffika with ^drada
(a kind of beans) together with the soup' of green gram for
drinking.
22b. Besmearing with tender • bilva is commended in the
diseases (known as) kafu.

23. Viianga^ indrayava^ asafoetida, sarala and the two varie¬
ties of turmeric could be given in the form of balls in the fore¬
noon to remedy all kinds of colics.
24. The main meal for them should be composed of (the
rice varieties known as) saffika, vrihi and Sdli. (The meals) con¬
sisting of barley and wheat are (considered as) mediocre. The
other kinds (of food) are (deemed as) inferior for the
elephants.
25. Barley and sugarcane increase the strength of the
elephants. Dried barley would derange the humours of the
elephants.
26. Drinking of milk is commended for an elephant that is
emaciated on account of rutting. The juice of flesh that has
been cooked with the substances that are stimulants is good.
27. In the event of severe injury in the war, balls of (flesh
of) crows, hens, cuckoos and owls (could be given) mixed with
honey.
28. An incense (consisting) of pepper, fish, alkaline
salt, juice of kofdtaki and turmeric ensures victory in the battle
for the elephant.
29. (A liniment consisting of) long pepper, rice, oil, honey
of different kinds applied along the eyelids is commended as
sharpening the eyesight.
30-3 la. Feces of a sparrow and a pigeon, the resin of the
ksira tree and the liquor (known as) prasanna are the excellent
collyrium. Such a collyrium applied on the eye would make
the elephant destructive in the battle.
31b-32a. Blue lotuses, musta and tagara made into a paste
with water in which rice has been washed is an excellent cooling
agent for the eyes.
32b. (Once in a month) the grown-up nails should be cut.
(They) should be bathed with oil once in a month.
33. The bed of an elephant would be powdered dry cow
dung. It is commended that (the elephants) should be anoint¬
ed with clarified butter in the autumn and summer.

Agni Purdiia
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYEIGHT
The diseases of the horses and the management of the horses
Dhanvantari said :
1. I shall describe the essence of (science relating to) the
management of horses and the treatment of their diseases. In
order to achieve dharma, artha (virtue) and kama (enjoyment
and prosperity) (a king) should acquire (good) horses.
2. (The asterisms) aivini, Srava^a, hasta and the three uttaras
{uttardsd4hay attaraphdlguni and uttarabhddrapada) are commended
for the first ride on the horses.
3. The early winter, winter and spring are commendable
for riding the horses. The riding of the horses in the summer,
autumn and rainy season is forbidden.
4-6a. One should not whip the horses severely or with
other kinds of sticks or at an improper place. One who rides
a horse* at a place abounding in nails, thorns and bones, on a
nigged ground, on a sandy and muddy ground and spoilt by
• pits and falls without knowing the temper (of the steed) and
without the saddle would be carried away by the horse even
as he is seated on its back.
. 6b-7a. There may be an excellent person among the learn¬
ed, a fortunate one who knows the behaviour (of the horse)
and is able to ride without any instruction on account of his
practice and application.
7b- 12a. The different gods aie assigned on (the different
parts of) the body of the horse that has been consecrated,
and faces the east, commencing with the syllable odi and end¬
ing with ‘obeisance’ with the respective bija^ in order. (Lord)
Brahmd (is assigned) in the mind, (Lord) Vis^u in the strength,
Vainateya (vehicle bird of Vi^^u) in valour, the Rudras on
the sides, Guru in the intellect, the Vi^vedevas in the vital
parts (of the body) , the Moon and the Sun in its glances and
eyesight, the two Aivins (the celestial physicians) on the ears.
1. The mystical letter formii^ the essential part of the mantra of a
ddty.

the Fire (god) on the stomach, Svadhd in the sweat, the (godd¬
ess of) speech on the tongue. Wind (god) on Speed, the vault
of the heaven on the back, all the mountains on the tip of the
hoof, the asterisms in the pores of the hairs, the digit of the
moon in the heart, the Fire-god in the lustre, the goddess of
love on the buttocks, the lord of the world on the forehead, the
planets in the neighing, Vdsuki (a foremost serpent) on the
chest.
12b. One who is to ride (the horse), should fast, worship
the horse and recite (the following mystic words) in the right
ear ( of the horse) .
13-19. ‘‘Oh ! Horse ! You arc a Gandharva prince! You
listen to my words. You are born in the family of Gandharvas.
Do not become a defiler of the family. O Horse ! Remember
your creed by the true words of the brahmins, of Soma, of
Garuda,ofRudra, of Vanina, by the strength of Pavana (Windgod) and by the radiance of the Fire-god. You remember that
you are the son of a paramount sovereign. You remember the
promise ( you had made at the time of churning the ocean).
You remember the daughter of the ocean (Goddess Laksmi) .
You remember the kaustubha jewel. You were born in the
divine family at the time of the churning of the milky ocean by
the celestials and the demons. You keep up your promise. You
were born in the family of horses. You become my eternal
friend. O Friend I You listen to this well.. You be ready as my
vehicle. You be victorious. You prot^t me and bring me
success in the battle. In olden days tlni demons were destroyed
by the celestials riding on your back. I will now ride on you
and conquer the army of the enemy.”
20. After having repeated (the above prayer) into the
ears (of his steed) the rider should confuse the enemy, saddle
the horse and ride (the horse) . (This would give him) victory
in the battle.
21. Generally the defects in the horses are produced in
their bodies. The excellent riders should convert them into
good qualities with much effort.
22. The good qualities that are due to the ability of the
riders would appear as natural.

Agni Purina
23. Other riders would destroy even the natural qualities.
Some know the good qualities. Some others know their defects.
One is fortunate who knows (the qualities as well as the defects
in) a horse. A stupid one is he who does not know both.
24. Even though one is a good judge, he is not commend¬
ed if he does not know how to manage a horse, does not know
the means (at the time of an emergency), acts rash, is of
irritable nature and engages in excessive punishing at the
vulnerable points.
25. One who knows the means (of handling an emergent
situation ) , one who knows the temper (of the horse) , one
who is pure, one who removes the defects and takes the (good)
qualities is always an expert in all acts (engaging the horses).
26. One who has entered the riding ground holding the
bridle should ride his steed either from his right or left.
27. An excellent horse should not be whipped at once after
mounting. Whipping causes fright and fear would produce
confusion.
28. The rider should conduct (the horse) in a gallop in
the morning holding the rein. (He should conduct the horse)
slowly in the evening holding the rein but without handling it.
29. (The following are the four political expedients) :
stroking is said to be conciliation, isolation (from the other
steeds is) division, whipping with the whip and other things
(is) punishment and biding time (is reckoned as) gift.
30-31. Each succeeding one should be employed when each
preceding one fails. While riding a horse, (the bridle) should
be placed without touching the tongue. The reins with hund¬
reds of threads should be entered at the tip of the mouth. (The
horse) should be made to forget (that) and then one may ride.
One should (ride) slowly if the reins have become loosened.
32. If the tongue of the horse is ulcerated, the joint on the
tongue should be released. The tight hold should be released
till the horse docs not give up its jumping.
33-36. The cuirass should be tied when the steed is releas¬
ed. (A horse) that has a raised face by nature should have its
cuirass made loose by the foremost rider and then mounted
with a sportive look. One that would make the left fore-leg (of

the steed) joined with the left rein, would get the hinder-leg
seized. By that the right one (also controls). One that practices
in this way with the left rein, the two feet (would be con¬
trolled). Then the foot would be held from the left itself. If the
fore-feet are released, one would become firmly seated.
37. The left fore-leg should be tied with the rein to the
left hind-leg (of a horse) of mischievous habit. It should be
ridden by holding the left rein.
38. The nature of the horse is to turn round its face again.
It is not on account of tying the legs of the horses thus.
39. After having looked at a trusted horse and after having
taken a tirm seat on the saddle, ( the horse) should be made to
touch his leg with the face by holding (the rein). Such a
(posture known as) lokana is beneficial.
40. The rein is clasped after pulling and firmly pressing
with the legs. It is said to be vakkana if the two legs are bound.
41. It is considered as mo (ana if there is binding of the
legs with the rein and letting it go by freeing the fore-legs.
42. A wise man should know the loss of consciousness and
destruction for a horse and the fourth rule, namely, the mofana,
is laid down.
43. A horse whose leg does not touch the ground in a
small circle, that foot should be restrained by means of mofana
and vakkana.
44. It is said to be sangrahat^a when it is held with exertion
and when one goes slowly holding it after fastening well on
the seat.
45. After striking on the side by kicking (the horse) that
has distracted mind while one remain on the seat, the rein is
drawn and held by the foot. It is known as grdhya-kanfakapOyanam.
46. If a horse stands on the feet and hurts the rear legs,
it is known as khalikdra (hurting).
47. It is known as (intensified), if (the horse), that
is in any one of the motions^, is held after striking with a stick or
with the leg as desired.
1. The trot, the gallop or the canter.

Agni Purina
48. It would be ucchvasana (exhalation), if the horse is
hurt and taken through a quadrangle by means of a different
bridle by cheering.
49. It is considered to be mukhavyivartana (turning the face
away), if the nature (of a horse) to turn its face and move
towards the place (from which it has been taken out), is rest¬
rained and held.
50. After restraining by any one of the three (ways) in
order, it should be controlled by taking to the courses such as
the circles and the like in order.
51. A wise man should relax and ride a horse that raises
its head from its knee onwards. One should rise a horse till its
limbs are light.
52. A horse that is soft at its shoulder, light at its face and
flexible at its joints, when it becomes controlled by the rider,
then it should be tamed.
53-54a. The hinder leg should not be freed when (the
horse) becomes quiet. Then it should be drawn forward with
the hands by means of the bridle. The horse stands with the
part about the hips becoming normal, the neck raised, and
face on level.
54b-56. If (the horse) keeps the hinder legs on the ground
and the fore legs lifted up and runs very fast, one should hold
the bridle with the fist and stop it. If the horse does not stop
when suddenly pulled thus and if it shakes its body, it should
be stopped by taking it in a circular path. The horse that casts
off the shoulder should be stopped by means of the bridle.
57. The cowdung, salt and (cow’s) urine boiled with mud
is besmeared on the body as a remedy for bites of flies, etc.
58. The scum of boiled rice should be given by the rider
to ( the horses) belonging to the bhadra and other breeds. The
bites of tiny insects make the horse feel indolent and hungry.
59. A horse should be trained in such a way that it would
become tamed. Horses would perish if they are made to run
much. They do not get practice if not made to run. If the faces
become white, (the horses) should be made to run.
60*61 a. After having pressed the horse well with the two
knees (one should ride the horse) with a Rrm 6st. Gomutra,

kufildt venif padmaman^aldf and {padma) mdlikd are well known
as the pancoldkhAlikd.
61b-62a. Similarly saAksipta^ vik^pta, kuncitat yathdcUay valgita
and avalgita are said to be six kinds of phases (of a horse) . The
path would be hundred dhanus (a measure of length equal to
four cubits) or eighty or ninety {dhanus) .
63. (Horses are said to be of four varieties such as bhadrOt
manda^ mrga and sadkirna.) The (type of horse known as) bh(uira
could be trained well, the manda variety, (by making use of ) a
stick. (The type) of horse (known as) mrgdt. (is classified)
taking the shank of a deer (as the basis) . The above charac¬
teristics would be found mixed in the sadkirna class.
64-65a. The horse that eats sugar, honey, and fried rice
and has a good aroma is said to be clean and belonging to the
brahmin class. The horse that belongs to the warrior class
would be lustrous, meek and clever. ( If the above qualities are
found in lesser proportions it is known as the vaiiya cleiss.)
(The horse that is) impure, unsteady, dull, ugly, foolish and
wicked (is said to belong to) the Sudra (class).
65b-66. The horse that would show saliva when being held
by the bridle, should be driven in phases by holding and loos¬
ening the rein. 1 shall describe (to you now) the characteristics
of the horses etc. as expounded by (the sage) ^alihotra.^
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND EIGHTYNINE
The characteristics of the horses and the treatment of the
diseases of the horses
Sdlihotra said :
1-5. O Susruta ! I shall describe the characteristics of the
horses and the treatment of the diseases. A horse with lesser
number of teeth, one devoid of teeth, one that is having dread1 ■ Salihotra is credited with the authorship of works on veterinary
science.

Agni Purd^
fill appearance, one that has a black palate and black tongue,
one that is born as a twin, one that has no testicle, one that
has a cleft-hoof, one that has a horn, one that is tricoloured,
one that has the colour of a tiger, one that has the cojour of an
ass, one that has the colour of ash, one that is not having a good
colour, one that has a hump, one that has white patches (on
the skin), one that is (often) ridden by the crows, the voice of
which resembles that of an ass, one whose eyes resemble those
of a monkey, one that has black manes, one whose anus is
black, one whose nostrils have a black hue and are pointed,
one that has the colour of a tittiri (bird), one that has unequal
legs having white patches on the foot, one that is devoid of fixed
rings and has rings indicating inauspiciousness, should be
avoided.
6. The pairs of curls of hair on the skull, uparandhra
(flanks), head, chest, forehead and neck of a horse are (deemed
to be auspicious.
7. The curls of hair at the corner of the mouth, forehead,
the root of the ear, the throat, root of the forelegs, neck arc
auspicious. (The curls of hair) at other (places) are inauspi¬
cious.
8. The horses which resemble the colour of a parrot,
indragopa (a kind of insect), moon and a crow and those which
have a golden colour and are glossy are always commendable.
9. One should dismiss all the hopes of conquest where the
horses of the kings have long necks, broad eye-corners and
auspicious short ears.
10. A horse or an elephant which is guarded confers good
and confers misery otherwise. Those horses are excellent and
are gandharvas which increase the fortune and progeny.
11a. A horse is offered as an oblation in the aSvamtdha (a
horse-sacrifice) on account of its purity.
1 Ib-13a. A morsel composed of vrfa, neem, bjrhatij gud&ct,
makfikd, sirtdid and gandhakari anointed on the head (of a horse)
or asafoetida, root of pttfkara, ndgara with sour vetasa, long
pepper and satndhava (a kind of rock salt) with hot water
would remove the pain (in the stomach).
13b- 14a. A decoction of dried ginger, atioifd, mustd, mania

and bUva leaves would remove all kinds of dysentery if given
as a drink.
14b-15a. A horse would become free from fatigue by drink¬
ing a potion composed of goat’s milkt pariyangu and sdriva (?)
with profuse (quantity of) sugar.
15b-16a. Oily emetic is to be given for the horse in a
dronika (an oval basin of wood). It should penetrate the sinews
of the viscera. It would make it feel comfortable.
16b- 17a. A ball of pomegranate, the three myrobalans,
dried ginger, pepper and long pepper with equal proportion of
molasses should be given to the horses. It would cure the
harassing cough.
17b-18a. The juice of together with priyangUf lodhra
and honey should be given to a horse for drinking. Or the five
kola etc.^ (should be given) with milk. It would cure the
cough.
18b- 19a, It is beneficial to give emetics at first in all the
kinds of diarrhoea. Then anointing with oil, rubbing with
fragrant unguents, besmearing medicated oil, giving sternuta¬
tory and besmearing with unguents should be done in order.
19b. The process of treatment for horses afflicted by fever
is with water only.
20. Anointing with the roots of lodhra and karahjay mdlu--
lunga, agnU dried ginger, kustka, asafoetida, vaid and rdsnd would
cure swelling.
21-22. A horse which drinks manjiffhdt madhuka^ gprapes,
bfhati, red sandal, the seeds and roots of wild cucumber,
Jrngdfaka and kaieruka boiled with goat’s milk and then cooled
together with sugar and abstains from food would become free
from passing of blood in the urine.
23. Anointment with kafutaila of the affected parts (of a
horse) is commended in the case of swelling in the wrist, cheek
or throat or stiff-neck.
24-25a. (A horse) that is affected by stiff-throat would
have probably swelling in the region of the throat. A sternuta¬
tory with mustard, mhni^ rock-salt, juice of holy basil, black
pepper and asafoetida (is given) .
1. The five spices such as the long pepper, etc.

Ag^i Purd^
25b>26a. Besmearing a paste of two varieties of turmeric,
jyotismati, pdfhd, black pepper, kuffha, vacd and honey mixed
with molasses and (cow's) urine is beneficial in paralysis of the
tongue.
26b-27a. Paste made with sesamum, turmeric, neem
leaves mixed with honey and clarified butter is a remedy for
ulcers.
27b-28a. The horses which limp on account of whipping
and feel extreme pain should be fomented with oil. It would
remove the pain quickly.
28b-29a. The same procedure as in the case of ulcers (is
to be followed) in the case of a hurt or deranged state of the
humours or one caused by whipping. A decoction of the barks
of aivatthOy udumbaray plakfOy madhUka and vafa with profuse
quantity of water in comfortable heat would cure the ulcers.
29b-3 1 . Oil prepared with a decoction of iatdhvSy dried
ginger, rdsndy manjifthdy kuffha rock-salt, devaddru, vaedy two
varieties of turmeric and red sandal mixed with gu4(lci and
milk is used for smearing, as emetic and sternutatory and as
unguents in all cases when there is oozing of blood at the eyecomers (of a horse) suffering from eye-disease caused by
leeches.
32-33. Decoction of the barks of khadiruy udumbara and
aivattha mixed with equal parts of emblic myrobalan, durdlabhdy
tiktd, priyangUy saffron and guduci is beneficial in case of a limp¬
ing one ( horse) , a wound of the tendon, or of an ear or a dry
tumour.
34a. In the case of a fast developing derangement of a
humour, it is desired that it is broken at once.
34b-35a. Rubbing with cowdung, manjikdy ku^fha, turmeric,
sesamum and mustard ground with cow’s urine would remedy
itching.
35b-36a. A decoction of the above mixed with honey and
cooled should be given through the nostrils together with sugar
and aivakarr^a. It would remedy the haemoptysis.
36b-37a. Salt should be given to the horses on every
seventh day. The liquor vdru^i should be given to them as an
additional drink after they had eaten as above.

37b-38a. (A decoction) with jlvaniya^ madhwa, mfdvikd,^
sugar, long pepper and padmaka should be given as a substitute
drink in the autumn.
38b-39a. (A decoction made) with viMgd, long pepper,
coriander, Satihv&y lodhrdy rock-salt and citraka (should be given)
to horses as a substitute drink on the advent of winter.
39b-40a. A substitute drink in the spring would be with
the herbs lodhrd, priyahgUy mustiy long pepper and dried ginger
mixed with honey. This would remedy (the deranged)
phlegm.
4Qb-41a. Wine together with the potent herbs priyangUy
long pepper, lodhri and ya^ti together with molasses should be
given as the substitute drink in summer.
41b>42a. A substitute drink on the advent of the rainy
season would be ( decoction made of ) stick of lodkrdy salt, long
pepper and dried ginger mixed with oil.
42b-44. The horses should be given ghee to remedy the
(deranged) bile in the summer, increase of the blood in the
autumn and loosening of the feces in the rainy season. The
horses which have excess of phlegm and wind should be given
oil to drink. Any evil consequence of the abuse of oil ( should
be remedied) by making them dry (to remove fat). Food
consisting of barley with butter-milk for three days would
make them shed (excess fat).
45. Clarified butter in the autumn and summer, oil in the
cold and spring (seasons) and through the syringe in the
advanced winter is desired to be the restraining (remedy).
46. Food that is heavy and that would increase the
phelgm, exercise, bathing, hot (sun) and wind are prohibited
for a horse which has been given oil to drink.
47. Horses should be bathed and made to drink only once
on the advent of the rains. On an extremely stormy day
drinking only once is commended.
48. When heat and cold are blended in a season, (horses)
should be made to drink twice and bathe once. In the summer
they should be bathed and led to drink thrice and should be
allowed to plunge (into the water) for a long time.
49-50. Four ddhakas (a measure) of barley without the
husk should be given (to the horses) . They may also be given

Agni Purina
bengal gram, arihi (a kind of paddy) and green gram. In a
whole day and night (a horse may be fed) ten and a half tulds
(weight) of barley and eight tulds of dried (grains) or four
(parts) of vyofa^ (dried ginger) .
51-52. DUrvi (a kind of grass) would remedy (the de¬
ranged) bile, barley (would remedy) the cough, mustard, the
congestion of phlegm and dr/una (would set right) breathing.
So also mdna (7) (would rectify) loss of strength. The horse
that takes a meal of (grass) would not be affected by
diseases due to (deranged) wind, bile, phlegm or their com¬
bined action.
53-54. Vicious horses should be tied with two ropes on
each side to posts behind them at a distance of a dhanus (four
cubits) . They may stay in places (stables) where (hay) has
been strewn and the ground has been fumigated. Barley should
be placed therein. The place should be well-lit and protected
well. Animals such as the goats and monkeys as well as cocks
should be kept in the stables of horses.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY
Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of horses
Sdlihotra said :
1 . O Susruta I Listen to me. I shall describe the three
kinds of propitiatory rites for the horses — the daily, the
periodical and optional (rites) that would cure the diseases of
the horses.
2. After having worshipped Sridhara (a form of Visnu),
Sri (consort of Visnu) and Uccaihsravas, the chief among the
horses, on an auspicious day, one should offer ghee as oblation
with (the recitation of the formula) Savitra (Gayatri).
3-6a. Then fees should be paid to the brahmins. Then the
horses would increase. The propitiatory rite (should be done)
1. The reading oapufmatafi in the venk. cdn. does not fit in.

on the fifteenth (lunar) day of the bright fortnight in the
(month of) aSvayuk (October-November). It should especially
be done outside (the stable). (Lord) Varuna (water-god)
should be worshipped. (A mystic) diagram should be drawn and
(the image of) the goddess (placed at the centre) should
surrounded by branches (of trees). Pitchers filled with all
flavours and covered by cloth should be placed at the cardinal
points. After oflering oblations of barley and clarified butter,
the horses and the Asvin gods' should be worshipped. Fees
should be paid to the brahmins. Listen to me ! (I shall now
describe) the periodical (rites) .
6b-8. One should worship (Lord) Visnu, (goddess) $ri
(Lak^mi), (Lord) Brahma, (Lord) l^ankara, (Lord) Soma
(Moon), (Lord) Adi tya (Sun ) , the A^vin gods, Revanta and
Uccaihsravas (the horse of Indra) in the (constellations)
Capricorn etc. for the horses with lotuses. The guardian deities
of the cardinal points (should be worshipped) on the petals.
Pitchers (should be dedicated) for each one of the (above)
deities (and worshipped) on the altar at the auspicious place.
After having fasted, oblations of sesamum, unbroken rice,
clarified butter and white mustard should be made a hundred
times for everyone of the gods. TJiis act would ward off the
diseases of the horses.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYONE
Propitiatory rites for curing the ailments of elephants
Salihotra said :
1. I shall describe the propitiatory rites that would destroy
the deseases of elephants. One should worship (Lord) Vi§nu,
(goddess) Sri and the elephant (Airavata) of Indra on the
fifth (lunar) day.
1 . a pair of celestial gods believed to have been born to Sun through
a nymph in the form of a mare.

Agni Purina
2>5a. (Similarly one should worship) Brahma, Sankara
(Siva), Vi§nu, Sakra (Indra), Vaisrava^a (god of wealth),
Yama (god of death). Moon, Sun, Varuna (Water-god),
Wind-god, Fire-god, the Earth, the Sky, Sesa (the serpent
couch of Lord Vi§nu), the mountains and the eight elephants
which guard the cardinal points such as Virupaksa, Mahapadma, Bhadra, Sumanasa, Kumuda, Airavata, Padma, Pu$-
padanta, Vamana, Supratika and Ahjana^. Oblation should
then be made and fees paid ( to the brahmins) . The elephants
which are sprinkled with the propitiatory water would multiply.
Listen to me ! I shall describe the periodical rites.
5b-7a. In a lotus diagram (drawn) on the ground outside
the city at the constellation Capricorn etc. of the elephants or
at the north-eastern (angular p»oint), (Lord) Vi§nu should be
worshipped at the centre, (goddess) Laksmi in the filament,
(gods) Brahma, Bhaskara (Sun), the earth and then (Lord)
Skanda (son of Siva), the sky, (Lord) Siva, the Moon and
Indra and his weapons on the petals in order.
7b-8a. (The weapons) such as the thunder-bolt, spear,
rod, club, noose, mace, spike and the lotus should be wor¬
shipped on the periphery of the outer circle (of the diagram).
7’he Sun and the pair of Asvins should be worshipped at its
centre.
8b-ll. The eight Vasus and the Sadhyas (a class of
celestials) (should be worshipped) at the petals at the southern
and the south-western ends. The celestials, (the sages) Ahgirasa
and others, the Bhrgus and the Wind-god (should be worship¬
ped) at the north-western (petal), the Vi^vedevas at the
southern (petal) and the Rudras at the north-eastern (petal).
The gods should be worshipped at the outer periphery of the
exterior circle. The sages who composed the aphorisms,
(goddess) Vani (Sarasvati, goddess of speech), the rivers and
mountains (should be worshipped) on the east etc. The great
spirits should be worshipped at the angular points such as the
1 . Airavata, Piai^arika, VSmana, Anjana, Pufpadanta, Sarvabhaums
and Supratika are the standard names of the elephants of the cardinal
points. The text here reads additional names.

north-east and the like. The lotus, disc, mace and conch (which
form) the four sides (enclosing) the circle (should be wor¬
shipped) .
12-14. Pitchers (should be placed) at (each one of) the
four entrances (at the east etc.) and banners on ( the angular
points such as) the south-east etc. Four ornamental arches
(should be erected at the entrances) . The elephants Air&vata
and others ( should be invoked to guard the entrances). Se¬
parate containers with herbs (should be placed) on the east
and other directions for the gods. Aflcr having offered a
hundred oblations with clarified butter and worshipped the
elephants, one should circumambulate them. After having
worshipped the elephant, fire-god and the gods at the outer
periphery, the worshippers would go home. Fees should be
paid to the brahmins as well as the physicians of the elephants.
1 5-20. An astrologer should then mount the famale ele¬
phant and utter in its ear. After having done the propitiatory
rite in this eternal king of elephants, one should recite the
(following) mystic words : “O ! Fortunate one ! The king
has made you the chief among the elephants. The king would
worship you with perfumes, flowers and excellent attendants.
Then the people would worship you by his order. The king has
to be protected by you in the battle, on the way and in the
house. Abandoning your animal nature you remember your
divine nature. In olden days, at the time of the battle between
the celestials and demons, the celestials created the divine
elephant. The elephant called Arii^ta that was born to Airavata
(elephant of Indra) inherited the splendour of the divine
elephants. O King of elephants I You attain that splendour
endowed with divinity. May you be blessed with virtues I You
protect the king in the battle.**
21. The king should (then) mount (the elephant) that has
been consecrated thus. Excellent warriors bearing weapons
should follow it.
22. Again in a lotus diagram (drawn) outside (the shed)
on the ground, the guardians of the cardinal points and others
should be worshipped. Bala (deva), Naga, the earth and
(goddess) Sarasvati (should be worshipped) in the filaments.

Agni Furdna
23. After having worshipped the small drum at the centre
with perfume, garlands and unguents, oblations should be
made and a pitcher filled with sweet juice should be given to a
brahmin. ,
24. Then the superintendent of the elephant, the guard
of the elephant and the astrologer should be worshipped . A
small drum should be given to the superintendent of the ele¬
phant and he should make it sound. It should produce aus¬
picious and loud sounds. He should sound this while remaining
on the buttocks (of the elephant).
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYTWO
The greatness of cows and their welfare
Dhanvantari said :
1. A king should protect cows and brahmins. I shall des¬
cribe the propitiation of cows. Cows are sacred and auspicious.
The world is sustained by them.
2. Their feces and urine are the excellent destroyers of
poverty. Stroking of a cow and the water from its horns would
destroy multitudes of sins.
3. The urine and feces of a cow, milk, curd, clarified
butter and rocani (yellow pigment got from a cow) are the six
constituents that are excellent and when drunk they would
prevent bad dreams etc.
4. (Go) rocan&is capable of nullifying poison and demons.
One who feeds the cow with a morsel of food would go to
heaven. In whose house cows are ill-kept, that person would go
to hell.
5-6a. One who gives a morsel of food to a cow belonging to
another would go to heaven. One who does good to a cow
would reach the world of Brahma. One who makes a gift of a
cbw, one who sings her praise and one who saves her life would
elevate his family. The earth becomes pure by the breath of
cows. Sins get destroyed by their touch.

6b-8. The urine of a cow, the feces, milk, curd, clarified
butter and the water in which kida (grass) (has been dipped)
(being taken) and a night’s fasting would purify even a vile
person. It was practised by the gods in days of yore to
destroy all inauspiciousness. If each one of the above was
practised for three days, it was known as the mahdsSntapana, This
is capable of fulfilling all the desires (of a person) and des¬
troying all that is inauspicious.
9. It was (knoYfn a.i) krcchrdtikrcchra, d one lived on milk
for twentyone days. The excellent men (who practised it)
would become stainless, would get all the desires fulfilled and
attain heaven.
10-11. One should drink hot urine, hot ghee, and hot
milk, each one for three days and consume air only for the
next three days. This vow known as taptakrcchra would destroy
all sins and confer the world of Brahma. It is known as iitakrcf Am if done with cold things (as above) . It was described by
Brahma. It would yield the world of Brahma.
12- 13a. One should bathe in the urine of a cow, maintain
himself with milk and move with the cows eating after they
had eaten. It is known as gavrata. One would become free from
the sins in a month. He would attain the world of cows and
reach heaven.
13b- 14a. One who mutters the gomati vidyd (a sacred
formula) would reach the excellent world of cows. Therein he
will enjoy music, dance and the company of nymphs in the
celestial car.
14b- 18. Cows are always fragrant. They give out the
•periome gugg^lu (fragrant resin) . They are the sustainers of
beings. Cows are the supreme conferers of welfare. The excellent
food for gods is the clarified butter from cows. They pour out
and utter purity for all the beings. They satisfy the immortals
in heaven with the clarified butter purified by mystic formulas.
Cows are connected with sacrificial rites such as agnihotra of the
sages. Cows are the excellent refuge of all beings. They are
supremely holy and are exceedingly auspicious. Cows are the
steps leading to heaven. They are the perpetually blessed
ones.

Ag^i Purd^a
19. Obeisance to cows ! To the fortunate ones ! To the
fragrant ones ! Obeisance to the daughters of Brahma ! Obeisance
to the holy ones !
20>22. One family has been made into dvo (such as)
brahmins and cows. The sacred formulas remain on one side
and clarified butter on the other. The entire universe is supported
by gods, brahmins, cows, holy men and chaste women. Hence
they are always considered to be the fittest to be worshipped.
Wherefrom {cows) would drink is known to be a sacred spot.
C!ows are really the Ganges and others. The greatness of cows
has been told. Listen to me ! I shall now describe the treatment
(of their diseases).
23. Oil mixed with rock salt and decoction of ifAgavera,
bald and mdjjtsa^ together with honey should be used for the
diseases affecting the horns of cows.
24. Oil prepared with manjiffhdy asafoetida and rock salt
or garlic alone should be used in all kinds of pain in the
ears.
25. Besmeau'ing a paste of the roots of bilva, apdmdrga,
dhdtaki, pdfald and kufaja at the base of the teeth would remove
the pain therein.
26. O R&ma ! Ghee heated with the ingredients used for
removing tooth<ache is known to remove the disease of mouth.
Rock'Salt (is used) for the diseases of tongue.
27-28. ^r^gavera^ the two varieties of turmeric and the
three kinds of myrobalans (are useful to remedy) the stiffness
of neck. The three myrobalans mixed with ghee given as a
drink to cows is commended in heartache, stomachache, rheu¬
matic complaints and pulmonary diseases. The two varieties of
turmeric and pdthd may be given for dysentery.
29. Sfhgavera and bhdrgi may be given for the diseases of the
digestive organs and the pulmonary capillaries, cough and
asthma.
30. PrijaAgu together with salt should be given for joining
the broken (bones) . Oil that removes wind, when heated with
madkttjfoffi (would cure) biliousness.
31. Mustard mixed with honey (would be the remedy) for
(deranged) phlegm. (For the diseases) of the flesh, the same
with the dmt of puffaka (would be the remedy). One should

apply oil, clarified butter and haritdla on wounds from which
blood oozes out.
32-34. Blackgram, sesamum, wheat, cow’s milk and ghee
made into a ball with salt gives nourishment to the calves. It
would give strength to the young bulls. Fumigation would
destroy the affliction due to evil planets. Fumigation with
devaddrn, vacd, mdriisi, guggulUf asafoetida and mustard is bene¬
ficial for cows against pain due to evil planets. After fumigation
a bell should be tied to cows.
35. If a cow is fed with aSvagandhd and sesamum it would
increase its strength and make it yield profuse milk. For a bull
that is maintained in the house, oil-cake (would be) the elixir.
36. The goddess of fortune should always be worshipped
in the feces of the cows on the fifth (lunar day) for peace. (Lord)
Vasudeva (should) also ( be worshipped) with perfumes etc. A
different propitiatory rite will be described now.
37. (Lord) Hari (Visnu) should be worshipped on the
fifteenth day of the bright fortnight in (the month of) aSvaytik
(Ociober-November) . (Lord) Hari, Rudra, Aja (Brahma),
Sun, (goddess of) Fortune and Fire-god (should be worshipped)
with ghee.
38- 39a. After feeding cows with curd and worshipping
(them), one should circumambulate the fire. One should also
arrange for a bull-fight accompanied by singing and instrumental
music outside (the place). Salt should be given to cows.
Brahmins (should be paid) the fees.
39b-43. In the periodical (propitiatory rite) (Lord) Vi§nu
should be worshipped at the centre of a lotus (diagi*am) on the
ground along with (goddess) Sri on the (occasion of Sun’s
transit through) Capricorn etc. The celestials should be wor¬
shipped in the filaments in the (different) directions. The Sun,
the Subhadrdja (born as fortunate) and Bali, the Bahurupa
should be worshipped outside. The Sky, Viivarupa, Siddhi,
Rddhi, Santi, Rohi^f (should also be worshipped). The guardian
cows of the cardinal points — east etc., the Moon and Ilvara
(should be worshipped) in the filaments. The guardian deides
of the cardinal points (should be worshipped) in the pitchers
(placed) on the petals of the lotus. Oblation should be made

Agni Puroj^
unto the fire with the twigs of the k^ira tree, mustard and un¬
broken rice a hundred times each. Gold and bronze should be
given away to brahmins. Cows should then be worshipped and
released for the sake of peace and to be endowed^with milk etc.
Firc-god said :
44. Salihotra narrated the veterinary science relating to
the horses to Susruta. Palakapya narrated the science relating
to the elephants to .Xhgaraja.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETVTHREE
Different kinds of mantras and their nomenclature
Firc-god said :
1. Listen to me ! 1 shall describe the science relating to the
mystic formulas that would yield enjoyment and emancipation.
O Brahmin ! The mystic formulas containing more than twenty
letters are known to be maldmantra-s.
2. The mystic formulas having more than ten letters (and
less than twenty) are designated as arvdgbija-s. These yield
results in the old age, while the mdldmantras in the youth.
3-5a. The formulas having more than five letters yield
fruits always. The other formulas belonging to the group of
mantras are of three kinds such as feminine, masculine and neuter.
The feminine man/rof end -with (the term) Svaha (consort of
Fire) . The neuter mantras end with (the term) obeisance. The
rest are masculine. They are commended (to be used) in charms
to subjugate and' to drive away (evil). The feminine {mantras)
(are used) to destroy diseases due to mean acts, while the
neuter ones in other cases.
5b-7. Mantras (are also classified as) dgn^ (fiery) and
rata^a (pleasing). They should be repeated at the beginning
and end of the asterisms and the halves. The dgneya mantra is
generally laid down as having the asterism at the end and the
fire and the ether (in greater proportions) . The rest (are said

to be) saumya. The two (varieties of mantras) are commended to
be used in cruel and good deeds (respectively) . The dgmya
mantra may perhaps be saumya by the addition of ‘obeisance* at
the end. Saumya mantra (would also) in the same way (be)
dgneya by the addition of the syllable phat.
8. A mantra would not accomplish (the result) if it is either
asleep or awakened. The sleeping state (of a mantra) is when
there is powerful (breath through the nostrils and the waking
state when the breath) flows through the right (nostril).
9, By the inversion (of the letters) of an agneya mantra one
would get (the letters) of a saumya mantra. One should ascertain
the waking state of both (the mantras) and the day for both.
10- 14a. The OTfln/w, whose letters are presided over by
baneful asterisms and constellations, should be avoided. In order
to acquire kingdom, the vowel letters which arc inimical to the
component letters of one’s name, should be first arranged in due
order. “May you go and fill the abode of the king”. Thus the
script is made ready. The vowels should be arranged in the
different asterisms in order ending with the (asterism) Revati.
The chambers should be marked as the siddha-s (successful, such
as the ninth, the first and the fifth chamber), the sadhya^s
(successful in time, such as the sixth the tenth and the second
chamber), the susiddha-s (extremely successful, such as the third,
the seventh and the eleventh chamber), and the ari (hostile,
such as the fourth, the eighth and the twelfth chamber) and
the character of each mantra in relation to the name of the
individual to whom it should be imparted, should be calculated
therefrom.
14b- 15. One accomplishes merely, by the repetition of the
stddha {mantra). The sddhya {mantra) (could accomplish) by the
repetition, worship and making an oblation. Hhtsusiddha {mantra)
would accomplish by mere contemplation. (The mantra known
as) ari would destroy the votary. A mantra full of baneful letters
of the alphabet is condemned by all.
16. After having been duly initiated .ending with the cere¬
monial bathing and after having had the exposition of the tantra
from the preceptor, one has to practise the desired mantra got
from the preceptor.

Agni Pwri^
1 7-1 8a. A person who is bold, competent, pure, devoted,
bent on repetition, contemplation and the like, accomplished,
who practises penance, is intelligent, knows the kin/ra, speaks
the truth and is capable of restraining and blessing ('the disciple)
is said to be a preceptor.
18b- 19. A disciple ( should be) calm, restrained, clever,
studied, celebate, and eating food fit for oblation. He should do
service to the preceptor. He should be eager to accomplish. He
(should be ) instructed. He (should be) like a son, modest and
capable of giving money.
20-21 a. A mantra should be imparted by the preceptor. When
it is accomplished the preceptor should repeat it a thousand times.
A mantra that has been heard accidentally, or got by fraudulent
means or by force or written on a leaf or (got) in the form of a
gathi (a verse) would not bear any fruit.
21b-23a. One who practises a mantra by means of several
acts such as repetition, oblation, worship and the like, attains
success by little practice. There is nothing which cannot be
achieved by means of a mantra that has been perfectly practised.
What to say about a person who has practised many mantras. He
is really Siva Himself.
23b-24a. A mantra (consisting) of a single letter bears fruit
after repetition for ten lakh (a million) times. The repetition
is reduced as the number of letters (in the mantra) is increased.
In this way one has to flock together the other mantras.
24b-25. The mantras containing letters twice or thrice the
bija mantras should be repeated like a m&limanira, A mantra
should be repeated a hundred and eight or a thousand times if the
number of their repetition has not been specified. It is known
that the number of libations and anointments is in general a
tenth part of the number of repetitions.
26. For one who is not able to repeat, ghee (would be the
material) for libation, in all the cases, if the material has not
been specified. The number of repetitions of the component
(mantras) Mn>uld be a tenth as that of the main mantra.
27. When the mantras are repeated according to their
potency, the presiding deities of th^ mantras yield the desired
(fruits). They get plctased with the contemplation, oblation
and worship etc. of the votary.

28. The muttering of a mantra is ten times more meri¬
torious than their loud repetition. Repetition with the tongue
(within the mouth) is hundred times (meritorious) . The mental
(repetition) is known to be a thousand times (more meri¬
torious).
29. One should begin the repetition of a mantra facing the
east or looking downwards. All the mantras should begin with
the pranava (the syllable Oih) . One should restrain from convers¬
ing and eat the prescribed food.
30. One has to repeat the mantras remaining seated. He
should look at his preceptor and the (favourite) deity alike.
The places (suited for the practice) are a solitary cottage,
temples and (banks of) rivers and tanks.
31-34. One who wants to gain perfection (in a mantra),
should live on rice-gruel, cakes, milk or (that is to be
offered to fire) food. The votary should worship the presiding
deity of the mantra on the lunar days and week-days such as the
eighth and fourteenth days of the dark fortnight and eclipses etc.
Dasra (AsvinI devata), Yama (God of Death), the Fire-god,
Dhatr (Brahma) , the Moon, Rudra, Jupiter, Diti, the serpents,
the Pitrs, Bhaga, Aryama, the Sun, Tvajtr, the Maruts, Indra,
the Fire-god, Mitra, Indra, Niirti. the Water, Visvedevas,
Hfsikela (name of Vi|^u), the Winds, the god of water
(Varuna), Ajaikapad (one of Rudras), Ahirbudhnya (one of
the Rudras), Pu$an are the deities of (theasterisms) ASvini and
others.
35-36a. The fire-god, Dasra (Asvini devata) , Uma (con¬
sort of Siva) , Nighna (Vinayaka ?), Naga (serpent), the Moon
(Candra) , the Sun, the divine mothers, (goddess) Durga, the
presiding deities of the cardinal points, Krsna, Vaivasvata (god
of death), Siva, the Moon (Sasanka) and the Pitrs are the
presiding deities of the lunar days.
36b-40. Hara (Siva), Duii;a, Jupiter* Vi?tiu, Brahma,
Lak$mi and Kubera are the presiding deities of the days of
the week. I shall describe the assignment of the letters (on the
different parts of the body) . The letters constituting the five
groups (of consonants such as ka, ca, fa, ta nndpa), should be
assigned on the tips of the grown up hair, eyes, the pair of ears,
nose, cheeks, lips, teeth, head, mouth, arms, feet, joints, sides.

Agni Pur&ifa
back, navel and heart in order. The letters and others should
be assigned on the heart. Skin, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow
and semen are the seven essential ingredients (of the body).
The regent of the letters beginning with rasa (essential juice)
and ending with payas (milk) should be written.
41 >42. Srikandia, Ananta, Suk^ma, Trimurti, Amareiv^a (Indra), Agpxisa, Bhavabhuti, TithiiSa, Sthanuka, Hara,
Dandl^a, Bhautika, Sadyojata, Anugraheivara, Akrura and
Mah^ena are the presiding deities to be worshipped.
43-46. The deities Krodhisa, Canda, Pahc&ntaka, Siva,
Rudra, Kurma, Trinetra, Caturanana, Ajeifa, Sarma, Somesa,
LMgali, Daruka, Ardhanari^vara, Uma, Kanta,A$adhi, Dandin,
Atri, Mina, Mesa, Lohita, SikhI, Chagalanda, Dviranda,
Mahakala, Balin, Bhujahga, Pinaki, Khadgl^i Baka, Sveta,
Bhrgu, Lagudi, Isaksa, Ksaya and Saihvarta (are also to be
assigned).
47. After having written (the names of) the Rudras
together with their consorts at first, then ending with obeisance,
they should be assigned in order. Then the aAga-mantras should
be located. All the mantras with their constituents are capable
of yielding perfection.
48-51. These should be completed with the
hrllekha and vyoma and located. Then the heart and other
parts of the body should be associated with the aAgamantras.
‘Obeisance’ would be for the heart, svdhd (oblation) for the
head, vasaf for the tuft, hurh for the armour, vaufaf for the eye
and phaf for the weapon. Eye need not be included when the
five are uttered. Where there is no aAgamantra (for a
mantra) , the location should be made in the self and repetition
is made a million times. After having located in order the
goddess Vagi si and the other gods mentioned, sesamum should
be offered to the fire. The goddess of letters who bears the
garland of letters, a pitcher, a book and a lotus would bestow
the ability to compose poetry. One should do the assignment
at the beginning of an act. All the mantras become spotless and
yield perfection by (the grace of) the divine mothers even if
one is not a poet.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYFOUR
The characteristics of different kinds of serpents
The Fire-god said :
1. The different species of serpents, their nature, the ten
places (in the body at which a bite would be fatal) , the re¬
medial action, (the resultant) impurity and the behaviour of
the (person) bitten (by the serpent) are said to be the seven
characteristics.
2-3. §e$a, Vasuki, Taksa, Karkotaka, Abja (Padma),
Mahambuja (Mahapadma), Sahkhap^la and Kulika are the
eight chief serpents. They have ten, eight, five, three, three and
hundred heads in order. Every two of these serpents are said to
be brahmins, kfatriyas, vaiSya and iUdras in order.
4-8. (The serpents) born in their family (are) five hundred
from whom innumerable serpents came into being. (The ser¬
pents are of three kinds such as) the phani, mandali and rdjtia
being windy, bilious and phlegmatic respectively. The variety
known as vyantara has these humours mixed. The serpents are
known as having hoods. They bear (the signs of) cart-wheels,
ploughshares, umbrellas, svastikas and goads. (The serpents
known as) gonasas move slowly. They are long and bear
different kinds of rings. (Those known as) rdjilas are variega¬
ted, glossy and (can fly) across and upwards with their wings.
The vyantaras (would have) mixed marxs. (They are again
classified) into four kinds as earthy, watery, fiery and windy
and are divided into twentysix kinds. The gonasas are sixteen
kinds, the rdjilas, thirteen and the vyantaras, twentyone. Those
which are born at an unspecified time are known as the
vyantaras,
9-12. Their impregnation lasts for four months beginning
with the three months commencing from Afddha. Two hundred
and forty eggs are laid. , The serpents swallow their young with¬
out showing any distinction such as the males, females and
hermaphrodites. The eyes get opened in seven days. The outer
(skin) becomes black after a month. After twelve days its faculty
gets developed. The teeth appear on seeing the Sun. The teeth
kardli, makari, kdlardtri and yamadGtikd (grow) in twenty to

808 Agni PurStja
thirtytwo days. There are the venomous teeth on the left and
right sides.
13-14. They discard their (outer) skin after six months.
They would live for one hundred and twenty years. Seven
serpents (among the eight mentioned earlier) preside over the
days and nights of days such as Sun-day and the like. Among
them six (preside over) every week. Kulika (is the lord) of
all the junctions of periods. Kulika may exercise its influence
jointly with either Sahkha or Mahabja (Maha-padma) .
15. One (24 minutes) in between the two is the
period of the Kulika. It is a malignant period in all the cir¬
cumstances and especially in the serpent bite.
16-1 8a. The asterisms Kfttika, Bharani, Svati, Miila,
the three purvas (purvaphalguni, Purva^adha and Purvabhadrapada) , Asvini, Viiakha, Ardra, Magha, Aslesa, Citra, l§ravana, Rohirii, Hasta, Saturdays and Tuesdays among the days,
the fifth, eighth, sixth as well as fourth, ninth and the fourteenth
lunar days are malignant. The four twilight periods and mali¬
gnant (periods) as well as the (naalignant) constellations
are bad.
1 8b-20a. There would be a single or a couple or many
bites (of the serpents) . The bites are of four varieties — pierced,
cut, apprehended and concealed. The bites in which there are
three or two incisions or a single incision, pain, profuse bleed¬
ing and a bite in the leg in the night accompanied by (swel¬
ling) resembling (the shape of) a tortoise are directed by Yama
(i.e. sure to be fatal) .
20b-21a. A bite accompanied by burning and itching
sensation (at the mouth of the bite), swelling and pain in the
neck, gruelling pain and knotty (swelling) (should be known)
to have the poison spread (in the body) . If it is otherwise it
should be taken as free from poison.
2 lb-25. It is inauspicious if one is bitten in a temple, an
uninhabited house, an ant-hill, a garden, a hole, at a cross¬
road, in a cremation ground, on the bed of river, at the con¬
fluence (of a river) with the ocean, in an island, at the meet¬
ing point of four roads, on the terrace of a building, in a
flower, on the summit of a hill, -at the mouth of a hole, in an
old well, in a dilapidated house, on a wall and on the trees such

as the iigrut ilesmUtaka^ cAfa,jambu, udumbara, ve^ and vafa (the
6g tree) as well as on a demolished compound, or at an aper¬
ture of the human body, face, heart, arm-pit, collar bone,
palate, bone of the forehead, neck, head, chin, navel and feet.
A messenger (who is sent to convey the news to the snakecharmer) is auspicious, if he has a flower in his hand, speaks
well, is intelligent, belongs to the same sex and caste (as that
of the person bitten), wears white dress, has no blemishes and
is pure.
26-28. One who enters through the side door, one who
carries a weapon, one who has erred, one who has a down-cast
look, one who wears decoloured dress, one who has the noose
etc. in his hand, one who stammers, one who holds a dry piece
of wood, one who feels depressed, one who holds sesamum in
his hand and clothes, one who wears a wet dress, one who wears
black or red flowers on his tuft, one who presses the nipple,
one who cuts the nails, one who touches the buttocks, one who
scratches (the earth) with the foot (toe), one who pulls out
his hair and one who cuts the grass are inauspicious messengers.
29. The sex of the person bitten should be known as male
or female or hermaphrodite from he flow of the breath forcibly
through the left or right or both me nostrils of the self ( the
snake-charmer) or the messenger.
30. One should indicate that part of the body as having
been bitten which the messenger touches (when he meets the
snake-charmer). It forebodes evil if the messenger moves his
legs. If one has his (foot) raised without movement it indicates
good.
31. If the messenger has an animal by his side (when
conveying the news), it augurs good. If he is found with any¬
thing else it forebodes evil. If the animal that is present paces
here and there, it forebodes bad. But (if it paces here and there)
when the messenger is conveying (the message), it augurs good.
32. If the speech of a messenger is foulty at the beginning
or middle, it is extremely ominous. The period that the venom
would last could be known from the distinctions at the end of
his speech.
33-34. The alphabets are divided into two groups — the
vowels beginning with ‘a’ and the groups of letters beginning

Agni Purd^a
with *ka* {ka, ca, ta and pa). The group forming the vowels
is known as vasumdn. The four letters of the consonanjts are sac¬
red to the Wind-god, Fire-god, Indra and Water respectively.
The fifth letters belong to hermaphrodite. The vowels arc sac¬
red to Indra and water (alternatively).
35. The presence of letters sacred to Wind and Fire (gods)
at the beginning of a speech of the messenger is not good. (The
presence of a letter sacred to) Hari (Indra) is mediocre. (The
presence of) letters (sacred) to Varuna (god of water) is com¬
mendable. (The presence of) hermaphrodite (letters) is ex¬
tremely ominous.
36. An auspicious sentence (heard as the messenger) de¬
parts or the thundering of a cloud or the trumpeting of an
elephant are auspicious. The circular movement (of birds) or
crying from a fruit or tree on the left side is (also) auspicious.
37. Sounds such as music etc. would be auspicious. Such
things would accomplish the result. Worthless words or words
expressing a calamity, a wailing sound, a scream heard from
the right (side), a sneezing (are bad omen) .
38-39a. The sneezing of a courtesan, a king, a virgin, a
cow, an elephant, mvrajh (a musical drum), a banner, milk,
clarified butter, curd, water from the conch, umbrella,
(a kind of musical drum), fruit, the celestials, rice, gold and
silver are fruitful if one comes across them on his way.
39b-40. (The sight of) an artisan holding a burning log
of wood, one who is clad in dirty clothes carrying a load, one
who carries an axe, a jackal, a vulture, an owl, one having the
matted hair, oil, skull and cotton is to be warded off. (The
sight of) ash (brings in certain) loss.
41 . The malady due to poison is of seven kinds depending
on the movement (of the poison) from one essential ingredient
of the body to another^. A poisonous bite (first) reaches the
forehead, then the eyes, then the face. From the face it reaches
the nerves associated with speech and other essential ingredients
(such as the blood etc. of the body).
1. They are the blood, flesh, fat, -etc.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYFIVE
The medical tnatmmt for a serpent bite
Fire-god said :
1-2. I shall describe to you the treatment of a (poisonous)
bite by means of mystic formulas, meditation and herbs.
Obeisance to lord Nilakantha^ (Siva)**. The repetition of this
{rnantfo) would be an antidote for poison. Liquid cowdung with
clarified butter should be drunk as a life-saving medicine. Poison
is said to be of two varieties — the poison due to animals such
as the serpent, rat etc. and that due to the plants such as the
irnga etc.
3-4. Lord Brahma is represented by the soft vowels and
those known as lohita and capable of protecting represent Lord
ifjiva. This (the following) is a mantra (bearing) the name of
the bird Tarksya (eagle, vehicle ofVisnu) consisting of letters
(sacred to it) .
Orii ! burn ! A person of great intellect ! is for the heart.
Garudavidala is on the head. To Garuda the crest-bird of
heaven is for the tuft. “O Garuda ! One who destroys the
poison ! One who pierces ! You frighten and trample down** (is
the mantra) for the armour. “One whose command none can
dispute ! hurh I phat** (is the mantra) for the weapon. “One
who bears a dreadful appearance ! One who frightens all !
You frighten all ! Burn. Burn them into ashes. Oblations” (is)
for the eye. (In order to worship Garuda with the above
mantra) a lotus (diagram) is contemplated in the heart. The
seven constituent elements (of the body are assigned therein).
The vowels are arranged in the petals pointing to the eight
cardinal p>oints. The letters are located in the filaments etc.
The fire (is located) near the pericarp (of the lotus). Then the
snake-charmer should mentally remember it on the palm of
the left hand. The letters should then be assigned on the
thumb and other (fingers). Thus the consfituent parts of the
mantra of the bird are distributed.
1 . As he has drunk the deadly poison that came out of the milky ocean
as it was churned.

Agni PurStjia
5-7. Then (Lord) Indra, the presiding deity of the earth,
of yellow colour, is assigned in a quadrilateral of the form of a
mace. The white-coloured (Lord) Varuna, the presiding deity
of water, ( is assigned) in a semi-circle like the half of a lotus.
(Lord) Fire, the presiding deity of lustre, (is assigned) in a
svasiika figure (inscribed within a triangle). (Lord) Wind, (is
assigned) in a circle with a dot, bearing a black garland.
These are assigned respectively in the middle of the fingers
beginning with the thumb in their respective places covered by
golden (images of) Garuda.
8-10. The four letters of the mantra (should be contem¬
plated) as having a good halo of similar radiance. They
should be located in the formless ether, presided over by (Lord)
Siva of the form of the subtle principle of sound. The first
letter (of the mantra) should be located on the middle fold of the
little finger. The first letters of the serpents are also located as
being present in their own spheres. The first letters of the earth
and other elements are located on the last mark of the thumb
etc. Then a wise man should locate the proximate qualities
such as the subtle principles and the like on the fingers.
11-14. By the touch of this Tark^ya {mantra) assigned on
the hand all kinds of poisons would be destroyed. Then the
letters of the mantra of the bird should be located in the halos
in the regions of the umblicus and the joints of the body. It is
excellent to have it as two fingers long. A wise man should
contemplate Tark^a (the Eagle), who pervades the cosmic
universal egg, who wears the serpent ornament known as the
candra reflecting the blue hue of his dreadful beak and who has
the great wings from the knee (to the navel) as golden coloured,
from the navel (to the neck) as snow-coloured, from the neck
(to the hair) as red like the saffron and from the ends of the
hair as black. There would thus be a charm for a poison from
the statement of a charmer who is pervaded by (the letters of )
the Tark§ya {mantra) .
15-20a. A blow with the fist, thus charged with the
Tarksya {mantra) y would remove poison. Raising the hand
charged with theTarki^ya {mantra) and passing over (the place
of bite) the five fingera, and by having a look at the person

intoxicated, one would arrest the spread of the poison. One
should arrest the spread of the poison by the repetition of the
(following) mantra : “This bhubija {mantra) ^ the lord of the five
letters has descended from the sky. I shall arrest the excessive
poison.” By reversing the bhubija^ the resultant mantra^ “Flood,
Flood, Yama !”, well-accomplished, would remove the poison.
This would raise one like a stick, by bathing him with water
after repeating (this mantra) well. Similar result could be
obtained by hearing the sound (produced) by a conch or bheri
(war drum) after repeating (this mantra) properly. (This
mantra) with the inversion of (the components of ) earth and
splendour would burn (the poison). This mantra with the
inversion of (the components of) earth and wind would
transfer the jjoison.
20b-24. The practitioner of this charm possessing the
shape of the figure of Garuda, should practise this act inside his
own house with the components of earth, fire, moon and water.
The repetition of this {mantra) in the abodes of Garuda and
(Lord) Varuna would destroy the poison. This is said to be the
holy janudan^l. It would destroy all posions and ward off fever,
diseases and untimely death by bathing and drinking (the
water consecrated by its repetition) marked with the compo¬
nents of (the syllables) svadhd and Sri, “Oh ! Bird ! Bird I
Great bird ! Great bird ! Vi ! Vi ! Oblations ! Oh ! Bird ! Bird !
Great bird ! Great bird ! Kn ! Kfi ! Oblations !” These two
mantras of the king of birds are capable of destroying poison by
chanting. (The gdyatri mantra of Garuda is) : “We contemplate
the king of birds. We meditate on the lord of the birds. May
that Garuda prompt us (our minds)”. Then “Kala and
Langali”, the {mantra) of Nilakan^ha. (blue-necked, an epithet
of l§iva) bearing the insignia of tooth and stick should be
assigned on the chest, neck, tuft etc. on the body in front of
the fire after consecration. Hara ! Hara ! Obeisance to the
heart ! To the head, for Nilakantha, to the tuft ! Oblation to
one who drank the poison kdlakuta^ ! Then the armour on the
neck. (Obeisance) to the three-eyed lord wearing the hide of
1. The poison that came out from the milky ocean when it was
churned.

Agni PurS^
elephants (present) in (the region of) the eye ! The faces of
the Lord from the east onwards (should be then contemplated)
as having (the colours of) white, yellow, red and black.
25-29. The Lord should be contemplated * as offering
protection and boon and holding the bow and the serpent in
His hands. (Goddess) Gauri and (Lord) Rudra (are contem¬
plated) as His presiding deity above and on the left. After
having assigned the letters of the mantra on foot, knee, private
organ, navel, heart, neck, face, head, hands, fingers beginning
with the thumb, fore-finger and folds (on the fingers) and then
all of them should be assigned on the thumb. After having con¬
templated thus, (they) should be bound quickly with the mudrd,
(formation made with the fingers), (in the shape of) a spike.
The little finger should be held by the thumb. The other three
are stretched out quickly. (This is that mudra.) The left hand
(is used ) for destroying the poison and the right hand in other
acts.**Om ! Obeisance to Lord Nilakanfha ! Cify ! To the clear¬
necked ! CUf ! (Obeisance) to the omniscient neck ! Cib ! Cast
down ! Orh ! Oblations ! (Obeisance) to the clear-necked, blue¬
necked ! To the destroyer of more than one or all poisons !
Obeisance to (Lord) Rudra-Manyu !” The poison gets des¬
troyed by rubbing with this {mantra) or by repeating in the car
or by (wearing) the sandal. There is no doubt. (Lord) Blue¬
necked, the great lord should be worshipped by following the
rule laid down for the worship of Rudra. One would destroy
the poison and disease by doing worship according to the rules
of Rudra (worship) .
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYSIX
The Jive constituents of the worship of Rudra
Fire-god said ;
1 -2. I shall describe the five constituents of the worship
of Rudra. It is the most excellent that confers everything. The

Hoasa^alpa (resolve for 8iva) is the heart. The Purufosi^eP is
the head. (The hymn) adbhyah sambhuta^ is the tuft. The hymn
(called) d/a® is the armour. The Satarudriya (hymn)* is the
weapon. These are the five constituents in the worship of
Rudra.
3-4a. After having assigned the five constituents and
contemplating Him, the Rudra hymns are repeated in order.
The hymn (beginning with) yajjSgrata^ is known to be repeated
mentally. The sage (of that hymn) is HvasaAkalpa (resolve)
and the metre is said to be triffubh (consisting of 11 syllables in
a quarter) .
4b-5a. (For the hymn) sahasraSirsiP for the head the sage
is Narayana. The deity (of this hymn) is the supreme soul.
The metre is known to be triffubh.
5b-6. The sage for the hymn adbhyah sambhuta^ is the person
going to the north. Iriffubh is the metre for the first three
hymns, antis (ubh for the next two and Irufubh for the last
(hymn). The deity for this (hymn) also is the supreme soul.
7-8. Indra is the lord for the twelve hymns beginning with
dSiP. Iris (ubh is said to be the metre and Pratiratha, the sage.
The deities are separate for each one of the verses in the hymn
of seventeen verses. The deity of the constituent part is
Puruvit. The metre of the remaining deities is said to be
aniisfubk.
9. Indra is the deity for (the hymn) asauyastamrab*. Purulinga is the deity for the constituent parts. Pankti is the metre.
The deities of the constituent parts are vital.
1 0. Paramesthin is the sage for all the hymns of the
Rudradhyaya^®. For the three hymns commencing with
2. TA. 3.13.1a. C/. adbhyafy sambhrtab.
3. Gould not be traced.
4. Same as Rudradhyaya.
Could not be traced.
7. See 1 above.
8. Could not be traced.
10. The hymns beginning with namasU rudra maiaiavf.

Agni Purina
*devanSrh kulsasya**^, Prajapati is the sage.
11. For the two (hymns beginning with) mano^y Uma is
the single deity and Rudra for rudr&ica^. Ekarudra is the deity
for the first anuvaka (name of a section of the •collection of
hymns ) .
12. Gayalra is the metre for the first (hymn), anuf^ubh for
the (next) three verses and pankli and anwfubh for the (subse¬
quent verses) .
13. Then jagati is the metre for the (next) two (verses)
The Rudra (hymns) are eighty. The Hiranyabahus are three.
“Obeisance to Thee ! O Kirika” is one.
14. Rudra is the deity of the five hymns of the twenty
mantras of the Rudr anuvaka. B^hatl is known to be (the metre)
of the first hymn.
15. The second one is a rA:. The next three are in jagati
(metre) . The third one is a trisfubh. Then the next four are
yajur {mantras) in anuftubh. One will gain perfection by means
of the aryd (hymns).
16-17. One would be able to destroy the poison, disease
and the enemy with (the repetition of) {the mantra) trailokyamohana (one that stupefies the three worlds) . “/wi, Srirfi, hririiy
hrum ! Obeisance to (Lord) Visnu, the stupefier of the three
worlds.’* One could (also) destroy the poison and disease with
theNfsimha {mantra) in the anusfubh; **Orhy harfi, irh 1 I make
obeisance to the fiercely brave great Visnu, who is glowing and
who has His faces on all sides. He is the frightening Nfsiriiha,
who is benevolent and is the destroyer of death.”
18-19. This is the mantra of five parts that accomplishes
all things. The two mantras having twelve* and eight® letters
are capable of destroying poison and disease. (The goddesses)
Kubjika, Tripura, Gauri and Candrika are capable of destroy¬
ing poison. The mantras relating to them also would remove
poison and make one gain good health. Similarly the mantras
relating to Sun, (Lords) Vinayaka (the elephant- faced god)
and Rudra (would give) everything always.
1. Could not be traced.
3. Gould not be traced.
4. om namo bhagavate vdsudevdjya.
5. om namo ndrdyoffdya.

CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETY SEVEN
The remedial mantra that would remove poison
Fire-god said :
1 -2. “On?, obeisance to LordRudra! You cut down venom !
(Obeisance) to the wielder of an axe of fire in his hand !
Obeisance to Lord Rudra in the form of the bird (Garuda) !
You make the bitten person get up ! Sliake him up ! Make
him converse ! Rouse up the person bitten by the serpent !
Make him dangle ! Bind him ! Release him ! Oh ! The Excel¬
lent Rudra ! You go, strike, bend, make noise and frighten and
destroy the poison with your fist ! Tha ! Tha !”
The poison gets destroyed by the repetition of the mantra of
the bird. “Oni ! Obeisance to Lord Rudra ! Destroy all kinds of
poison — vegetable or animal, artificial or natural, primary or
secondary ! Destroy different kinds of poison ! Destroy the
venom in the bitten person ! Subdue ! Eject ! You become free
from poison by the showers of darkness in the form of the
clouds. Destroy ! Go forth! You neutralise the poison by ejecting
it.” The poison would be controlled with the repetition of this
mantra. “OiA! Throw away 1 Om Throw away ! Oblations! Orh^
hrdrh, hrith, khirhy sa^, fharhf draurh, hrirn, fhah !” Being accom¬
plished by the repetition, one would be able to bind the ser¬
pents always. One could accomplish all things (by the repeti¬
tion of the mantra) : “Obeisance to the beloved of milk-maids”
having one, two, three or four letters and having the disc of
Krsna as the fifth part.
3-4a. “Gift, obeisance to Lord Rudra, the lord of ghosts !
Listen ! Make sound ! Make to rotate I Release ! Stupefy !
Manifest ! Enter ! Golden bird ! Rudra makes known ! Tha !”
This mantra known as the agitator of hell would destroy the
poison when repeated. A person bitten by a snake should
cauterize with log or stone for subduing the poison immedia¬
tely after being bitten. The bitten part of the body should be
cauterized with burning red lotus etc.
4b-5a. The drinking or besmearing or collyrium of the
three pungent things — seeds of Hri^a flower, arka flower and
ksird seeds would destroy the poison.

Ag^i Furdna
5b-6a. There is no doubt that the white pepper mixed
with the essence of the Sirisn flower would remove poison when
drunk or used as sternutatory or collyrium.
6b-7. The three pungent things, kosdtakU vacd and asafoetida mixed with the milk ofi/ma and arka and the mesa mixed
with water would remove the poison when used as a sternuta¬
tory. The powder of asafoetida and all parts of iksvdku used
as a sternutatory would remove the poison.
8. The expressed juice of indrabald, agnika^ droi^Ut tulasU
demka?tii6. saha mixed with the’powder of the three pungent things
when eaten would remove the poison. The five parts of the
Sirica eaten on the fifth (lunar day) of the dark (fortnight)
would remove the poison.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYEIGHT
The treatment for the poison due to snakes such as
the gonasa and others
Fire-god said :
1 . O Vasistha ! Listen to me ! I shall describe to you the
treatment for ( the poison due to) and others (snakes).
Hrirhy hrirh oblations to the stainless bird ! A charmer would
remove the ptoison due to mandalin (a kind of snake) by eat¬
ing the betel leaf (after consecrating it with the above mantra).
2. Garlic, asafoetida, kusfhay agnU dried ginger, pepper
and long pepper (are remedies) for poison. The milk of snuld
and clarified butter from the cow would remove the poison due
to . a class of snakes called ahi^ when it is drunk for a fortnight.
3. When one is bitten by (the snake called) rdjila, he
should drink pepper with rock-salt. Clarified butter, honey and
cow-dung water ( taken) with puritaki would remove poison.
4-6a. Thick milk and clarified butter together with pepper
should be drunk with honey. Pepper, dried ginger and long
pepper, the feather of a peacock, the bone of a cat and the
hair of a mongoose in equal parts should be powdered after

soaking with the milk of a goat. Fumigation (with the above
powder) would remove all kinds of poisons. The hair (of
mongoose) , nirgutf4ii and kola with same proportion of garlic
burnt with the leaf of (the plant) muni and boiled with sour
gruel (could be used for fumigation to remove poison).
6b-7. Rats are of sixteen kinds. One should drink the
juice of cotton together with oil ( to remove the poison due
to them). The phalini flower will also destroy the affliction
due to the rats. Eating of molasses together with nagara would
also remove that poison and the loss of appetite.
8-1 la. There are twenty ways of treating (this poison).
The group (of remedies) for removing the poison due to a
spider etc. ; padmakuy pdfali, ku^fha, uHra, sandal, nirgujniU SarikH
and Selu should be made into a paste and applied for affliction
due to the spider. The leaves of gunjd, nirgundi and ankola, dried
ginger, the two kinds of turmeric, the kernel of karahja made
into a paste and applied (would also remedy that poison).
Listen to me ! (I shall describe) the remedy that would remove
the poison due to a scorpion. A paste of the mixture of
manjisfhdy sandal, dried ginger, pepper, long pepper and the
flowers of iirifa and the white water-lily used in four ways such
as ointment and the like would femove (the poison due to) a
scorpion.
lib- 12. Orh obeisance to Lord Rudra ! Civi ! Civi ! Cut !
cut ! Kiri ! kiri ! Break ! Cut with the sword ! Pierce with the
spear ! Severe with the disc ! Orhkrurh phaf. When (the herb)
is given after the repetition of the (above) mantra, it would des¬
troy the poison due to an ass and others (animals). The three
myrobalans, uSira, musta water, mdrhsi, padmaka and sandal being
drunk together with goat’s milk would remove the poison due
to an ass and others (animals) .
13. Five parts oHirtfa (together with) dried ginger, pepper
and long pepper would remove the venom due to the centipedes.
The neck of the Sirtsa and its kernel would remove the poison
due to a rat.
14-15. The dried ginger, pepper and long pepper together
with clarified butter and made into a paste with the root of
long pepper would remove the poison. (A mixture of) alkali,
dried ginger, pepper and long pepper, vati, asafoetida, vidaAga,

Agni Purina
rocksalt, ambaffha^ atibala and kuftha would remove the venom
due to all insects. A combination o^yasti, dried ginger, pepper
and long pepper, treacle and milk would remove ^ the poison
due to a dog.
16-18. Otiij obeisance to Subhadra ! Orii, obeisance to
Suprabha ! You have been told by Brahma that you should
absorb the seed of the herbs which are taken by people without
(adhering to) the instructions. After having made obeisance to
them and the herbs later, the barley grains should be scattered
with the fist. This mantra should be repeated ten times. Then
obeisance should be made to that herb. (One should say) “I
lift you, the one looking upwards” and take the herb.
19-21. ‘‘Obeisance to the lion among men (eminent man) !
Obeisance to the cowherd ! O Krsna ! You yourself have
admitted that one (who takes your name) will not be defeated
in battle”. May the medicine be successful for me ! Obeisance
to Vaidurya mother ! O Gauri ! Protect me therein from all
venoms ! O Gandhari ! O Candali ! O Matangini ! Obla¬
tions to the illusive energy of Hari ! This is the mantra to be
used before (administering) the medicine in the case of a vege¬
table poison. If there is burning sensation after taking a medi¬
cine, the patient should be made to drink cold water together
with the root of lotus; ghee and honey should be taken if poison
persists even then.
CHAPTER TWO HUNDRED AND NINETYNINE
Recipes for the diseases of infants
Fire-god said:
1-2. I shall describe the science relating to (the diseases
of) children that would destroy the evil spirits that seize child¬
ren. The PapinI (-sinister) spirit possesses the child on the day
of its birth. (The child) would have trembliAg of the body. It
would not take food and would toss about its neck. These are
the reactions due to the above (spirit) . It would also takeaway
the strength of the mothers.

3-5. (An o.Tering consisting) of fish, meat, wine, edibles,
perfumes, garlands, incense and lamps (should be made to
appease this spirit) . The child should be besmeared with a
paste of dhdtaki (a variety of myrobalan), lodhra^ manjisfhd, tdla
and sandal. The spirit known as Bhisani (frightful) (would
sei^e the child) on the second night after birth. An incense
made of mahisdkfa (should be offered to drive the spirit). A
child possessed by this spirit would have cough with hard
breathing and writhing of the body again and again. The body
of the child should be besmeared with urine of goat together
with black pepper, apdmdrga and sandal. An incense made of
cow’s horn, tooth and hair should be offered. Offering (should
be made to the spirit) as before.
6-7. The spirit Ghan^ali (possesses) on the third (night
after the birth). (The affected child) would cry repeatedly,
yawn and make sounds. It would exhibit fear with convulsions.
It would not have appetite. The child should be besmeared
with a paste of keSara (filament of a flower), anjanut the tooth
of a cow and tusk of an elephant together with goat’s milk. An
incense consisting of nakhardji and leaves of bilva should be
offered. Offering (should be made to the spirit) as before.
8-9. The spirit (known as) Kakol! (possesses) on the fourth
(night after the birth). (The child would have) convulsion, loss
of appetite, frothing, and would turn to look in the different
directions. An offering (to the spirit is made) with kulmdfa and
spirituous liquor. The body should be besmeared with (the
scrapings of) the tusk of an elephant, the slough of a serpent
and the urine of a horse. Fumigation should be done with (the
vapours of ) turmeric ( and) neem leaves fanned by the hair.
10-1 la. (The monstress) Haihsadhika (would affect the
child) on the fifth (night). It is marked by yawning, breathing
upwards and clenched fists. Offering ( to the spirit) should be
made with fish and the like. The child should be besmeared
with (the scrapings) of goat’s horn, bald^ lodhray Hid and tdla.
lib- 12. The monstress Phafkari (takes possession of the
child) on the sixth (night) . (The child would exhibit) fear,
fainting and excessive weeping. It would not take food and
have convulsions. The offering (is made to the spirit) with fish

Agni Purd^a
etc. (The body of the child) is besmeared with turmeric,
gugguLu, kuffhta, (scrapings of) tusk oi* an elephant etc., and
fumigation is done with the same materials.
13-1 9a. A child is afflicted by (the spirit) Muktakeli on
the seventh (night). There would be foul smell, yawning, ex¬
haustion, excessive weeping and coughing. Fumigation should
be done with tiger’s nails. (The body of the child) should be
besmeared with vacd, cow-dung and cow’s urine. The spirit
(known as) Sridandi (afflicts the child) on the eighth (night),
(The afflicted child) would look in different directions, move
the tongue, cough and weep. Offering is done as before with
fish etc. Fumigation and besmearing is done with hiAguldf vacd,
mustard and garlic. The frightful monstress 'Drdhvagrahi
(affects the child on the ninth day). (The affected child)
would get agitated, have upward breathing and bite its clench¬
ed fist. Fumigation is done with red sandal, kuSfha etc. and the
child is besmeared (with the same) . Fumigation is done with
the hair and nails of a monkey. The monstress RodanI (affects
the child) on the tenth day. (The affected child) would always
weep, ( the body) would smell sweet and turn blue. Fumigation
is done with neem (to appease) the terrible monster. (The
body) should be besmeared with turmeric and the juice of
sarja (a kind of tree) . Offering should be made outside (the
house) with fried grains, kulmdfa and barley. Fumigation and
other such acts should be done in this manner until the thir¬
teenth day (after the birth).
19b-22a. The terrible monster (known as) Putana takes
possession of the child that is one month old. The (afflicted
child) weeps like a crow and breathes heavily. The body would
have the smell of urine. The eyelids would close. Such a child
should be bathed with cow’s urine. Fumigation is done with
the tooth of a cow. (The spirit should be appeased) by giving
yellow clothes, red garland, red sandal, oil lamp, three kinds of
sweet porridge, wine, sesamum and four kinds of flesh. Such an
offering should be made for seven days, at the foot of a karaHja
(tree) in the direction of Yama (south).
22b-23. (The female spirit) Mukut& (would seize the child)
two months old. The body (of the child) would get cold.
There would be vomitting, parching of the mouth and other

things. Flowers, incense, cloth, sweet cake, cooked rice, lamps
and (things) of black colour (should be offered). Camphor and
fumigation (also should be shown).
24-26a. (The famale spirit) Gomukhi (possesses) in the
third (month). (The afflicted child) would sleep (long), pass
urine and motion (in excess) and cry. (This spirit should be
appeased) by offering barley, priyaAgUt meat, kuimS$a (a kind of
grain), vegetables, cooked rice and milk in the morning.
Fumigation (should be made) with clarified butter at midday.
(The child) should be bathed with (water mixed) with (the
leaves of) five kinds (of trees). (The spirit) Pingala would
afflict (the child) in the fourth month. The body (of the child)
would become chill, have putrid smell and be parched. That
child would certainly die.
26b-27a. (The spirit) Lalana (would seize the child) in
the fifth (month). It would make the body weary. Blood
would come out tlu"ough the moudi. The -stools (would be)
yellow in colour. Offerings of fish and the like are made in the
south (in order to appease that spirit).
27b-28a. (The spirit) Pankaja (would seize the child) in
the sixth month. (Crying and modified) voice (are) the symp¬
toms. Offering (to appease the spirit) is done with fish, meat,
wine, cooked things, flowers and perfume and the like.
28b-29. (The monstress) Nirahara (would seize the
child) in the seventh (month). (The child would have) fetid
smell and the like and have toothache. Offering (is made)
with flour-paste, wine and meat. (The name of the spirit that
would seize the child) in the eighth (month) is Yamuna. There
would be boils, desiccation and the like. One should not do
medical treatment for that.
30. (The spirit) Kumbhakarni (afflicts the child) in the
ninth (month). The afflicted child would have fever and would
vomit and cry. Offering should be made with meat, kulmdfa (a
kind of grain) and wine and the like in the north-eastern
(direction).
31. (The demoness) Tapas! (seizes the child) in the tenth
(month). The symptoms are : the child would refrain from
(taking) food and have the eyes closed. (The monstress is

Agni Purd^
appeased) with (the tying of) a bell, (fixing) a banner and
offering of wine and meat together with flour jon a level
(ground).
32-33a. The demoness Raksasi (afflicts the child) in the
eleventh (month). It would affect the eyes etc. There is no
medical treatment (for that). (The spirit) Cafleala (would
seize the child) in the twelfth (month). There would be heavy
breathing. (The child) would exhibit fear etc.
33b-34a. (The monstress) Yatana (would affect the
child ) in the second year ( after birth) . ( The child would have)
pain and would cry. Offering is made with sesamum, meat,
wine etc. As before bathing and other (practices are done).
34b-35. (The monstress) Rodan! (would seize the child)
in the third (year). (The body would) tremble. (The child)
would cry and pass urine (mixed) with blood. Cooked rice
mixed with molasses and sesamum cake (should be offered) to
the image (of the monster) made of sesamum flour. It is
bathed with sesamum. Fumigation (should be done) with five
varieties of leaves and the bark of rdjaphala (a kind of fruit).
36. (The monstress) Ca^aka (would afflict the child) in
the fourth (year). There would be swelling (in the body),
fever and exhaustion in all the limbs. Offering (to appease is
made) with fish, meat, wine, etc. Bathing and fumigation (are
also done).
37-38a. (The monstress) Cafleala (would seize the child)
in the fifth year. (The child would have) fever, fear and ex¬
haustion in the limbs. Offering (is done) with meat, cooked
rice and the like. Fumigation (is made) with the horn of a
ram. Bathing should be done with the water in which the
leaves of the trees — -paldia^ udtmbara^ aSvattha, vafa and bilva
(have been put).
38b-39a. (The monstress) Dhavani (would afflict the
child) in the sixth year. (The child would have) desiccation,
insipidity and exhaustion in the body. Offering should be
made for seven days. Fumigation and bathing with bhfAgaka is
done before that.
39b-40a. (The spirit) Yamuna (would possess the child) in
the seventh year. (The child would have) vomitting, speech-

lessness, fits of laughter and weeping. Offering consists of meat,
sweet giuel, wine and the like. (Then there should be) bathing
and fumigation.
40b-41a. (The spirit) Jatadeva (would possess the child)
in the eighth year. (The child) would not take food and
would cry. Offering (should be done) with (scsaraum
and rice mixed), cakes and curd etc. Bathing and fumigation
(should also be done).
41b-42a. (The monstress) Kala (would seize the child) in
the ninth year. (The child would make) sound by beating the
arms, would roar and (exhibit) fear. The offering would be
with sesamum mixed with rice, cakes, flours, kulm&^a (a kind
of grain) and sweet gruel.
42b-44. (The spirit) Kalahamsi (would possess the child)
in the tenth year. There would be burning sensation, emacia>
tion and fever. Offering should be made with the paulika cake
(a kind of cake) and curd rice for five nights. Fumigation with
nimba and besmearing with knsfha (is done to appease the
spirit). The possessive spirit DevadutI (seizes the child) in the
eleventh (year). (The child would utter) harsh words. Offering
and smearing (are done) as before. (The spirit) Balika (would
possess the child) in the twelfth (year). There would be hard
breathing. The offering and smearing (are) as before.
45-47. (The spirit) Vayavi (would possess the child) in
the thirteenth (year) . The face and external organs would
become emaciated. Offering (consists of) red-coloured cooked
rice, incense, flowers etc. (The child) should be bathed with
the five (kinds of) leaves. Fumigation (should be done) with
rdjlf and neem leaves. (The monstress) Yaksini (would possess
the child) in the fourteenth (year). Colic, fever and burning
sensation arc the effects (due to this spirit). Offering (is made)
with meat, eatables etc. Bathing for the appeasement (of the
spirit is done) as before. (The spirit) Mundika (would possess)
in the fifteenth (year). Discharge of blood is due to this
(spirit). The mother (of the child) should always be attended
to in such cases.
48. Vanari (would seize the child) in the sixteenth (year).
The child would fall to the ground, sleep always and have

Agni Purdt^a
fever (under the influence). Offering (is made) . with sweet
gruel etc. for three nights. Bathing etc; (are done as before).
49. Gandhavati (would possess the child) in 'the seven¬
teenth (year). The body (of the child) would tremble and the
child would cry much. Offering (should be made) with kulmasa
etc. Bathing, fumigation and smearing etc. (are done) as
before. (The spirit) Putana exercises her influence during the
day and Sukumarika during the whole year.
50. Orfi ! Obeisance to all the mothers. Consume ! Con¬
sume the affliction that has got united with the child ! Attack !
Attack ! Explode ! Explode ! Agitate ! Agitate ! Seize ! Seize !
Manifest ! Manifest ! Thus Siddharupa announces. Take away!
Take away ! Make the female or male child or the woman or
man free from defect from the seizure of all the spirits. O
Camunda ! Obeisance to the goddess ! Hrurh ! Hrum ! Hrirh !
Drive away (all) the evil spirits ! Hrurh I Let the possessors go
elsewhere by another way. (Lord) Rudra makes known (thus).
This mantra would yield the desired result in all the cases of
seizure of children by evil spirits.
51. Oot I Obeisance to the Goddess! O Camunda !
Make the male or female child free. Accept the offering I Be
victorious I Be victorious I Dwell ! Dwell ! This mantra that
protects is read in all instances of offering being made.. May
(the gods) Brahma, Visnu, Siva, Skanda, Gauri, LaksmI, and
the Ganas protect and release the child from the affliction due
to burning sensation.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED
Description of the mantras which remove the baneful
influences of planets
Fire-‘god said :
1-2. I shall describe the mantras which would remove the
baneful inhuences of . planets and crush the planets. There
would be five kinds of insanity due to joy, desire, fear, grief.

eating food items which have contrary qualities and are not
clean, and the wrath of the preceptor and gods etc . These are
caused by the three defects (of deranged humours), their com¬
bined effect and external things.
3-5a. On account of the wrath of Rudra, the gods became
the several planets. The planets would seize men and women
at a river, ocean, tank etc., mountain, garden, bridge, - conflu¬
ence of a river, a deserted house, an entrance to a hole and a
lonely tree in (any one of the following states) : one who has
slept, a pregnant woman, a woman about to commence her
menstrual period, and one who bathes naked after the menstrual
period.
5b-8. Disrespect, enmity of men, obstacles, change of for¬
tune, trangression of the codes of conduct relating to the gods
and elders, fall from a mountain, tree and the like, brushing
aside the hair on the head frequently (are the symptoms of
evil influences of the planets). A person possessed (by planets)
would weep, dance, have red eyes, be deformed, be agitated,
suffer from pain and burning sensation, be affected by hunger
and thirst and have headache. A person possessed by a planet
that desires for a victim wouldrequest (saying) “Give I Give !**.
A man possessed by a planet having excessive desire would
desire for women, garlands, enjoyment and bath.-
9. (The manfror) of the great Sudar^ana (disc of lord
Visnu) that pervades the sky, twig-shaped nose, Patalanarasiihha and the like and the Gandimantras are capable of
subduing the planets.
10- 12a. One should worship the lord who is fond oipfint
(an aquatic plant), asafoetida, vacd and bunch of iirlfa
(flowers). (One should worship Him) who is the supreme
person, who bears the noose, goad, rosary, human skull, who
holds (in his hand) a club with the skull, lotus and mace, who
has four faces, who is on a lotus amidst inner and outer staffs
with skull in the orb of the Sun togeth^ with the Sun and
others should be worshipped and water for sipping should be
offered to the Sun who has risen.
12b. Venus (should be contemplated) as having the form
of breath, poison, hre, a brahmin, pitcher and hfllekhd
(knowledge ?).

Agni Purana
13-14. **BhQrbhuvah saa^'* for Arka (Sun) and Jalini the
family mace (are used in the worship ofSun). The Moon (is
contemplated as) seated on the lotus, having light red com¬
plexion, wearing red clothes, spreading radiance ifi the uni¬
verse, lofty, holding lotuses in his two hands and having all the
limbs adorned. Moreover the heart and other limbs (should
be contemplated) as red, benevolent, conferring boons and
holding lotuses.
15-16. Mars (should be contemplated) as resembling a
multitude of lightning, wearing white clothes, beautiful and
light red in complexion. Mercury (is also contemplated) in
the same manner. Jupiter (is contemplated) as yellow, Venus
as white, Saturn as dark, Rahu (the ascending node) as
resembling charcoal and Ketu (the descending node) as grey.
They (should be contemplated as having) the left hand
(placed) on the left thigh and the right hand (placed) on the
right thigh and knee.
17. The first letters of their names would be their bijas
(the mystical letter forming the essential part of the mantra).
The two hands are purified with (the mantra of) the weapon.
Then (the letters) should be assigned on (the fingers) begin¬
ning with the thumb, the palm, the two eyes as pervading the
heart and the other (limbs) .
18. One should contemplate the life force and carry out
the location of the three basic letters (of the mantra) in the
limbs. The vessel should be sprinkled with (the mantra of) the
weapon and filled with water with the basic {mantra) .
19. After having placed incense, flowers, unbroken rice
and durvd (grass), the offering should be sanctified. One should
then spinklc that (water) on oneself as well as on the materials
for worship.
20. Then one should contemplate the absolute, pure,
essence (that confers) supreme happiness. One should then
(mentally) set up the seat etc. in the centre and in the differ¬
ent directions with (the mantras of) the heart.
21. One should (offer the worship) on the seat and in the
(main) directions as well as the intermediate directions with
(the mantra of) the heart. (One should contemplate) the heartlotus on the seat and the eight female energies in the filaments.

22-23. One should worship ( the goddesses) Dipta, Suk*
sma, Jaya, Bhadrika, Vibhuti, Viinala, Asighatavidyuta and
Sarvatomukh! and the seat with the syllables varh^ virh^ vwfit
vCiriif verh, vairfi^ vorfi, vaurh and vam and then worship the Sun
with (the syllable) vaHj^. Oh ! One who practises austerities !
Water for drinking and other formalities should be offered
with ( the mantras of) the heart and the six accessories after
having invoked.
24. The two ^kka* syllables, the two daniins^ the two
CandaSy the marrow together with the teeth, m&rhsadirghd ( ?) ,
jaradvdyu (?) etc. of the Sun that confer all the things (should
be worshipped) with (the mantra of) the heart.
25. The heart etc. should be worshipped in the south-east,
north-east, south-west and north-west, extending upto the
pericarps with their respective mantras. The weapon with the
eye (should be worshipped) in the forepart of the directions.
26. (The planets) Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus
should be worshipped in the directions commencing with the
east. In the case of diseases caused by planets, one should do
the sternutatory, unguent etc. with prSniy asafoetida, vaedy
cakra (?), ^irisa and garlic together with the goat*s urine.
27. One each of mustard, iigrUy rock-salt
and dried ginger, pepper and long pepper ground well and
mixed with an ddhaka (a unit of measure) of goat’s milk and
the ghee prepared. (The use of this) would remove all (the
defects due to) the planets.
28. One should drink the water mixed with the vrSeika (a
herb), aliy pkali, kusfha, the salts and SdrAgaka. It would destroy
epilepsy.
29-3 1 . One should drink the decoction made with viddriy
kuiOy kdSa and sugarcane mixed with milk and boiled (as a
remedy for the same). (Similarly) clarified butter boiled with
essence oiyastikoy dro^a and k&smdnda (would be a remedy) . So
also ghee of the five things got from a cow (would do good).
Listen to me about the combination that would remove the
fever. “Om ! Let us know (the nature of) the deity that has
the weapon to reduce (all the things) to ashes. Let us meditate
on (that god having) single tusk. May fever make us meditate

Agni PurS^a
on that.** One should lick (a paste made of) long pepper,
pepper, turmeric, Tdsn&, oil extracted from grapes and molasses.
32. One who has breathing trouble should lick bhUAgi
(hemp) andyaffi with honey and clarifi^ butter. -Or else one
should lick pdfhdt tiktdf kai}d and bhdAgi with honey.
33. Dh&triy vUvasitd, kff^a, musta, khatjSra, mdgadhi and pivar a
(?) would destroy hiccup. The three should be licked with
honey.
34. One should drink the juice of kdmdli, jiray mdi^^Skt,
turmeric and dhdtri(one of themyrobalan) . Long pepper, pepper
dried ginger, padmaka, the three myrobalans, vidaAga, devaddru,
and the powdered rdsnd taken in equal proportions would remedy
cough.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND ONE
The mode of worship of Sm
Fire-god said :
1-3. **Sayyd (bed) , Da^dl* Aje^, Pavaka, the four-faced'*
is the basic {mantra) that accomplishes all the desires. It is said
for the sake of (gaining) power. The (%‘a (basic)) should
contain long vowels. The constituents should be evenly set in
the bija {mantras). Each collection of monhos would have five
parts such as the khdta, sddhu, vifa, bindu and sakala. Each one
has a separate great merit. Thega^fa (should be worshipped as
follows) : “Obeisance for the sake of victory. (Obeisance) to
the one having one tusk ! To the elephant-faced ! One having
big belly and hands !** These five constituents are common for
all (the mantras) . One would accomplish his desires by repeating
a lakh times.
4-6. “(Obeisance) to the head of the ga^as (goblins), to
the leader of the ga$as, to the lord of the gaifas-, and to the one
who sports with the gw/fos.** The image shonld be worshipped as
before with the five constituents in the directions which are
the petab. (Obeisance) to one having curved trunk, single tusk,
big belly and ele^^nt face. (Obeisance) to the dreadful one, to

the lord of obstacles and to the one of grey complexion. One
should worship these (gods), the lords of the worlds, in the
(main) directions and the intermediary directions by (showing)
the mudrd formed by inserting the two thumbs in between the
(two) middle and index fingers of the clenched fists. One
should (contemplate the god) as having four hands filled with
ball-shaped sweets) and bearinga club, noose and goad*
One should worship (the god) as holding the eatables with
his tusk, as red in complexion, as holding a lotus and as surround¬
ed by a noose and goad especially on the fourth day (of a lunar
fortnight) and in general everyday.
7. (If the oblation) is done with the root of white arka
(plant) it would confer all desires. (If it is done) with sesamum,
ghee, rice, curd, honey and clarified butter one would get pros¬
perity and power to subdue.
8. Lord Martandabhairava (the Sun god) (who) affects
the skin, blood, breath and the vital energy, (who is) the cause
of virtue, material prosperty, desires and emancipation (and
who is) covered by the orb (is contemplated).
9-1 3a. (He should be worshipped such that) His five forms
(are represented by) the short (syllables) and the limbs by the
long (syllables). The Sun-god possessing a red complexion as
the sindura (vermilion) and having His consort on His left (is
worshipped) in the north-east. Mars, Saturn, Rahu, Ketu and
others (are worshipped) in the angular points south-east etc.
After having bathed as laid down, the Sun-god should be wor¬
shipped preceded by (the offer of) respectful water. At the end
of the worship, a garland of flowers should be oldered to the
dreadful effulgent (form) in the north-east. Lighted (lamp),
rocand (the yellow orpiment got from the cow), saf&on, water,
red perfume and unbroken (rice), sprout (of the paddy),
bamboo-seed, barley, Sdli (a kind of paddy), tydmdka (a kind of
grain), sesamum and mustard together with japd flower should
be offered. Then they (should be collected) in the vessels and
should be held on the head. Then one should prostrate bending
his knees on the ground and dedicate the offering to the Siingod.
13b- 14a. After having worshipped the planets with nine
pitchers sanctified with their respective mystic syllables, one

Agni PurSt^a
should bathe for appeasing the planets. After the repetition of
the syllable sacred to Sun-god, one will get all (the things).
14b-15. The bija mantras logGlh^r y/ilh. agni^ dosa aind bindUy
that confer victory in battle, should be located from
head to foot. The basic {mantra) is worshipped by (showing)
the mudrd. After having performed the assignment on the
different limbs, one has to imagine himself as the Sun-god.
16-18. (The Sun-god) should be contemplated as yellowcoloured in incantations practised for death as well as for stupe¬
fying the senses, as white for the sake of satisfaction, as black
for achieving the destruction of the enemy and as the colour of
the rain-bow for stupefaction. One who is always bent on doing
ablution, repetition (of the mantras)^ contemplation, worship
and oblation would become resplendent, invincible, prosperous
and gain victory in the ocean etc. After having located (the
mantra of the Sun) in the betel etc. and after repetition (of the
mantra) i one should offer uSiraka (the fragrant root of a plant).
A person who touches with the hand in which the bija {tnantra)
has been located would certainly charm (the person).
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TWO
Description of different kinds of potential mantras and herbs
Fire~god said :
1. The ^chief manfm, that is (known as) Saras vat! (Goddess
of learning) , that which has the letters that have the directive
at the end of the oblation (is) **For speech, deed, united to
the side, white, and for the sake of the child is deemed to be the
ship.*’
2. A person who repeats this collection of mantra a lakh
times would become a wise man. The supreme {mantra) of the
heart for Indra is “Atri, together with fire, vSma, eye and dot
{bindu)r
3-4a. (Lord) Indra having yellow complexion and wielding
the thunderbolt and lotus should be invoked and worshipped.

Ten lakh oblations of clarified butter and sesamum should be
made and (the image) should be anointed with that. (By doing
so) a king would recover the lost kingdom and progeny etc.
4b-6. (Lord Siva) is known to be with the female energy
Hfllekha and possesses agni^ dati^i and danda. After having
propitiated (Lord) Siva, one should repeat (the mantra of) the
female energy on the eighth and fourteenth (lunar days) . (The
goddess should be contemplated) as bearing disc, noose and goad
and as showing protection and conferring boons. One would
gain prosperity, poetic skill and progeny by doing oblation etc.
“Ow, hrirhy orh obeisance to (god of) desire, to the one beneficial
to all the beings, to the one who stupefies all the beings, to the
one who makes the hearts of all the beings glow. Come and
take a place in my self (repeated).” Orh. One would subjugate
the entire world by the repetition of this mantra etc.
7-9. “Om, krirhy Oh ! Camunda ! Burn(?)and cook ( ?) such
and such a person. You bring him under my control (repeated).
Tha ! Tha ! This mantra of (goddess) Gamuncja that would
subjugate has been told. The genital parts should be washed
with the decoction of the three myrobalans. (It) would sub¬
jugate (the partner). Similarly a wife should smear with aiva~
gandhdy barley, turmeric and comphor (with the same results).
(So also) long pepper, eight grains of rice, twenty numbers of
pepper, besmeared with the juice of brhali would keep (the
husband) under one’s control till death. Besmearing with the
root of kafira and trikafu mixed with honey would also have
similar results.
1 0- 1 2a. A paste made of sandal wood, fruit, karabha, mdgadhl,
madhuka and honey besmeared would bring prosperity to the
couple. The juice of kadamba and honey mixed with sugar and
besmeared in the vagina (will also yield the same fruit).
Pulverized sahadeviy mahdlakpni, putrajivi and krtdnjali thrown on
the head would subjugate the world.
12b- 13. One prastha (a measure) of the decoction of the
three myrobalans, two kudavas (a measure) each of the juice of
bhrdgay hema and do^d and an equal (measure) of honey got
from musk-rat boiled with ghee (and mixed with) turmeric
dried in the shade, when besmeared, would delight (the
couple).

Agni Pwfina
14. One who drinks daily vidari^ uccafd^ mdsa and pulverized
sugar mixed well with milk could cohabit with a hundred
women.
15- 16a. A woman, who desires to have a son, should drink
the roots oi aivattha (holy fig), bamboo, darbha (grass), vaisnavi,
iri^ dUrvd (grass) axiA aivQgandha mixed with powdered gulma^
mdsa, sesamum, vrihi paddy together with milk.
I fib- 17a. The fibrous roots of Aaunti and z;q;Vd,
lodhra and the sprouts of vata (banyan tree) should be drunk by
a woman during her menstrual period together with clarified
butter and milk for the sake of (getting) a son.
17b-I8. A woman who desires to have a son should drink
milk together with the root of Sri (bilva) and the shoots of
banyan. Alternatively she may use the juice of bilva, shoots of
banyan and devi as sternutatory or she may drink the root of
bilva and lotus ground with milk together with the root of
holy fig tree in abundance.
19. Tarala with milk and the fruits and the tender branches
of the cotton tree, the tip of the apdmdrga flower and fresh
buffalow milk would have the same effect.
20-21 . Four kinds of compounds are said ( to be beneficial)
for the sake of progeny by using the three kinds of herbs.
Sugar, lApala flower, ak$a, lodhra, sandal and sdrivd should be
given with rice-water for abortion. One may alternatively lick
fried ricc,_ya;/», sugar and grapes together with honey and
clarified butter.
22. A woman would have comfortable delivery if a paste
of the fibrous roots of afarUfa, IdAgall and kdkamdci&TC besmeared
separately below the navel.
23-26. One should drink (the juice of) red or white japd
flower in the case of discharge of blood and semen. The eating
of the filament, the root of brhatl, gopl, yoffi, grass and utpala
mixed with goat’s milk and oil would make the hair grow.
When the hairs begin to fall, this would make them firm.
A prastha (measure) of cmblic myrobalan and the juice of
bhrAga and an d^haka (measure) of oil and milk (boiled with)
oil and anjana fruits is beneficial for hairs, eyes and head.
If khdrl (quantity) of turmeric, the bark oirdjavfksa, root of
tamarind, ro<^-salt and lodhrdca are drunk it would remove

quickly the swelling of the belly of the cow. *^Oth, obeisance to
the lord having three eyes ! Subdue ! Subdue ! ailu (2), mUi
(2) ! Break (2) ! One that regards the cattle! In the disc I
Hr urn phaf ! You protect the cattle in this village (2) ! Appease
(2) I (The lord) having belblike ear, the leader of a host of
army, the warrior is said to be having great strength. May that
lord of the world who is capable of destroying the epidemic
diseases protect me. These mantras in the form of a verse which
are capable of protecting the cows should be located.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND THREE
The propitiation of the letters on one's limbs to ward off evil
Fire-god said :
1. It is known to be the period of paufna when the Moon
reaches the natal asterism and the Sun occupies the seventh
house. One has to examine one’s breath then.
2. The throat and the lips move from their position, the
nose (becomes) bent and the tongue (becomes) black. That
person would live for seven days only.
3-4a. (The following is the mantra for warding off this evil
consequence) : **taro mefo mifarh danti naro dirghd ghanS rasahy to
kruddholka^ maholkay viroVeuy ulka and sahasrolka." This is the
eight-syllabled mantra of (Lord) Vi^^u.
4b- 7. These should be located in the folds of the eight
fingers beginning with the little finger. The eight letters of (the
eight) asterisms represented by the eight folds beginning with
the first fold on the middle finger should be located in order on
the head. The asterism (is located) on the index finger, the
lagnas on the thumb as also with the middle finger. In the same
way the letters of the asterisms etc. are located on the palm
and thumb. (The letters of the mantras should be contemplated)
— ^as red, white, tawny, green, golden .and (the remaining)
three as white. These letters having the above colours and set
with their true state should be located in order at the heart,
face, eyes, head, feet, palate, private organ and hands.

Agni Purib^a
8. After having assigned the principal letters on the hand
and body, the location of the constituent parts. The location
on ( the image of) the deity should be done as in the case of
oneself except (that) the hand (is not involved).
9-12. The letters located in the different places such as the
heart should be worshipped with incense and flowers. The
virtues etc., fire etc. and unrighteousness etc. are located res¬
pectively on the body, seat and the lotus. The three orbs of
the Sun, Moon and Fire pervading the filaments (of the lotus)
should be located in order with their distinctions. The
qualities sattva etc. and the female energies Vimala, Utkarsini,
Jflana, Kriya, Yoga, Prahvi, Satya and Isananugraha (arc to
be located) in the filaments therein in order. After having wor¬
shipped the yogic seat at the centre, (Lord) Hari should be
invoked and worshipped.
13. The five practices of worship such as water for washing
the feet, arghya (respectful offering) , water for sipping, yellow
clothes and ornament are all offered with the principal
{mantra).
14. The images of (gods) Vasudeva (a form of Vi§nu)
and others, namely four^, should be worshipped in the four
(principal) directions. (Goddesses) 8ri (Laksmi), Sarasvati,
Rati and iSanti should be worshipped in the intermediary
directions.
15. The conch, disc, mace, lotus, pestle, sword, iarnga
(bow) and the garland of wild flowers should duly be wor¬
shipped in the principal and intermediary directions.
16. After having worshipped Tarksya (eagle vehicle of
Lord Visnu) outside in front (of the Lord) , Visvaksena and
Some^a should be worshipped outside at the centre and Indra
and other attendant gods outside the enclosure. One would
obtain everything by this worship.
I Vdsudeva, Pradyumna, .\niruddha and Sankarfaii^a.

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FOUR
The mode of worship of Siva with the mantra of five syllables
Fire -god said :
1. *^Me$ahLy Sarhjhdy visarfiy sdjyarh, astiy dirghodakarhy rasa^**
This is the mantra sacred to (Lord) 8iva that confers good.
2-4. After having worshipped the asterisms etc. well one
would gain the status of the celestials etc. (Lord) Siva, the
embodiment of knowledge, the Supreme Brahman and the
highest intellect (should be contemplated) in one’s heart.
Brahma and other gods are born of His power and are only His
manifestations. The letters of the mantra (gave rise) to the
five elements, their respective mantras and their respective
matter. Prana and other ( vital) winds, the five organs of sense
and five organs of action, everything are (the manifestation of)
Brahman, namely, the five letters. Similarly we have the
embodiment of eight syllables.
5-8. The place of initiation sanctified by the mantra should
be washed with (the five jthings got from a cow) . The essential
articles for worship (should be taken to the place) and (Lord)
Siva should be worshipped as laid down. After having practised
the location of the mantras on the m :in image and the limbs,
rice should be scattered. Then the porridge should be made
ready and the milk boiled. Then it should be divided into three
parts. One part should be dedicated (to the god), the second
should be given as oblation and the third should be taken by
the preceptor and the pupil. After rinsing the mouth and
accomplishing the transformation, the preceptor should give
the disciple a twig of the Ajrira tree for (cleansing) the teeth
after sanctifying it with (the mantra of) the heart. After having
cleaned the teeth and washed the mouth, he should throw it on
the ground.
9-11. It (indicates) good if it falls in the northern or
western direction from the east and bad otherwise. The wise
(preceptor) should make it dry by tying the tuft, of the disciple
who has come and make him lie down on the sacrificial altar
on the bed of darbha (grass) together with himself. At dawn
the pupil should meet the preceptor who has slept well and let
him know (the dream he had) . Then worship (should be done)

Agni Purdtfa
supreme principle. Then the preceptor should regenerate the
pupil by the process of (tantric) creation. After having located’
(the supreme principle) in the pupil, he must be led circumam¬
bulating. After bringing him to the western door, ( the precep¬
tor) should make (the pupil) throw (the flowers) held in
the folded hands. On whatever place the flowers fall that name
should first be given (to the pupil).
36b-41 . By the side of the sacrificial shed a pit should be
dug up in such a way that it has the navel and girdle. The fire
of Lord Siva should be generated and worshipped. It should
again be worshipped by the pupil- (Then the preceptor) should
absorb the pupil in his own self after contemplation by means of
the process of dissolution. Again regenerating him, darbha
• (grass) consecrated with the repetition of mantras should be
placed in his hand. The principles such as the earth and others
should be offered to the fire with ( the repetition of the mantras
of ) the heart and others. After having offered hundred obla¬
tions for each one (of the principles), one should do oblation
with the principal {mantra) of (the principle of) sky. After
having offered the final oblation, one should offer eight obla¬
tions with (the mantra of ) the weapon. (After having perform¬
ed) the rite of atonement for the sake of purification, it should
be completed with the residual offering. Then a consecrated
pitcher should be worshipped well and the pupil bathed on the
seat. (Then the preceptor) should instruct the pupil in the
ceremonial practice and (the pupil) should pay respect to his
preceptor by (offering) gold and other things. Thus the initia¬
tion into the five syllables relating to (god) Vi§nu and others
has been narrated.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND FIVE
The fiftyjive names of {Lord) Vi$nu and their greatness
Fire-god said :
1. A person who repeats the hi tyhve names ot (Lord)
Vi^nu would get the fruits of Repeating the mantras and the

worship (with these names) at the sacred places (of
pilgrimage) would have undiminishing fruits.
2. Pun^arlkaksa (lotus-eyed) (should be contemplated)
at Pu§kara, Gadadhara (one who wields the club) at Gaya,
Raghava (Rama as the scion of Raghu) at Gitraku]a and
Daityasudana (the destroyer of the demons) at Prabhasa.
3. Similarly Jaya (the victor) (should be worshipped) at
Jayanti, Jayanta (one who gains victory) at Hastinapura,
Varaha (manifestation as boar)at Vardhamana and Cakrajmni
(one who holds the disc) at Kasmira.
4. (One should contemplate) Janardana (one that re¬
moves the difficulties of people) at Kubjamra, Ke^va at
Mathura, H^sike^a (lord of the senses) at Kubjamra and
Jatadhara (one who bears the matted hair) at the place where
the Ganges enters the plains.
5. (One should contemplate) Mahayoga ( one who ardently
practises Toga) atSalagrama, Hari at the Govardhana mountain,
Caturbahu (one having four arms) at Pindaraka and Sahkhin
( the holder of the conch) at ^ahkhadvara.
6. Vamana ( the Dwarf manifestation) (is worshipped) at
Kuruksetra, Trivikrama (the conqueror of three worlds) at (the
river) Yamuna, Vi^ves vara (the lord of the universe) at (the
river) 8ona and Kapila (propounder of the Sahkhya philosophy)
on ( the banks of) the eastern ocean.
7. (One should repeat the name of) Visnu (on the shore
of) the great ocean at the confluence of the river Ganges with
the ocean, Vanamala (the bearer of garland of wild flowers)
at Kiskindha and Deva ( lord) at Raivataka.
8. Mahayoga (the great (is contemplated) at Kasi,
Ripufljaya ( the conqueror of enemies) at Viraja, Ajita (the
unconquered) at Vi sakhayupa and Lokabhavana (the creator
of the world) at Nepala.
9. One should know that (one has to repeat the name)
Krsna at Dvaraka, Madhusudana ( the slayer of the demon
Madhu) at Mandara (mountain ) and Ripuhara (the destroyer
of enemies) at Lokakula and one should think of Hari at l§alagrama.
10. (One should repeat the name) Puru^a (the Supreme
person) at Puru^avafa, Jagatprabhu (the lord of the world) at

Agni Furda^a
Vimala, Ananta (the endless) at the Saindhava forest and
8arhgadharin (the wielder of the bow) at Dandaka (forest) .
1 1 . Sauri (the hero) (should be contemplated) at die whirl¬
pool (called) Utpala, Sriyahpati (the consort of Laksmi) at
(the river) Narmada, Damodara (having the enlarged belly)
at Raivataka and Jala^ayin (one who reclines on the water) at
Nanda.
12. It is known that (one has to repeat the name) Gopi-
£vara on (the shore of) the Sindhu ocean, Acyuta (unswerv¬
ing) at Midiendra (hill), Devadevesa (the lord of gods) at the
Sahya mountain and Vaikuntha (one who has united the
earth etc.), at the M&gadha forest.
13. (One should repeat the name) Sarvapapahara
(Destroyer of all sins) at the Vindhya (mountain) and Puru-
$ottama (the foremost among men) in (the region of) Odhra.
One should know the universal soul (residing) in one’s heart.
The recitation (of these names) confers enjoyment and eman¬
cipation.
14. (One has to contemplate) the Vai^ravana (the great
fig tree) at every fig tree, (Lord) I§iva(’the auspicious) at every
quadrangle, Rama on every mountain and Madhusudana ( the
slayer of the demon Madhu) everywhere.
15. One who contemplates the Supreme spirit on the
earth and sky, the god having eagle in the banner in ( the
great sage) Vasis^ha and Vasudeva (epithet of Krsna) every¬
where would get enjoyment and emancipation.
16-17. One would obtain all (the desires) by the repeti¬
tion of these names of (Lord) Visnu. The (performance of)
ancestral rites, (offering) gifts, repetition (of the names of
god) and (offering of waters of) libation in all these sacred
places will have manifold (benefits). One would become
verily the Brahman after one’s death. One who reads or
listens to this (will become) free from impurity and will obtain
heaven.

CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SIX
Description of the mantras to be repeated
to ward off evil incantations etc.
Fire-god said :
1 -2. Stupefaction, dissension, ruin, destruction, delusion,
death and illness are known to be (due to) evil incantations.
Listen to me ! I shall describe the means of getting relief from
them. Orh obeisance to lord Unmattarudra (intoxicated
Rudra) ! Stupefy (2) Make (him) wander (2) ! Threaten
such and such a person! Hurl him aloft (2) with anger I
Hurh^ phaff fha (2) : One should do oblation with honey with
the twigs of dhUrta in the funeral fire after repeating ( this
mantra) three lakh times at night in a Cremation ground. (By
this) the enemy would be wandering always.
3. (After having made) a black image (of the enemy) with
red chalk, if it is pierced in the throat or heart with golden
needles 2d*ter repeating (the above mantra) ^ the enemy would
die.
4. One who wants to destroy (his enemy) should throw
pulverized tail of the ass, funeral ash, brahmadanil and markafi
on the house or head of the person.
5-7a. (t shall describe the method of worshipping the
disc in the. thousand-petalled lotus.) **Bhrgu, ether, glowing
fire, bhrgu, fire armour, (is for the armour) . One (should)
thus (worship) in the thousand-pe tailed (lotus). phafy
to the disc (acakraya) oblations” is for the heart, {h&rh phaf)
to the disc (vicakraya) for the head, {hurh phaf) to the disc
(fikhacakra) of the tuft (for the tuft), (Aflm phaf) to the disc
(vicakra) for the eye, {hUrhphat) to the disc (sahcakra) for the
weapon and {hurh phat) to the glowing disc {jvdldcakra) as
before for the bow. (By worshipping) the disc in this way
(with the constituent mantras) ^ it would remove all the afflic«
tions due to evil incantations and accomplish all (the desires).
The letters of this {mantra) should be located on the head,
eyes, mouth, heart, genital organ and feet.
1. The number 2 after the words indicates repetition of the respective
words.

Agni Purina
7b- 9a. (One should contemplate the Sudarsana disc
personified as ) seated on the lotus, resembling the colour of
fire, having large teeth and four hands, (holding) the conch,
disc, mace, lotus, brush and goad in his hand, holding the
bow, having reddish brown hair and eye and pervading the
three worlds by means of the spokes (of the disc). If the navel
is pierced with its fire, the diseases and (afflictions due to) the
planets would get destroyed.
9b- 10. One should draw two discs. They should be yellow.
They should be bearing the disc. The spokes should be red and
their inter-spaces black. The periphery should be white and
the outer line black. The inter-space should bear the colour
of silver.
11-12. After having brought a pitcher with water first, it
should be placed in front and the Sudarsana (disc of Lord
Visnu) placed there. One should offer oblation in order to the
disc on the south. Clarified butter, twigs of apamargOt unbroken
rice, sesamum, mustard, sweet gruel and clarified butter from
the cow (are the materials that are offered). (One should do
oblation) one thousand and eight times.
13-14. The remaining (part) of each one of the materials
after the oblation should be put into the pitcher by one who
knows the mode of performance. A ball made of these offer¬
ings should be placed in the pitcher. (By doing so) (Lord)
Visnu and others would enter that (pitcher). Then offering
should be made in the south with the residual water with (the
repetition of) the mantra “Obeisance to the retinue of (Lord)
Visnu who appease everything. May they accept. Obeisance
for peace !”
15-16a. (It may also be performed differently). One may
inscribe (the disc) on a plank, place a vessel filled with milk
and perform oblation with the twigs oipalaSa and kfira (trees)
in the different directions engaging brahmins. These two obla¬
tions done after offering appropriate fees (to the priests)
would destroy the spirits, etc.
16b- 17. Evil incantations would be removed by writing
on leaves soaked in cow’s milk and without leaves. (One has to
do oblation) with dUrvd (grass) for (prolonging) life, with lotus
flowers for prosperity, with ( twigs of) udumbara for progeny.

with clarified butter at the cow-shed for cattle and with (the
twigs) of all the trees for intellect.
18. Ofht ksaurh ! Obeisance to Lord Narasimha ! To one
who has the flames as the garland, one who has effulgent
teeth, one who has fiery eyes, one who is the annihilator
of all the demons ! To one who destroys all the spirits ! To
one who destroys all fevers ! burn (2) ! cook ( 2) ! protect
(2) \humphat ! This man/rfl of Narasimha (the man-lion mani¬
festation of Lord Visnu) removes all sins. Its repetition would
remove evil incantations, (evil influences of malignant) planets,
epidemics, poisons and diseases. One could arrest the force of
water and fire (by rubbing over the body) the ground marrow
of a frog (after the repetition of the ahov a mantra).
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND SEVEN
Description of the mantras that would
stupefy the three worlds
Fire-god said :
1-2. I shall describe to you the mantra that would stupefy
the three worlds and would accomplish the four ends of human
life. 0;w, Srluiy hrM, hrurhy orh obeisance ! Oh ! Foremost among
men ! Fite prototype offoremo.st among men ! The abode of
Laksrni (goddess of fortune) ! One who agitates the entire
world ! One who opens the hearts of all women ! One who
intoxicates tlie three worlds ! Burn (2), Make glow (2), Dry
up (2), Kill (2), Arrest (2), Melt (2), Attract (2) the hearts
of the maidens of the heaven and, earth ! ,Oh ! The most
fortunate one ! The giver of all good fortunes ! Conferer of
desires ! (You) kill such and such a person (repeated) ! You
pierce with the disc, mace, sword and all the weapons ! Cover
(2) with the noose ! Strike with the goad (2) ! Hasten (2) !
Why do you tarry till accomplishing my desire ! Hurh, phai,
obei*:ance. Orh, foremost among men !, One. who intoxicates
the three worlds I HUrh, phdpl Obeisance to .the heart I

Agni Purina
Attract ! Oh ! One of great strength ! Hurfi^ phaf to the weapon!
Oh ! lord of the three worlds ! You kill, pierce, and bring
under my control the hearts of all men ! Hurfi^ phaf I To the
eyes I Oh I stupeher of the three worlds ! The lord of the sense
organs I Incomparable one ! One who attracts the hearts of
all women I (You) come (2) ! Obeisance I The location of
the auxiliary (mantra) pervading the limbs and eyes should
also be done as described for the principal (mantra). After
having worshipped, repeating (the mantra) fifty times and
anointing one thousand times, (the preceptor) should prepare
porridge in the divine fire* and do hundred oblations in the
fire in the pit.
3-4. Curd, ghee, milk, porridge, clarified butter and
boiled milk (should be offered) separately. Twelve oblations
(should be made) with (the repetition of) the principal
(mantra). (Then one should offer) unbroken rice and sesamum
a thousand times and barley, the three sweet things (sugar,
honey and clarified butter), flower, fruit, curd and twigs
a hundred times. After having offered the final oblation, (the
preceptor) should make the disciple drink the porridge to¬
gether with ghee.
5-6a. After having fed the brahmins, the priest should be
pleased (by paying the fee). Then the mantra would get
accomplished. After having bathed and rinsed (the mouth) as
laid down, (the votary) should go to the sacrificial chamber
restraining his speech. He should sit in the padmasana (sitting
posture with legs crossed) and dry up his body as laid down.
6b-l 1. The sudarsana (disc) that destroys the demons and
removes the obstacles in the (different) directions should be
placed at first. Then one should contemplate the principal
(syllable) *yarh* that is at the centre of the navel. It is of the
nature of the terrific wind. It is conceived as absolving all the
sins from the body. After having contemplated the principal
(syllable) rath situated in the lotus of the heart, one should
burn with (its) flames spreading above, below and across in the
head. Then after contemplation the body should be flooded
with the ambrosia that flows out and in through the path of
sufumni (one of the arteries in the body). After purifying the
body thus, one should do pratutiyima (regulated breathing) three

times with the mantra. Then the energy should be located in
the hand, head, face, genital organ, throat, heart, belly, the
(different) directions and everywhere in the body. The supreme
lord (endowed) with all (good) characteristics should then
be contemplated in the lotus of the heart after being invoked
from the orb of the Sun through the aperture in the crown of
the head with (the repetition of) the tara {mantra) : “We know!
To the stupeher of the three worlds ! May we meditate on the
lord of remembrance, may (Lord) Visnu lead us to reflect on
that.”
12. After (having done) the soul-worship, (the votary)
should sprinkle (water) on the materials for worship and the
pure vessel. After having done the soul-worship as laid down,
the deity should be worshipped on the ground.
13-17. (Lord) Visnu should be contemplated as riding the
eagle and as remaining on a lotus over a seat composed of
one’s deeds etc. (He should be imagined as) having beautiful
limbs, having attained the beauty appropriate to the youthful
age, the reddish-brown eyes reeling with intoxication, lofty,
agitated by love, adorned with divine flowers, dress and un¬
guents, having a smiling face, being surrounded by many
attendants of different kinds, as compassionate to the beings,
beautiful, having the lustre of one thousand sons, bearing the
five weapons, one who has attained the desires as known from
his eyes, having two or four hands, one surrounded by divine
women and one who is affectionately looking at the face of his
consort. One should worship Him as bearing the disc, conch,
bow, sword, mace, pestle, goad and noose commencing with
invocation and ending with the request to leave.
18-19. (Goddess) Sri ( consort. of Vi§9u) (should be ima¬
gined) as seated on the left thigh andshank (of the lord) and
as embracing the consort with her hand. (She should be con¬
templated) as having a well-built body, holding a lotus and
chowrie in her hand and endowed with the Srivatsa (mark)
and Kaustubha (gem). One should worship (Lord) Hari
( Vi$9u) as wearing a garland, yellow garment and as endow¬
ed with the disc etc. Orh ! Sudariana ! The great lord of discs I
Dreadful for the wicked ! Cut (2) ! Tear (2) ! Devour mighty
spells (2) ! Eat (2) ! Catch hold of the spirits (2) 1 Hath phaf

Agni Purana
orh oblations to one who remains in the water ! One as sharp as
the sword ! Cut (2) ! Obeisance to the sword ! To the bow
with the arrow hiirh^ phaf ! “We contemplate the union of the
elements. We meditate on the four-fold principles* May that
Brahman lead our mind (to meditate) on that.’* Oh ! Fire that
destroys the world (Samvartaka) ! The embodiment of breath!
You recoil (2) ! /f wot oblations ! O ! Noose ! Bind (2) !
Attack ( 2 ) I Hurh phaf 1 One has to worship these weapons on
the hands with their respective mantras.
20-22. One has to worship Tarksya (the eagle vehicle of
Visnu) in the pericarp (witli the mantra) **Oin ! To the king
of birds I Huth phaf !’* Then the presiding deities of the limbs
(should be worshipped) as laid down. The female energies
(should be worshipped) at the places of Indra and others and
Tarksya and others as holding chowrics. Indra and others
should be worshipped first and the energies at the end by the
priest. Laksmi and Sarasvati (should be contemplated) as
yellow, Rati, Priti and Jaya as white, Kirti and Kanti as white,
and Tusti and Pusti as black (and worshipped) as laid down,
(One should worship ) upto the guardian deities of the worlds
and then Lord Visnu for the sake of gaining one’s desired fruits.
23. After having repeated the mantra^ one should contem¬
plate (the lord), offer oblation and do consecration. Om, Mrhy
krlrfi, hrith, hum obeisance to Visnu, the stupefier of the three
worlds ! As before one would get all his desires by doing this
worship.
24-26. One should please the jamffzoAartf (&i<(ya) (the stupe¬
fier) daily with water and flowers. The principal part of the
Trailokyamohana (the stupefier of the three worlds) is “Brahma,
Sakra (Indra), Sri (Lak§mi) and Dandi-” One would get long
life by repeating (the mantra) three lakhs times and offering
oblations (with the mantra) one lakh times with bilva (leaves) ,
clarified butter, rice, fruits, perfumes ^.nAdurl^& (grass). (Lord
Visnu) being pleased with anointment, oblations and other acts
with that {yidyd) would confer all the-desired things. Om,
obeisance to Lord Varaha (Boar manifestation of Lord Vi§nu) !
To the lord of (the three worlds) Bhuh, Bhuvah, Svab ! Grant
me the suzerainty over the earth ! Oblation to the heart I One

would get long life and kingdom by repeating (the above mantra)
ten thousand times daily together with the paiicanga^ (five parts
of the body).
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND EIGHT
On the mode of worship of goddess [jiksmi and
others that confer immense benefits
Fire-god said :
1. (The mantras) “chest, together with fire, beautiful
wouian, Dandi, Srih (goddess of fortune) ” gives all prosperity.
Obeisance ! O ! greatest fortune ! O ! great prosperity ! O !
One having a lustre as tlic powerful lightning ! Obeisance to
the goddess of prosperity ! O ! Victorious ! O ! Mighty one !
Bind (2) ! Obeisance ! Hurh ! One having a big body ! One
holding the lotus in the hand ! Hum phaf ! Obeisance to Sri !
To .^ri, phaty obeisance to Sri ! To Sri, the conferer of pros¬
perity ! Obeisance ! Oblations ki-phaf !
2. The constituent parts of this {mantra) arc said to be
nine. One should resort to one of these. It would confer pros¬
perity if repeated three lakh or one lakh times with rosary beads
or lotus (seeds).
3-1. One would get wealth by worshipping Sri in the
temple of Sri or Visnu. One lias to do oblation with rice soaked
in clarified butter in the fire ( kindled with) khadira (twigs) . (By
this) the king would be under one’s control. One will have
more and more growth and prosperity. Bathing done with
mustard would destroy the (evil propensities of) planets.
5-9a. Oblations done with the bilva (leave) (with the
repetition of) Sri {mantra) , would increase one’s wealth. Then
one has to contemplate the mansion of Indra having four doors
in his heart. One should contemplate (the energy) Balaka,
1 . The obeisance conveyed by the touching of the ground simultaneoiuly
with the two arms, the two knees, the head, chest and the eyes.

Agni Pur&na
short and black sporting (and guarding) at the eastern entrance
with the two hands held upwards holding white lotus flowers,
(the energy) Vanamalini of white (complexion) at the southern
entrance with the hands held upwards holding red lotus flowers,
Vibhlsika, the messenger of Sri, having green (complextion),
at the western entrance, with Her two hands lifted upwards
holding white lotus (flower). Sahkari (should be contemplated)
at the northern entrance.
9b-14a. One should contemplate Vasudeva, Sankarfanaf
Pradyumna and Aniruddha in the lotus petals carrying conch,
disc and mace. TJiey are of the colours of collyrium, milk, saffron
and gold and wear good dress. One should contemplate the
elephants such as Guggulu, Kuruntaka, Damaka and Salila
(having) the colour of silver, in the different directions such as
south-east etc. in the petals. (These elephants should be imagin¬
ed as) bearing golden pots. Sri should be contemplated in the
pericarp as having four arms, two of which are raised upwards
and hold lotus. (She is also conceived as having the following
characteristics) : golden coloured conferring protection and boons
W’ith the right and left hands respectively, besmeared with white
sandal, wearing a silvery garland and carrying the weapon. One
would get all (his desires) by contemplating as above and wor¬
shiping Her together with Her attendants.
14b-15a. (The worshipper of Sri) should not wear the
drona and lotus flowers and the leaf of the bilva tree on the head.
So also salt and embelic myrobalan are prohibited on the eighth
and twelfth days (of the lunar fortnight) in order.
15b- 16. Taking (only) sweet porridge one should repeat
the Srisukta^ SLiid anoint (goddess) Sri with (the repetition of)
that (hymn) , One has to contemplate mentally as doing the
rites beginning with the invocation and ending with the dismis¬
sal and worship Sri. One would gain prosperity by doing obla¬
tions separately with (the twigs of) bilva, clarified butter, lotus
and sweet porridge.
17-24, ‘‘Poison, buffalo, the destructive fire at the end of
the world, Rudra, the effulgence, the two bakas.** krirh the
slayer of the great buffalo-demon! Tharhl !” (is) the
1 . Designation of the hymn hiravyavar^ftih harioiih 'RVkh. 5.87.1a.

principal mantra (of Durga, a form of the consort of Siva).
‘^Obeisance to the lioness (that killed) the buffalo (demon). O !
Enemy of the (buffalo) demon ! Make (the enemy) whirl
round (2) ! Hurht phafy fha tharh ! Make the buffalo (demon)
neigh (2) ! Hum slay the buffalo (2) ! O ! Goddess ! Hurh ! The
slayer of the buffalo (demon) ! Phaf V* This is said to be the
Durgahfdaya ( the heart of Durga) . Together with its accessories
it is capable of accomplishing all the things. One should worship
that goddess and the seat in the middle of the accessories thus :
Orh hrlrn ! O ! Durga ! Durga ! Protector ! and oblations’*.
Obeisance to Durga ! Obeisance to Varavar^i, Arya, Kanakaprabha, Krttika, Abhayaprada, Kanyaka and Surupa ( excellent
complexion, noble, golden-coloured, offering protection, virgin
and having good form respectively). These forms (of the goddess)
should be worshipped on the leaves with the principal syllables
in due order. (One should also worship the weapons) disc,
conch, mace, sword, bow and arrow. One should worship this
(goddess) Durga, the tranquil one in the world, on the eighth
day (of the lunar fortnight). This association with Durga would
increase longevity, prosperity, favour of master and victory.
Oblation and sesamum with (the repetition of) the Isana mantra
after the worship (of Durga) would enable one to gain control.
( Oblation made) with lotuses would ensure victory. One desirous
of appeasement (should do oblation) with durvd (grass). One
will gain strength (by performing oblation) with (the twigs of)
Palana. Death, dissension etc. would be caused (by offering
oblation) with the wings of the crow. This mantra would re¬
move all the difficulties such as evil influences due to malignant
planets, evil incantations and fear etc. **0rh ! O ! Durga !
Protector ! Oblations !’* This {mantra) together with the acces¬
sories of the victorious Durga is said to be able to protect. One
should contemplate the goddess as black, having three eyes,
four arms, bearing the conch, disc, lotus, spike, sword and trident
and as having a wrathful form. One would gain victory in battle.
One (who wants to have) victory of sword etc. should worshjip
Her. **Orh obeisance to the Goddess having a garland of flames,
surrounded by flocks of female eagles move ! Oblations to the
protector !” One should repeat this mantra for (gaining victory
in) battle. The combatant would conquer his enemies.

Agni Purina
CHAFFER THREE HUNDRED AND NINE
The mode of worship of Tvarita
Fire-god said : •
1. I shall describe (to you) the constituent {mantras) (relat¬
ing to the worship) of Tvarita* that is capable of conferring enjoy¬
ment and emancipation. “Oni obeisance to the the supportive
energy ! Oni hrirn puru (2) obeisance to great lion ! 0th obeisance
to the lotus ! 0th hrim hrtlrh khecacheksah ! Strirh oth hrum ksairh hrurii
phaf ! Obeisance to (goddess) Tvarita ! Khe ca obeisance to the
heart ! Cache obeisance to the head ! Cheksah obeisance to the
tuft ! Ksastri obeisance to the armour ! Stririi hrum obeisance
to the eye ! Hruth kkc obeisance to the weapon phat !”
“Oot ! We known the Tvarita-vidya. Let us meditate on the
turnavidya. May the goddess prompt us (to meditate) on her.”
(This is the Gayatri mantra for the goddess Tvarita.) Obeisance
to the conferrer of prosperity. Obeisance to the syllable hrum !
Obeisance to the syllable om ! Oiii kheca obeisance to the heart !
Obeisance to the one who is able to fly ! Om obeisance to’ the
fierce one ! K?a strlm obeisance to the armour ! Obeisance to
the cutter ! Obeisance to the thrower ! Obeisance to the woman
of the form of the syllable huth ! To the one that gives safety !
To the victor ! To the conqueror! Protect I Oth be firm by the
command of (Goddess) Tvarita ! This is the incantation
known as Tvarita. It is known as Totala and Turna.
2 -3a. After having touched the head, forehead, throat,
heart, navel, genital organ, thighs, knees, shanks and feet (with
the mantra) in order and thus complete the. location spread
over the whole body.
3b-6. The goddess has to be contemplated as having the form
of daughter of the mountain, huntress, supreme, conferring boons
and protection, having the peacock feather on the head, having
the tender sprout as the upper garment, seated on lion throne
together with an umbrella of peacock plumes, the dark-compl¬
exioned goddess wearing the garland of wild flowers, having the
brahmin class of serpents as the ear ornament, the ksatriya{cl3LM of
serpents) as the bracelets, the vaiiya class of serpents as the girdle
1 . The goddess conferring benefits quickly.

and yrja/a (fourth class) class of serpents as the anklets. Then
one should repeat that mantra ten lakh times.
7. In days of yore the lord took the form of a hunter and
(the goddess) Gauri also (took a) similar (form). One has to
repeat (the mantra of the Goddess). One has to contemplate
and worship Her for accomplishing all ( the things) and for the
removal of poison etc.
8-10. (Goddess Tvarita) has to be worshipped in a lion
seat (having) eight ( petals) . Gayatri, Pranita, humkdra etc. and
Phatkarl are located in the petals in the east etc. in front of the
Goddess with the principal mantra of Sri. Their colours and
weapons are as those of the guardians of the quarters. Phatkari
should bear the bow. Jaya and Vijayii should be worshipped as
at the entrance holding golden staff. Kihkara, Barbari, Mundi
and LagudI (should be worshipped) outside them,
11-15. After having worshipped (them) thus, one has to
accomplish (them) with materials. Oblation should be made
in a sacrificial pit of the shape of the female organ of generation.
One would gain gold (by doing oblation) with white grains,
increasing prosperity with wheat, all accomplishments and the
destruction of f/P with barley and sesamum, insanity of the
enemy with rosary seeds, death (of the enemy) with (the twigs
of) silk cotton tree, gain of wealth and grains with rose apple,
satisfaction (pleasure) with blue lotuses, abundant prosperity
with red lotuses, great prosperity withA'jw</a (a kind of jasmine) ,
disturbance in the city with mallikO, (a kind of jasmine) , good¬
will of people with white lilies, birth of a son with a§oka (a
kind of flower), an auspicious and beautiful woman with patald
(trumphet flower), long life with mango (flowers), fortune with
sesamum, prosperity viithbilva^ wealth with campaka (flowers),
desired (object) with madhuka (flowers) and omniscience with
bilva (leaves).
16-17. One would get all things by the repetition (of the
mantra) three lakh times or by doing oblation or contemplation
or worship. After having worshipped with the gayatri in a circle,
(one should offer) twentyfive oblations. A person who offers
three hundred oblations with leaves with the principal {piantra)
1. These are six; excessive rain, drought, locusts, rats, parrots and
foreign invasions. See Aptt SD p. 96.

Agni Purd^
would become initiated. After having taken the five things got
from a cow, one should take porridge. (This is the proce¬
dure) always.
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND TEN
The narration of the spell relating to Tvaritd
Fire-god said :
1-5. I shall describe (to you) the worship of Tvarita by
another method that would yield enjoyment and emancipation.
One has to worship the Goddess in a diagram of the shape of a
thunderbolt drawn with dust. One has to draw a lotus inside it.
One has to contemplate the Goddess and draw quickly eight
thunderbolts in the (main) directions and the intermediate
directions and also draw pathway, entrance, ornamental arch
and secondary decoration. (One has to worship the Goddess)
as having eighteen hands and Her left shank placed on the lion.
Two-fold fee should be offered at Her pedestal. (She should be
worshipped) in the sacrificial pit in the form of the thunderbolt
as being adored by serpents, and as holding the sword, disc,
mace, spike, arrow and mace in the right hands and as confer¬
ring boons and as holding the bow, noose, arrow, bell, threaten¬
ing posture of the first finger, conch, goad and thunder- bolt in
the left hands and as offering protection.
6. If one worships this form, one’s enemy would die, one
would win a kingdom with ease, gain long life, become the
ruler of a kingdom and gain perfections such as supernatural
powers.
7-8b. There are the seven nether regions below, which are
as destructive as the destructive fire at the end of the world. The
syllable orh and others denote (the space) beginning with the
heaveii suid ending with the primordial egg. One has to whirl
round water with (the repetition of) the syllable orh (and repeat)
“Totala, Tvarita” then. (Then) oile has to whirl round water
with (the repetition of) the syllable ‘/a’ (and repeat) “Totala,
Tvarita” then.

8c-18. I shall introduce the (method of writing the mantra) .
The group of vowels should be written on the ground. (The next
group) would be the ‘Aa* group (belonging to) the palatal
class. The third (letter) is (the letter belonging to) the tongue
and palate. The fourth (letter) is (the letter belonging to) the
palate and the tip of the tongue. The fifth (letter) is that of
the tongue and teeth. The sixth one consists of eight letters. The
seventh one is of mixed group of letters. (The eighth one
consists of) the ia group of letters (known as) sibilants. The
mantra should be constructed then. The first (basic syllable)
should begin with the sixth vowel and end with last of the
letters of u^ma (sibilants) together with bindu (the nasal sound
marked by a dot). Then the second (letter) among the palatals
is compounded with the eleventh vowel. Then the combination
of the (letters belonging to) the tongue and palate would be the
first simple (basic syllable) . The second (letters) of the same
(group of letters) should be compounded below. Then the first
letter among the palatals should be compounded with the
eleven vowels. Then the second letter among the sibilants is
coupled from below. The second letter among the sibilants
coupled with the sixteenth vowel should be compounded below
with the first letter belonging to the union of the tongue and
dental region. Then the second letter belonging to the mixed
group should again be coupled below. Then the second letter
among the sibilants combined with the fourth vowel and yoked
with the first letter of the palatals should be coupled below.
Then the last among the sibilants together with the bindu (the
nasal sound) is coupled with the eleventh vowel. Then the
letter formed by the union of the (two) lips is joined with the
fifth vowel. Then the second of the palatals is joined with (the
letter belonging to) the tip of the tongue. Then the first letter
of the fifth group should be combined with half-vowel and. thus
the mantra is constructed. One should repeat (the above mantra
coupling) with the syllable Orh at the beginning and obeisance
at the end. One has to add ‘oblation* (at the end) in acts of
offering oblation in fire. (The rite of location of the above
mantra should be done as follows) : “Oni, Arfm, hrUrh^ hrafy (let it
permeate) the heart. Hdrii hafi (let it permeate) the head.
Hrithf burn, bum would be (for) the tuft. Hulu, hulu is for the

Agni Purdna
armour, Hrurfi, Srltfi, kfum is said to be the mantra for the three
eyes. Ksaum, ham, kkaurh, hum, phaf is for the weapon. The secret
auxiliaries are assigned before ( the above location is done).
19-26. Listen to me ! I shall describe the constituent parts
of the wirtnfrfl relating to (the worship of Goddess) Tvarita.
The first two (letters in the mantra) are said to be the heart.
The third and fourth are said to be the head. The fifth and
sixth are said to be the tuft and the seventh and eighth as the
armour. The pupil (of the mantra) would be the eye. It has the
characteristic (of containing) nine and half letters. It is known
to be (the mantra of) Totala (Tvarita). Then (the worship of)
Vajratunda (would be described) . There are ten syllables in
(Her worship), A fim (obeisance to) Vajratunda, the
messenger of Indra. Khecarl ! Jvdlint ! Jvdld ! kha ! kha arc the
ten syllables for Jvalini (glowing) l§abari (huntress) ! Bhisani
(frightening) ! kha ! kha ! grow ! are (the syllables) for Sabari.
Che ! Chedani (one that cuts) ! Karalini (terrible) ! kha\ kha !
are for Karali. Sravadravaplavani (one who floods the ear and
the liquid) ! kha kha (is for) the messenger Plavan^ for the sky.
Strikalakara (one who creates women and time) ! DhunanI (one
who agitates) ! is for l§vasi (the Goddess possessing the swiftness
of breath) . Ksepaksa! Kapila! Hariisa (is for) the messenger
called Kapila. Hrurhl Tejovati (one having lustre)! Raudii
(terrible one) and Mataiigi (huntress) (are for) the messenger
oi Viudra.. Pufe pute kha kha khaiga (to the sword) phaf (for)
Brahmadutika ( messenger of Brahma ) . Ten syllables of (the
mantra of) Vaitalini have to be discarded like the cloud and
straw. (This is the method) for locating {the mantras relating)
to the heart and the like. A wise man should locate ( the
mantra of) the eyes at the centre.
27-81. Beginning with the leg and ending with the head,
beginning with the head and ending with the leg, and beginn¬
ing with the navel, heart and neck and (ending) in the feet,
knees, thighs and genital organ the location is done. The votary
should contemplate the vajramaniala above and the basic be¬
ginning syllables above and below that and then the cow of the
form of a moon that showers ambrosia as entering. ( the brain)
through the aperture in the crown of the head. The votary
should locate the first basic syllable {a) in the head, face, neck.

heart, navel, genital organ, thigh, knee, feet and (the fingers )such
as the fore-finger again and again. One who visualises the body
made up of the basic syllables as flanked above by the moon
and the lotus below would not die. He would not suffer from
diseases or fevers. One should locate the Goddess thus and
worship Her repeating hundred and eight times.
32-41. I shall describe the postures such as the Pranltd and
the like. (The postures called) Pranitds are known to be of
five kinds. The two hands are interlocked and the thumbs are
put over that. Then they are placed on the head, the two fore¬
fingers resting on the head. This is known to be the Pranltd.
That is then brought to the region of the heart. The twiceborn know ( the Pranltd) to be an excellent one in which the
little and middle (fingers) are turned upward and endowed
with the basic syllables. When the tip of the thumb is placed
beneath tlie middle finger and the fingers arc mutually resting
on the middle (part) of the fore-fingers, it. is said to be the
Bhedani. This (mudrd) held in the navel region and the thumbs
raised upwards is known as the great mudrd Kardli. The same
located in the heart of the votary and the middle finger resting
on the aperture on the head and raised upwards is said to be the
Vajratimda. It should be placed on the vajradeSa (the part of the
body known as vajra) and the wrist should be locked up by the
two hands stretching the three fingers (of each hand) ; it is said
to be the Vajramudrd. The postures such as Danda (club),
Khaiga {sword) t Cakra (disc) and Gadd (mace) are known to
have the (respective) shape. Three fingers (are stretched) and
held upwards and (their bases) are touched by the thumb. It
would be TriSula (trident posture). If the middle finger
is neld upwards it is said to be iSakti (spear). Thus there arc
twenty-eight postures of the hand such as $ara (arrow),
Varada (bestowing boon), Cdpa (bow), Pdia (noose), Bhdra
(weight), Ghanfd (bell), Sankha (conch), AnkuSa (goad),
(offering protection) zxid Padmam '(lotus) (having the
respective shape). The five Prarjlld mudrds such as Grdhcafi
(one that seizes), (one that liberates), Jvdlinl (one
that sets fire to), Amftd (ambrosia), and Abhayd (that offers
protection) should be employed in the worship and while
offering oblation.

Agni Purdna
CHAPTER THREE HUNDRED AND ELEVEN
The location of the basic mantras o/Tvaritd and Her worship
Fire- god said :
l-8a. I shall describe the (rite of) initiation etc. after
having located in a lotus (diagram) furnished with (a diagram
of) lion and thunderbolt. (The Tvarita-mezn/ra for this is) : **He
he, huti, Vajradanta ( one having the tooth like the thunder-bolt) !
puru, purtty lulu, roar, roar here! Obeisance to the lion seat!”
There should be four lines running across and vertical. A wise
man should draw nine squares (formed by these lines). Only
the squares in the directions should be taken and those in the
in between directions should be destroyed. Outside the angular
points of the chambers there should be eight outer lines. The
outer line should be divided into two so that the middle horn
of the vajra occupies the middle of the outside of the outer
chamber. The outer line would be curved. A wise man should
divide it into two. The central chamber would have a radiant
lotus having yellow petals. One should draw the thunder-bolt
and sword above (the lotus) with black dust. The outer square
should be adorned with the sign of a thunder-bolt. The votary
should add lour signs of thunder-bolt at the entrance. ( If it is
done so) the centre of the lotus and the left line will be on the
same line. The centre as well as the petals (should be made)
red. Initiated women (should be worshipped) in this circle.
( By this ) one would conquer the kingdoms of others and recover
(the lost) kingdom quickly.
8b-12a. O! Twice-born! The image (of the Goddess)
illumined by the (syllable on%) should be commissioned
with the syllable hurh. After repeating the basic syllable as if it
had occupied the ( regions of) the wind and sky, a person
(should worship) it as the first one. One should worship it again
in the pericarp. After having worshipped each one of the
syllables from the beginning thus in the cyclic order, one should
worship the subordinates of the mantra in the middle of the
petals, Nirrti in the south-east (corner), the eye at the centre,
the weapons in the directions and Rak^a^a in the genital organ.
Five offerings of oblations at the filaments on the left and right
side should be worshipped with their respective mantras.

12b-l8. The eight guardian deities of the world should be
located outside the central circle. The respective names should
be added to the last syllable of the agni mantra split by the sixth
vowel and permeated by the fifteenth (letter). One should
worship (the Gk>ddess) in (the image of) the lion in the peri¬
carp (of the lotus) with perfume and other things for prosperity.
It should be surrounded by eight pitchers consecrated with (the
repetition of the mantras) one hundred and eight times. After
having repeated the {mula) mantra eight thousand times and the
subordinate a tenth of that (number), one should ofier
the oblation in the fire-pit. (Then the fire) should be stirrred
with the fire nianlra. The fire should be placed with (the mantra
of) the heart. Then the Goddess should be contemplated as
remaining at the centre of the fire. Then the oblations for the
garbhadhana^ , pwmavand^ said jalakarma^ are made. (The oblation)
with (the mantra of) the heart (would be) one hundred (times).
The fire should thus be generated at the centre of the fire-pit.
The fire of the Goddess would glow with the final oblations
made with the mantra. 'I’hcn oblation should be made with the
principal mantra a hundred times and a tenth of that with the
subordinate {mantra). Then it should be dedicated to the
Goddess. Then the disciple should be ushered in.
19-23a. After striking with (the repetition of the mantra
of) the weapon, the secret subordinate {mantras) should be
located in the disciple. Tlie disciple should be bound with the
subordinate {mantras) and then charged with the subordinate
{mantras). Then the disciple should be made to throw a flower.
He is then led to the sacrificial pit. One hundred oblations
should be made with the principal mantra with barley, grains,
sesamum and clarified butter. The first oblation (is intended
for) the state of a plant, the next one for the state of reptiles
(like the serpents), and (the subsequent oblations are) for the
states of being a bird, animal and human beings, mortals,
Brahma, Vi$nu and Rudra. The concluding oblation would be
1. Rite for impregnation.
2. Rite performed prior to the movement of the foetus for the sake of
getting a male child.
3. Rite performed soon after the birth of a child.

Agni Purina
at the end. The disciple would become initiated by a single
oblation. (The disciple) would have the authority in this way.
Listen to me! I shall hereafter describe (the way to gain)
liberation.
23b-30. The votary who remains steadfast at the feet of
Lord Sadasiva (always benevolent) and on the Siimcru should
offer one thousand oblations for improper and proper acts
composed. That yoginwill not be stained by dharma (righteous¬
ness) and adharma (unrighteousness). He could attain the
supreme place of liberation from which he would not return.
Just as water poured into (larger quantity of) water becomes
merged as water, so also the mortal becomes one with (Lord)
Siva. Consecration should be made with the pitchers. One would
gain victory, kingdom and all the things (by such a worship).
One should worship Kumari and Brahrnani (obviously the
divine mothers). Fees should be paid to the preceptors and others.
After having worshipped, one thousand oblations should be
offered everyday with sesamum or clarified butter. 'Fhe pro¬
pitiated Goddess would confer the desired things, abundant
riches and anything else that is desired. (A person) who repeats
the mantra a lakh times would become the master of a treasure.
(A person) would get the kingdom by repeating (the mantra)
twice (that) and become a Yaksin' (a semi-divine being) by
repeating thrice ( that) . (A person) would get the position of
Brahma (by the repetition) four times (that number) and then
gain the place of Vi snu. (A person who repeats it) six times
(that number) would gain great powers. (The person who
repeats it) one lakh times would get rid of his sin. The repetition
ten times would purify the body. (The repetition) a hundred
times (would confer) the fruits of bathing in the sacred water.
31-36. ( Goddess )l§igra(Tvarita) should be worshipped on a
cloth or in an image or on the altar. It is said that hundred,
thousand or ten thousand are the counts for the repetition (of
mantra) or oblation (with that). .After having repeated thus
as laid down one should offer oblation one lakh (times) with
the fat and flesh of a buffalo or goat or the body of a man.
After having done the oblation with sesamum, barley, fried
paddy, paddy, wheat, mango, Mphala {bilva) together with
clarified butter, one should practise austerities. Equipping him-

self with sword, bow, arrow and the like at midnight, (the
votary) should dress himself with a single (piece of) clotli of
varied colours or red or yellow or black or blue. He should
worship the Goddess with the same (materials). Then the wise
man should set out in the southern direction and offer the
victim at the entrance with (the repetition of) the dutimantrd,
(It should be done) at tlic entrances or a single tree or in the
cremation ground. If it is done so a king would enjoy all
pleasun^s and the entire earth.
