READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: three_hundred_important_combinations.json
Dataset number: 397 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 157,076 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: 2015.83552.Three-Hundred-Important-Combinations
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: 2015.83552.Three-Hundred-Important-Combinations
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Three Hundred Important Combinations XML
  • total_pages: 154
  • total_words: 28178
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.956
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
THREE HUNDRED IMPORT&NT GSMBiN^TIONS
PART 1
BY
BAiGALORE VENKATA RAMAN, MRAS.
Editor, The Astrological Magazine
Author: Astrology and Modern Thought Astrology
for Beginners^', “A Manual of Hindu Astrology
Hindu Predictive Astrology Graha and
Bhava Balas Bhavartha Ratnakara
“ Hoiv to Judge a Horoscope ”, “ Indian
States Souvenir,'' World Predictions for 1941 to 1945
Ayurveda,'' etc.
Firti Edition
RAMAN PUBLICATIONS
P. O. Malles waram, Bangalore
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED
Price per copy :
Poctage Extra

THE STUDENTS’ EQUIPMENT
A COMPLETE HOME STUDY COURSE
IN ASTROLOGY
BECOME A MASTER OF ASTROLOGY
fife is set a Mystery — discover ih® power within jm
mi use il Study Astrology in your leisure time and
apply the precepts of Cosmic Law to the problems of
e\eryday life.
The Sliidents’ EqEipment course teaches vou to
develop the understanding necessary for correct and
practical application of Astrology to everyday life. The
books selected take you through all the important
aspects of Astrology and give you a good insight into
the subject.
Stodenls* Equipmeol includes the following items .
(1) Hindu Predictive
Astrology
(2) Varshapbal
(3) Astrology for
Beginners
(4) Manual of Hindu
Astrology
The cost ©f these beoks will come to Es. 35
Tlie lowest casii pnc© for tie above 9 items ioclii«ling postage is
t$» 27/8 only If you als® want to subscribe to “ Tfee Astrological Magaiiat *
for one year m ailililjoo I© bayiag tfee equipraentj send Rs. 35 m all.
RAMAN PUBLICATIONS
P.O. MALLESWARAM. BANGALORE

PAGIs
26. Piishkala Y^oga ...
29. Bnarathi Yoga ... ••• •••
32. Sreenatha Y'oga ...
48. 3»Inciaoga Y^oga ... «»• n
49. Panjatha Y^oga ... •»» b7
53. PI anbara Brahma Yoga ... ... ... 73
62. Gandharva Y^oga ... ... 85
71. Thrilochana Yoga ... ... ,,

PAGE

THiliE HOIOREO IMFOBTMI gSIEIHITlOMS
PREFACE
The importance of Astrology in the social life
of man is manifold. Human needs and
aspirations funiish a continuous motive power for
astrological inquiry. Astrology has a definite
relation to the several grades of urgency into
which the needs of human being in society can be
divided. Success in life depends to a large extent
upon one’s material prosperity or adversityYogas in astrological parlance tend to show the
degree of wealth, fame, rank, position, adversity,
ill-health and misfortunes a man is likely to enjoy
in his present life as a sequel to his owji actions
in previous states of existence. In other words,,
the dififerent specific planetary combinations show
a summation of inherited physical and psychological tendencies which condition our present environment ; the extent to which we can offset the
inherited tendencies by effort ; the characteristics
that will be dominant and those that will be,
and so on and so forth. Strictly speak*
ing, all Yogas are combinations of planets but all
combinations cannot be Yogas. Only specific
combinations can be styled as Yogas. In this
book, I have made an attempt to carefully select
only such important combinations that could be
'raised to the dignity of a Yoga and that could indicate certain definite physical or mental traits, or
degree of wealth, fortune or misfortune. To collect

•combinations at random is easy but to select
notable ones illustrative of a variety of life
events is not only difficult but even risky.
I should call this book a research project in
the sense the material used forms part of the vast
scheme of investigations I have in view. Modern
astrologers seem to have overlooked an exception^
ally fertile field of investigation in their indifference
to the study of Yogas which forms as it were, the
essence of Indian Predictive Astrology. Most
modern writers are silent on the subject of the
Yogas except perhaps for some odd remarks upon
a few common Raja Yogas or Arishta Yogas.
For this reason, there has been for several years a
demand for a book devoted specially ro the predictive significance of Yogas and the present work
has been undertaken to meet this demand. Long
back this want was supplied by my grandfather
Prof. B, Suryanarain Rao whose excellent book
SATAYOGAMANJARI deals with some of the
most important Yogas on the subject. But I
felt that a more and systematised account of all
the important Yogas should be brought out so
that, illustrated by a number of practical horoscopes, the work may stand as a foundation upon
■which future research may be developed.
Therefore THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS is intended to provide
a working knowledge of the yogas which indicate
specific horoscopic trends. The astrological ^
mathematics required for this purpose is very
elementary. Numerous examples especially

designed to illustrate points arising in the elucidation of the yogas have been inserted and as
these are worked out fully, readers should have
no difficulty in following the principles clearly.
Points of a controversial nature have not been
shelved or glossed over. They have been approached from the point of view of their practical
applicability.
All planetary combinations may be divided
into two broad groups, viz.. Yogas and Artshtas.
Though by the word Yoga is meant a combination,
in practice Yoga is always considered to imply a
fortunate combination. Arishtas generally deal
with misfortunes though it is also included in the
generic term Yoga. The Yogas may be Raja
Yogas (political power), Dhana Yogas (combinations for wealth), Gnana Yogas (combinations for
real higher knowledge and spirituality).
The subject of interpretation of Yogas is
briefly dealt with in the first few pages of the first
part herewith presented. This branch is to be
specially studied by the student of astrology
inasmuch as it enables him to evalute the examt
implication of a particular Yoga. Special Yogas,
including what are called Nabhasa Yogas have
been dealt with then with suitable illustrations
wherever necessary. The difficulty arising when
two or more Yogas coincide such as would be the
case in respect of say Asraya and Akriti Yogas
- (see page 124) have been suitably clarified with
proper explanations. The first part also deals
with some of the important Dhana Yogas which
include combinations for poverty also.

In a way, the second part is more important,
for it deals with such outstanding combinations as
Raja Yogas, Arishta Yogas and Neecha Bhanga
Raja Yogas about which, of late so much fuss is
being made by a section of astrological students.
The last pages give a summary of the entire subject matter. The example horoscope, with which
the book is closed, should be of particular interest
to readers, for it shows how, in the face of many
Yogas existing in a particular case, only a few can
operate. It also demonstrates that in respect of
certain Yogas, the indications become efective
throughout life while in regard to certain other
Yogas, the results can happen only during specific
periods and not always.
For such a work as this which largely rests
upon the principles furnished by classical astrology no originality can be claimed. But I feel
I can certainly claim credit for being the first to
bring together all scattered information, present
it systematically and prove its practical worth and
utility. The truth of this becomes evident when
it is remembered that the first part itself carries
nearly 90 practical illustrations most of them
being gathered from actual lives.
I have as my readers, scholars, intellectuals,
students and practitioners. Therefore, to meet
such different tastes and angles presents difficult
problems of authorship, especially that a book
dealing with the practical aspect of astrology
should not merely aim at an uncritical exposition
of the subject matter. The only way to gratify

the readers and at the same time preserve the
theme is to present the apparently dreary principles in a graduated form and give the book a simple
readability by interspersing the difficult sections
with remarks which will not only elucidate the
difficult points but encourage the casual reader to
take a more positive interest in the study of
the subject.
I am thankful to Mr. S. Venkataraman for
his assistance in not only correcting the proofs
but in making available suitable examples for
illustrative purposes.
It is hoped that the exposition of Yogas presented in this book will stimulate readers to
pursue the subject further.
Bangalore, )
21st July 1947- j
B. V. RAMAN.

Jkm Mmkd
By B. V. Raman, m.r.a.s.
INTRODUCTION
This book is intended to place before my
readers Three Hundred Important Planetary
Combinations comprising a comprehensive list of
human transactions including fortunes, misfortunes, death and various physical and mental
worries and elations, financial troubles and
successes and all other events connected with
human life. Man wants to know something of
everything connected with his career and the
lives of those who are dear and near to him.
These three hundred combinations include a large
variety of his life transactions and a previous
knowledge of these happenings will be of immense
benefit to him so that he may not only take
remedies to avert the evils indicated by the planets
from time to time but also adjust his affairs where
the remedies prove ineffectual.
Human life falls under two grand divisions —
Yogas and Arishtas, or fortunes and misfortunes.
Yogas include success in every line — health, personality, success in politics, financial gains, good
education, mental strength, bodily health, good
wife, dutiful children, sympathetic friends and
relations, righteous conduct and other sources of
pleasure and enjoyment which generally go under
the name of fortunes.

2 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Arishtas or misfortunes include all sorts
and sources of sorrows, worries, miseries, troubles,
distractions, bodily and mental disturbances such as
ill-health, physical and mental deformities, financial
losses, ugly and bad children, quarrelsome wife,
hateful relations and friends, evil temper, sinful
nature and other unpleasant sources in life which
go under the name of evils or misfortunes. Therefore these three hundred combinations will be
specially useful to astrological readers and
students. I shall try and give the necessary explanations and notes where they are needed to make
the meaning of the combinations clear.
GENERAL OBSERVATIONS.
1 am dealing in this book with three hundred
important yogas or special combinations bearing
on the twelve houses which signify certain definite
indications in the horoscopes as different from the
general combinations enunciated in astrological
text books. The word ‘yog^-’ is rather difficult to
define. Yoga means combination but in common
parlance yoga means a certain definite or special
combination which adds strength to the horoscope
or removes the vitality from it.
If you go through standard books on astrology
you will find that each ascendant has certain
planets disposed towards it as yogakarakas. In
the treatment of special combinations in this book,
we have nothing to do with such planets. Again
the combination of trinal and a quadrangular lords is supposed to give rise to
Rajayoga. We are concerned with this combination to the extent that it qualifies or

STRENGTH OF YOGA
modifies a certain special yoga. For example
take the following horoscope. The disposition
of the Moon and Jupiter in kendras or quadrants has given rise to
Gajakesari yoga. The
Moon and Jupiter who
have generated this yoga are lords of the
6th and 11th and consequently they are not
as beneficial as they
would have been were
they lords of the 4th
and 9th. In other words, the evil due to ownership
has modified to some extent the strength of Gajakesari. What is the method of interpreting
a yoga and how and when do the results manifest
or make themselves felt. Let us try to answer
these important questions.
Strength of a Yoga
A yoga is formed by more than one planet.
The nature of a planet is of three types viz.,
benefic, malefic and neutral.
According to the natural classification benefics are Jupiter, Venus, well associated Mercury and
malefics are the. Sun Mars, Saturn, evil associated
Mercury and waxing Moon. But in this book our
reference to melefics and benefics unless otherwise
stated are in the sense of malefic lords and benefic
lords.
The benefics or benefic lords are (1) lord of
Lagna, (2) Lords of the 5 th and 9th (3) and

4 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Lords of kendras or quadrants, when they are
natural malefics. The malefics are (1) the lords
of the 3rd, 6th and 11th (2) Lords of kendras
when they are natural benefi.es.
The lords of the 2nd and 12th may be termed
as neutral because ther- give good or bad results
according to their other conjunctions. The 8th
lord is a malefic .according to Jathaha Chandrica
but for all practical purposes he may be taken
as a neutral. The above can be classified thus:
Benefics. Lord of 1, Lords of 5 and 9 and Lords
of 4, 7, 10 if they are natural malefics.
Malefics. Lords of 3, 6 and 11. Lords of 4, 7,
and 10 if they are natural benefics.
Neutrals. Lords of 2, 8 and 12.
Of course the 8th lord is supposed to be evil
unless he be the Sun or the Moon. We shall
avoid controversies and assume that the 8th lord
is a neutral for the purpose of interpreting
yogas.
Here an observation has to be made.
In the above list of benefics, malefics and
neutrals we have completely omitted to take
into account the influence due to a double
lordship. Thus for Aquarius, Mars owning
the 10th — a quadrant is good. In addition
to the 10th he owns the 3rd also which is bad. In
other words. Mars a natural malefic becoming
a benefic lord by virtue of owning a kendra is
‘ influenced ’ by his ownership of the 3rd house.
It will be seen that excepting the Sun and the

BENEFICS, MALEFICS AND NEUTRALS 5
Moon al] the other planets own two houses each so
that whether a planet is a benefic or malefic can
be judged only when both the lordships are taken
into account. The nature of a lord is influenced
on account of two factors, viz., (1) the other lordship and (2) association. The other lordship
varies with regard to different ascendants. Thus
when Pisces is Lagna, Mars owns the 2nd and 9th
houses whereas he owns the 1 st and 8th when
Aries is Lagna. Thus the ‘ Ascendant ’ is of
utmost importance while deciding the benefic and
malefic lords.
We shall now discuss the nature of the different planets.
The Sun — He is benefic as lord of 1, 4, 7, 10,
5 and 9 which is possible in regard to Leo,
Taurus, Aquarius, Scorpio, Aries and Sagittarius.
He is neutral as lord of 2, 12 and 8 which is possible
for Cancer, Virgo, and Capricorn. He is malefic
as lord of 3, 6 and 11, which is possible for Gemini,
Pisces and Libra.
The Moon. Benefic as lord of 1,5 and 9
which is possible for Cancer, Pisces and Scorpio.
Neutral as lord of 1, 2, 12 and 8 which is possible
for Gemini, Leo and Sagittarius ; and malefic as
lord of 3, 6, 11, 4, 7 and 10 which is possible in
regard to Taurus, Aquarius, Virgo, xAries, Capricorn and Libra.
Mars. He is benefic as lord of 1 and 8
(Aries), 2 and 7 (Libra), 2 and 9 (Pisces), 3 and 10
(Aquarius), 4 and 9 (Cancer) 5 and 10 (Leo) 5
and 12 (Sagittarius) and 7 and 12 (Taurus).

6 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Here we have taken into account the
‘ modified influence’ due to the second lordship.
Thus if you take Sagittarius he is benefic as lord
of a trine (5) and neutral as lord of 12. But his
trinal lordship is so powerful as to overcome the
12th lordship so that he becomes a benefic.
Mars is netitral as lord of 1 and 6 (Scorpio)
and malefic as lord of 3 and 8 (Kanya), 4 and 11
(Capricorn) and 6 and 11 (Gemini)
Mercury. Benefic, as lord 2 and 5 (Taurus),
9 and 6 (Capricorn), and 9 and 12 (Libra):
Neutral as lord of 1 and 4 (Gemini), 1 and 10
(Kanya), and 5 and 8 (Kumbha) ; as lord
of 2 and 12 (Cancer), 4 and 7 (Pisces), 7 and 10
(Dhanas) and 8 and 11 (Scorpio)
Jupiter. Benefic as lord of 2 and 5 (Scorpio),
9 and 12 (Aries): neutral as lord of 1 and 4
(Dhanas), 1 and 10 (Pisces), and 5 and 8 (Leo)?
and i^alefi-c as lord of 2 and 11 (Kumbha), 3 and
6 (Seel]^), 3 and 12 (Makara) 4 and 7 (Kanya), 7
and 10 (Gemini) and 8 and 11 (Taurus)
Venus. Benefic as lord of 1 and 8 (Libra), 2
and 9 (Kanya), 4 and 9 (Aquarius), 5 and 10
(Capricorn), and 5 and 12 (Gemini): neutral as
lord of 1 and 6 (Taurus), and malefic as lord
of 2 and 7 (Aries), 3 and 8 (Pisces), 3 and 10
(Leo), 4 and 11 (Cancer), 6 and 11 (Dhanas), and
7 and 12 (Scorpio).
Saturn. Benefic as lord of 1 and 2 (Makara),
1 and 12 (Kumbha), 4 and 5 (Thula), and 9 and
10 (Taurus) ; neutral as lord of 3 and 4 (Scorpio),
5 and 6 (Virgo), 6 and 7 (Leo) and 7 and 8

VOGA-INTERPRETATiON
(Cancer) : and malefic as lord of 2 and 3 (Dhanasj,
11 and 12 (Pisces), 8 and 9 (Gemini), and 10 and
11 (Mehsa).
With the aid of the above sclicdnlc tlm i>cncfic and malefic planets (do not confuse this with
the good and evil planets according to n.ttural
classification) for any horoscope can be easily
ascertained.
In this e\am]ilc horosco[ic Lagna is Kumbha and tlu' follow ing
arc the bcuieiics, neutrals tind malelics.
Benefics. Sun (Lord
ol 7) Mais (Ivord of 3
and 10) Venus, (Loid
ol 4 and 9 <iml Saturn
(lord of 1 and 12).
Neutrals. Mercury (Lord of 5 and H).
Malefics Moon (Lord of 6), Jupiter (I..ord of
Interpretation of Yogas
Before attempting to interpret yoga.s propeuiy,
the strengths of the various plaru'ts ha\e to he
noted. There are two methods ol ascertaining
the strengths which I shall name as the Lipprov,n
mate ’ and the ‘correct.’ The coro'ct nieihotl
is the one described in iny “ Gralia and
Bhava Balas” which enables one to ca leulate the six sources of strength and weakness

8 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
of planets. The majority of readers will probably find it difficult to work out the
shadbalas so that for purposes of interpreting
yogas they can rely on the ‘ approximate ’
method. This consists in ascertaining the
Saptavargaja bala wli’ch has also been fully
described in ni}' Graha and Bhava Balas and
which I do not propose to discuss here. It must
be specially noted that one should resort to this
‘ approximate ’ method onl)' when he is quite
unable to apply the ‘correct method’. Saptavaragja bala means the strength a planet gets
b)' virtue of its disposition in a friendly, neutral
or inimical Rasi, Hora, Drekkana, Sapthamsa
Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and thrimsamsa. An
objection may be raised that in case a planet is
strongly disposed according to the ‘ approximate
method ’ but powerless according to shadbala
method, which should be accepted. The answer
is, always give preference to shadbala method.
We call such strengths of planets as ‘ inherent
strength’. The next step is to ascertain what
may be called the residential strength which
reveals the percentage of results a planet is
capable of giving by virtue of occupation of a
house. This requires the determination of
Bhavas (house longitudes), Bhava sandhis (junctional points) and the lengths of Bhavas. All the
processes involved for ascertaining these details
are given in my Manual of Hindu Astrology.
Thus we require the following details for purposes
of interpreting yogas.
1. The good and evil lords in a horoscope.
2. The inherent strengths of planets.

YOGA-INTERPRETATION
3. The residential strengths of planets.
A yoga is formed by at least two planets.
Ascertain whether the planets forming a yoga
are benefic lords or malefic lords. If benefic, they
get one positive unit of strength ; if malefic assign
a negative unit of strength, x^scertain if the two
planets causing the yoga are in association with or
aspected by other benefic and malefic lords. Assign
one positive unit for benefic aspect or association
and a negative unit for the association or aspect
of a malefic. See also if the yogakarakas are in
exaltation or debilitation, in friendly or inimical
houses and assign positive and negative units for
the same. Summarising: — positive units of
strength are contributed thus :
(a) If }fogakaraka is a benefic lord ... ] unit
(b) Yo<?akaraka with a benefic lord ... 1 ,,
(c) Yogakaraka receiving the aspect of a benefic lord 1 ,,
(d) Yogakaraka in exaltation or friendly sign ... 1 ,,
x\nd negative units of strength are contributed
thus :
(a) If Yogakaraka is a malefic lord ... 1 unit.
(b) Yogakaraka with a malefic lord ... 1 „
(c) Yogakaraka receiving the aspect of a malefic lord 1 „
(d) Yogakaraka in debilitation or inimical sign ... 1 „
If the positive units predominate, the yogakaraka will confer predominantly beneficial results
in respect of a beneficial yoga ; and no evil results
will be given by him in regard to a beneficial
yoga if the negative units predominate. Out
of the two planets causing a yoga, the planet

10 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTAN".. COMBINATIONS
who=;e inherent strength is more, will fulfil
the larger part of the indications of the yoga in
his Dasa while the planet whose shadbala strength
is less \wll fulfil his part as a sub-lord to a lesser
extent. The nature of the results of the yoga
corresponds to the nature of the house in which
the }oga occurs or to Mhich the 3'oga has reference
and the extent of the results depends upon the
residential strength of the 3’ogakarakas. The above
method of interpretation has been developed and
applied by me, the germ of the method, having
been taken from standard astrological works. I
shall illustrate the above with a suitable example.
Inherent strcngihs Residential sttcngihs

YOGA-INTERPRETATION
Benefics and Malefics. — -As Aquarius o
Kumbha is Lagna, the benefics are Venus, th^
Sun, Saturn and Mars ; Mercury is neutral ; an(
malefics are Jupiter and the Moon. Gajakesat
Yoga is formed in the above horoscope by th
disposition of the Moon and Jupiter in mutua
kendras,
Yogakarakas. — The planets causjiig th
Gajakesari are the Moon and Jupiter.
The Moon IS a malefic lord ... —unit
The Moon is associated with Saturn, a
Thus the Moon is benefic and Jupiter is mor
benefic. The Moon’s shadbala strength is greate
than that of Jupiter. Hence the Moon shouL
fulfil the larger part of the yoga pertaining to th
4th house while Jupiter gives the results pertainin
to the 10th house. The native cannot enjoy th
Moon’s Dasa and hence the Moon can produc
the results of the yoga only as sub-lord and tha
too to the extent of only A%. Jupiter on th
other hand can give 90% of the results due by hir

12 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
in reference to the 10th house and gives good
results of the 2nd and 11th houses.
Therefore :
(1) The yoga will be enjoved throughout
Jupiter’s Dasa subject to the influences of sub-lords.
(2) The Moon’s bhukthi in Jupiter’s Dasa
would have bee n excellent so far
as this particular 3'oga is concerned
but as the Moon can give onh’ 4%
of the resul ts of the 4th house, much
importance need not be attached.
(3) During the Moon’s sub-period in all
Dasas the yoga will manifest to a
small proportion.
(4) During Jupiter’s bhukthi in all Dasas
the yoga will be felt to a fairly good
proportion, subject of course to the
disposition of the other major lords
under whom Jupiter acts as sublord.
The method suggested above should be studied and applied very carefully. It has been
offered with a view to enabling the readers to make
further investigations. By an extension of the
same principle it will no doubt be possible to
interpret any kind of yoga.
In giving the combinations below no particular order has been followed but only such yogas
(several of which are indeed rare) have been

GAJAKESARI YOGA
included which are to be met within the generality
0 f horoscopes and which can be easily deciphered
by the astrological students.
1. GAJAKESARI YOGA.
Definition. — If Jupiter is in a kendrafrom the
Moon the combination goes under the name of
Gajakesari.
Results. — Many relations, polite and generous»
builder of villages and towns or magistrate over
them ; will have a lasting reputation even long
after death.
Remarks. — Here as well as elsewhere great
difference in the enjoyment of results should be
pronounced. The original writers saj' that the
person born in this yoga will build villages and
towns. A literal interpretation of the results leads
one no where. They have to be adapted to suit
modern conditions and climes. One born in this
yoga may become a member of Municipality and
engineer or if the yoga is really powerful, a mayor.
The results ascribed to a yoga arc subject to qualification or modification according as the yogakarakas are strong or weak. There are magistrates from
the village to the district with different powers.
From a builder of a small shrine or choultry to the
builder of a large and rich temple there is much
difference. Combinations are given but the results
of the same conjunction will vary with the strength
of the planets, bhavas and the constellations. I
would give here two typical horoscopes illustrative of the different variations in Gajakesari.

14 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth, years 6-7-15.
Balanc eof Moon’s Dasa at bnth, } e?5s 9-8-12.
Above are given two chart-,— illu'^tratne of
Gajakesan Yoga.

GAJAKESARI YOGA
Chart No. 2. — Yogakarakas are Jupiter and
the Moon. Lagna is Scorpio, hence benefic lords
are the Moon, the Sun and Jupiter. Malefics are
Mercury and Venus. Neutrals are Mars and
Saturn.
2\ units.
Both the Moon and Jupiter are beneficially disposed and as Jupiter gets more units he will fulfil
the larger part of the blessings of the yoga. As
the native enjoys Sukra Dasa at birth (about
6 years) the Moon m his Dasa (12 to 22 age)
gives tise to the results of the yoga to some extent
while the larger part of it (particularly regarding
finance and fortune) will be realised in Jupiter’s
Dasa to begin from the 48th year. The extent
of the results depends upon the residential
strength.
Chart Ko. 3. — The ascendant is Cancer.
Therefore bencfics am Mars and Jupiter ; malefics

16 THREE HUNDRED PIPORTANl COMBINATIONS
arc Venus and ]\Iercury, and neutrals aie the
Sun, the Moon and Saturn
Thf Moon
— I unit
Jupiter IS feebly malefic and the Moon is
feebly benefic. The Moon will give rise to a
larger part of the }Oga results than Jupiter The
Moon can fulfil his part of the results as major
lord and sub-lord particularly in Jupiter’s Dasa
The yoga is practically neutralised as the positive
and negative units of strength obtained by both
the planets are equal
2. SUNAPHA YOGA
Defimhon. — If there are planets (excepting
the Sun) in the second house from the Moon
Sunapha is caused.

SUNAPHA YOGA
Results — Self-eArned property, King, luleroi
his equal, intelligent, we ilthy and good lepiitation
Remarks — The Mo m pi lys a veiy laige paii
m this AS well as in the IoIIoy i ig two } ogas The
2nd house must be occupied b\ planets excepting
the Sun The second may be occupied by Mais,
Mercury, Jupitei, Venus and Saturn either singly
or collectively Vgair the natuie of the yoga
depends to a large extent upon the nature of the
lord or lords occupying the second Thus take
Taurus a<- the Moon’s Rasi and Meicurj^, Jupiter
and Venus being placed in Gemini This is a
powerful Sunapha Yoga capable of giving rise to
much wealth The intensity of the yoga wnll be
heightened if Lagna h ippens to be Leo as in
this case the yoga will have reference to the 10th
and 11th houses usual the results will find
expression m the Dasas and Bhukthies of the
planets responsible foi causing the >oga
after Su-nrise Lat 13° N, Long 5 h \0 m 20 s E
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth, yeais 5-10-17

18 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
This is a peculiar horoscope. Note the concentration of 5 planets in the 2nd from the Moon
causing a Sunapha Yoga. The yoga is practically
defunct because all the evil forces have been
focussed on it. The Sun is in debility, with
Kethu aspected by Saturn and Rahu. The yoga
ha« produced no results and the native is a nonentity. Compare this horoscope v\ilh Chart No. 5,
where Sunapha is present as A'enus occupies the
second from the Moon. Venus is a yogakaraka
and his having caused Sunapha has fortified the
financial position of the native. Note that Sunapha
has much influence on the financial prosperity or
adversity of a person.
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth, } (vir-) 5-10-7.
3. ANAPHA YOGA.
Definition. — If there are plawts in the 12tb
from the Mo('n, Anapha yi'ga is .or.iied.

ANAPHA YOGA
Results. — Well formed orj^ans, majestic
appearance, good reputation, polite, generous
self-respect, fond of dress and sense pleasures.
In later life renunciation and austerity.
Remarks. — In Anapha also the Sun is not
taken into account. The remarks made for
Sunapha apply to this also with slight variation.
Chart No. 6. — Born on
lO'E.
Balance of Rahu Dasa at Birth, years 5-4-18.
The Anapha is caused by the presence of
Jupiter and Saturn in the 12th from the Moon.
The yoga is feeblj" powerful inasmuch as Jupiter
is debilitated — though there is Nceebabhanga
because of Saturn’s disposition in a kendrn from
Lagna. Saturn’s quota of the yoga will manife'-t
in his Dasa. Note also the fact that the 12th has
reference to moksha so that the nritive would
cultivate an outlook of detachment for wordlv
things in his later years.

20 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
4. DHURDHURA YOGA.
Definition. — If there are planets on either
side of the Moon, the combination goes under the
name of Dhurdhura.
Results. — The native is bountiful. He will
be blessed with much wealth and conveyances.
Remarks. — Whatever may be the results
ascribed to different yogas, one important truth
emerges out and that is, the person gets money,
power, fame and reputation with varying gradations. This of course does not apply to strictly
Parivraja Yogas. Many varieties of Surtapha,
Anapha and Durdhura are formed by permutations and combinations of the five planets and
their results should be particularly noted. If Mars
is in the 2nd and Mercury is in the 12lh a kind
of Dhurdhura is formed. Similarly Mars in the
12th and IMercury in the 2nd gives rise to another
kind and Jupiter in the 2nd and Mercury in the
12th gives rise to 3-et another type though all these
go under the name of Dhurdhura. Each conjunction in these permutations produces different
results. To give a simple illustration take Mars
in the 2nd in Capricorn where he is exalted and
Jupiter in the 12th in Scorpio in a friendl}^
Now take Jupiter in the 2nd (debilitated) and Mars
in the 12th (in his own house). Would the results
in both cases be the same ? All these permutations must be carefully analysed. There will be
31 varieties of Sunapha, and an equal number of
Anapha combinations and there are something
like 180 varieties of Dhurdhura. For fuller details

DHUrWDHURA YOGA
refer to English Translation o( Brihal Jalkaka
by Prof. B. Suryanarain Rao.
after Sunrtse^ Lat, S'" 44'
Mercury! I J nn it i
Rahu I ^ uui
Siui
Balance of Moon’s Da->a at Birth, yens
In this horoscope the Durdhina Yoga fui nn <!
IS a typical one. The Moon is cxallcd m Taunts,
Saturn is m the 12th and Venus is in the hid.
Saturn is Neecha but there is Ncechahhanga.
ITom Chandra Saturn is a yogakaraka, Tlu*
results of the yoga may find expnssion in a large
measure in Sani Dasa parlicularl} in Sukra
Bhukthi.
5. KEMADRUMA YOGA.
Definition. — When there arc no planets on
both sides of the Moon, Kemadruma Yoga is
formed.
Results. — The person will be dirty, sorrowful,
doing unrighteous deeds, poor, dependent, a rogue
and a swindler.

22 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Remarks. — Some authors say that if planets
are in a kendra from birth or from the Moon or if
the kloon is in conjunction with a planet there is
no Kemadruma. Theie are }^et other authors who
say that these }ogas arise from kendras and navamsas but these observations aie not generally
acceptable. Varahamihira adds emphasis by
saying that when persons born in royal families
are subjected to such degradations much more of
these unfoitunate lesulLs must be predicted than
in the case of persons born in ordinary families.
Sorrows mean physical as well as mental The
word Neecha ’s used in the original and this refers
to such acts as are prohibited by the religious,
moral and social codes and are therefore held to
be disgt aceful.
Chart No. 8 — Born on 28-7-1896 at Gh 10 after
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at Birth’s xeais
The above is a typicall}' Kemadiuma Yoga
horoscope. No planets aie placed on either side

CHANDRA MANGALA YOGA
of Chandra and no planets aie to be louud m
kendras either from Lapna or lioin llie Moon
Here you will Ace that Kean idi urn i s
present because the houses on eitliei side o^i th.c
Moon are vacant. But there is distinct cam t i iLn i
of the Kemadruma because {a) tiie kendi is tiiun
the Moon are occupied and (&) kciulias lioin ilu
Lagna are also occupied.
6 CHANDRA MANGALA YOGA.
Definition. — If Mais conjoins the Moon tins
yoga IS formed.
Results. — Earnings thiough unset ujiulous
means, a seller of women, treating mothei h ushl>
and doing mischief to her and other relatives.
Remarks. — ^The results given above ,ire those
ascribed bj'' ancient writers. With due lespecl to
the ancient masters in the science I hivi to
observe that Chandra Mangala Yoga acts as ,i
powerful factor in stabilising one’s financial uoith
The earnings will generally be ihrougli such
occupations as toddy contract, bt'er siiop, hai,
etc. One has to cater to the baser needs ol man,
but when the Moon and Mats arc well disj-iostd.
the earnings will be through other approwcl
means. The yoga is saul to arise by the assoc lations of Mars and the Moon but 1 foci that the
yoga will also be formed if the Moon and Mats
are in mutual aspect. Take the Moon in Taurus
and Mars m Scorpio. Take the Moon in ('aiicc r
and Mars in Capricorn. These aic excellent

24 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
positions. The combination can be productive of
good if it occurs in the 2nd, 9th, 10th or 11th
house.
Balance of Kethu Dasa at Birth, years
Chart No. 10. — Born on 24-9-1890 at Gh.
37-10 after Sunrise. Lat. 13° N . Long, shivu 20s. E.
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at Birth, years

Aiiiu ^nov
The ChandiM Vo- i b
in Scorpio the 9th from *';*■> '■
own house and llic M>>on ■
Because the Aloon is aiu
his own sign, this yogi has leceo* '
The Dasa of hlars \vd! be tin' h -.i.
ta'. on plaei’
M n - f a:eu mk ^
When Chandra \laneala No;.'
unfavourable houses, the naure will
character. He may sob his wdo, hi
and make money out ol unholy ti.ms
!,n i'j ‘ha aed
S S! fUG 7
7. ADHl YOGA.
Definition.— \\ benefu's are situ lU'd
6lh, 7th and 8th from the Moon, dm combmalion
goes under the name of Adhi Yoga.
o
Results.— The person will l)c polite and trustworthy, will have an enjoyable and happy j C
surrounded by luxuries and ailluencc,
defeats on his enemies, will bo healthy and wm
live long.
Remarks. — Adhi Yoga is ene cu the
important combinations. Astrological authon i -
classify this Adhi Yoga as Papadlu 1 and
Shubhadhi Yoga. But Varahamihira and that
section of Astrologers do not seem to favour sue
a classification. Bhattotpala, the erudite
meiitalor of the writings of Varahamihira sugges
the existence of Papadhi Yoga. Vaiaha.mni
distinctly observes Soumyehi implying cleai y on y
the benefics, viz., Mercury, Jupiter an e .
All these benefics may be in the 6th, 7th or
in two houses or all of them may be in any o

26 THREE HUMORED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
these signs. If there is one planet in full strength
in any one of these signs, that person becomes a
leader. If there are two, he will be a minister
and if there are three he will occupy a more
eminent station in life. If all the three benefics,
devoid of strength, are in the three signs, above
mentioned, then also Adhi Yoga will be present
but the influence it exerts would indeed be feeble.
Adhi Yoga may be considered as a Raja Yoga or
almost its equivalent.
Chart No. 11. — Born on 24-9-1871 gha. 7 after
Balance ot Moon's Dasa at Birth years 9-8-17.
The Adhi Yoga is fairly powerful in Chart
Ko. 11, because Jupiter is exalted in the 7th and
Mercury is in the 8th from the Moon. Jupiter’s
Dasa was an excellent one as it enabled him to
attain a good position in life. Note also the
presence of Gajakesari as Jupiter -s exalted in a
kendra from the Moon. Thus Jupiter has given
rise to two yogas.

CHATUSSAGARA YOGA
Balance of Jupiter Dasa at Birth years 0-2-22.
Here also the Adhi Yoga is fairly powerful,
Venus and Jupiter occupying the 7th and 8th from
the Moon. Evidently Venus is more powerful as,
though he is Neecha he is exalted in Navamsa,
while Jupiter is in an inimical house. The native’s
Sukra Dasa has been brilliant as he is a leading
Indian figure.
8. CHATUSSAGARA YOGA.
Definition. — Chatussagara is caused when all
the kendras are occupied by the planets.
Results. — The person will earn good reputation, will be an equal to a ruler, wilh have a long
and prosperous life, blessed with good children
and health and his name tra\els to the confines of
the four oceans.
Remarks. — According to the dictum Kendrasihatibalassuhuhu planets disposed in kendras add

28 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
great strength to the horoscope. The four angles
m a horoscope are like the four falls of a building.
The results should not be applied literally. Planets
in the 10th kendra are more powerful than those
in the 7th ; those in the 7th are more powerful
than in the 4th and those in the fourth are more
powerful than those in the 1st though Lagna
Kendra is an exception. In ascribing results to
the Dasas, the usual considerations such as a
planet being a benefic or malefic lord, etc., has
to be taken into account. Chatussagara Yoga
contributes considerable financial soundness and
good name to the person irrespective of the fact
whether or not one is a ruler.
after Sunrise, Lat. \TN. Long. 5h. lOm. 20s. E.
The above is the horoscope of the father of
late Professor B. Suryanarayana Rao. Note all
the kendras are occupied. He was a man of
great self-respect, held a decent position as a
Dewan, a great yogee and knew well eight
languages.

VASUMATHI YOGA
9. VASUMATHI YOGA.
Definition. — If benefics occupy the upachayas
(3, 6, 10, 11) either from the ascendant or from
the Moon, the combination goes under the name
ot Vasumathi Yoga.
Results. — The person will not be a dependent
but will always command plenty of wealth.
Remarks. — Vasumathi Yoga has more to do
with wealth than with anything else. The Vasumathi resulting from the Lagna seems to have
more influence than the one formed with reference
to the Moon. By implication it also means that
two benefics will give less wealth while only one
benefic will give ordinary wealth. If the upachayas happen to be exaltation places, the yoga
becomes extremely powerful while the reverse
holds good in case the upachayas happen to be
debilitation places. When counted from the
Moon all the four upachayas cannot be occupied
because there will be only three benefics left.
The authorities are silent on the matter and they
simply say that the upachayas should be occupied.
Varahamihira seems to go so iar as to assent that
predictions made according to ordinary combinations maj^ sometimes fail but the results predicted
by Vasumathi Yoga do not" fail. In all such
planetary combinations, one must be very careful
in assessing the real strength of a yoga and if its
results have already been comprehended by some
ocher more powerful 5mgas. It will be seen that
purely Vasumathi Yogas are a rare occurrence.
You v/ill find very few examples in which
benefics are in all the upachayas. Even when

30 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
benefics are in upachayas, they will be found to
be associated with or aspect by malefics and due
allowance must be made for such evil dispositions.
Chart No. 14. — Born on 31st October 1915
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at birth years
In Chart No. 14, the 3rd, 6th and 10th are
occupied respectivelj' b}- the Moon, Mercury and
Jupiter suggesting the presence of Vasumathi
Yoga. Of the tnree planets that have caused
the Yoga, Mercmy is the most powerful and hence
most of the indications of the Yoga will fructify
in Mercury’s period or sub-periods. A purely
beneficial Vasuma.thi Yoga cannot occur m as
much as, in very rare instances all the four
upachayas can be occupied.
10. RAJALAKSHANA YOGA
Definition. — Jupiter, Venus, Mercury and the
Moon should be in Lagna or they should be
placed in kendra.

VANCHANACHORABHEETHI YOGA
Results. — The native will possess an attractive
appearance and he will be endowed with all the
good qualities of high personages.
Remarks. — The week Moon or badly associated Mercury cannot make the person possess a
beautiful appearance. However, the yoga seems
to contribute Adrishta or luck in such a way that
the person can command respect, dignity and
regard. One need not necessarily be a king to
inherit all the virtues, for all kings are not virtuous.
Personalities are strokes of luck which many will
not have and which many covet.
Chapter No. 1. (page ) may be cited as an
example for Rajalakshana in as much as Jupiter,
Venus, Mercury and the Moon are all in Kendras.
But owing to the association of the Moon with
Saturn and the predominance of Saturnine influence both on the Moon and the Lagna for the
physical appearance, the blessings of this yoga
have fully manifested otherwise.
11. VANCHANACHORABHEETHI YOGA
Definition. — The Lagna is occupied by a
malefic with Gulika in a trine ; or Gulika is
associated with the lords of Kendras and
Thrikonas ; or the lord of lagna is combined with
Rahu, Sani or Kethu.
Results. — The native will always entertain
feelings of suspicion towards others around him.
He is afraid of being cheated, swindled and
robbed.

32 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Remarks- — Here three sets of combinations
can be noted : They are ; —
{a) The ascendant must have an evil
planet with Gulika disposed in the
5th or 9th.
(6) Gulika should be associated with the
(c) Lord of Lagna should join Rahu or
Saturn or Kethu.
In all these cases, the person will not only
have fears from cheats, rogues and thieves but be
will also have huge material losses. The combinations pertaining to this Yoga are to be found in
almost all horoscopes, so that we are all guilty
of cheating and being cheated each other in some
form or other. It is a tragedy of our social life
that a merchant minting millions at the cost of the
poor is left scot-free while the poor, committing
theft in the face of poverty and want, is booked
by law. Cheating is practised in a wonderful
variety of ways. Fertile brains find countless
methods to cheat their associates. The merchants
have various ways of cheating their clients. The
lawyer is equally successful. The medical man
commands many ways to defraud his patients.
Gulika is considered as the son of Sani and
his position is to be carefully fixed in the Zodiac.
The Yoga given above refers to persons who will
be the victims of fraud but the same combination
can also be extended to apply to those who perpetrate of the deeds.

SAKATA YOGA
after sunrise, Lat. 17°N ; Long. 5 h. \0 m. 20 s. E.
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at birth years
In this horoscope, you will see that lord of
Lagna is Neecha and he is with Kethu aspected
by Rahu. The Lagna is occupied by the Sun.
The native is always afraid that he will be cheated
and defrauded. Naturally he is nervous and
extremely sensitive, miserly and very cautious.
He adopts towards others the same siicpicious
behaviour, that, he thinks others adopt towards
him. This is a typical horoscope.
12. SAKATA YOGA.
Definition. — The Moon in the 12'h, 6lh or 8th
from Jupiter gives rise to Sakata Yoga.
Results. — The native loses fortune and may
regain it. He will be ordinary and insignificant.
He will sufier from proverty, privation and misery.
He will be stubborn and hated by relatives.

*^4 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Remarks —While the generality of astrological writers hold that Sakata Yoga is productive of
Til results, there is difference of opinion as
regards the definition of this Yoga. The great
pTasara and Varahamihira say that when all the
planets are in the 1st and 7th, Sakata is caused.
Prof. Rao opines that this definition leaves room
for doubt as to why one should be 7th. On the
contrary, the definition given above appears more
reasonable inasmuch as the Yoga is generated by
the Moon occupying the three Dusthanas from
the greatest benefic Jupiter thus obstiucting the
free flow of fortune ; but it is also open to
objection as will be seen from the following
observations : —
In the large number of horoscopes examined
by me I have been able to mark that Sakata
Yoga has' not really made the natives poor and
wretched but often the degree of poverty and
wretchedness has been nominal. I have a work
entitled SUKRANADI which says that one born
in Sakata will have his fortune obstructed
now and then. The exact words used
are “ The periods of misfortune will accord with the times of transits
in malefic rasis, uiz., 6th, 8th and 12lh. In other
words, every time Moon transits the 6th, 8th and
12th from the radical Jupiter, the effects of Sakata
are realised.
According to the definition given above,
Sakata is caused by the Moon being placed in the
6th or 8th or 12th from Jupiter. When one

AMALA YOGA
planet is in the 8th from the other, naturally, the
other will be in the 6th.
13. AMALA YOGA.
Definition. — The 10th from the Moon or
Lagna should be occupied by a benefic planet.
Results. — The person will achieve lasting
fame and reputation. His character will be
spotless and he will lead a prosperous life.
Remarks. — As in interpreting every combination, due consideration should be given to the
strength of the lord causing the Amala and the
aspects and associations he receives. Some
benefic planet must occupy the 10th from Lagna
or the Moon to cause Amala. If no benefic is
present, then Amala is not caused. But yet on the
strength of the dictum f'ftl |
II which means that an'^
planet in the 10th from Lagna or Chandra would
give during his Dasa, much wealth, a malefic is
not also ruled out. Amala means pure and when
the Yoga is present, prosperity and affluence will
be achieved through fair means while a malefic,
whilst giving wealth may make the means questionable. After all, the end justifies the means according to some and therefore, Amala makes one
scrupulous as to the means he employs for earning
while a malefic in the 10th while no doubt good
in its own w'ay, as causing wealth to come, would
not make one famous or a man of character.

36 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
In this chart, one can easily detect the presence of Amala because of the situation of Jupiter
and Mercury in the 10th from Lagna.
Balance of Mercury at birth years 14-8-6.
Amala is prominently marked by the presence
of A’enus in the 10th from Lagna and Jupiter in the
10th from the Moon. The subject is a high

PARVATA YOGA
civilian officer, confident, imaginative and a good
Judge of human nature. Venus as karaka of
Amalayoga proved very beneficial to the native.
14. PARVATA YOGA
Definition. — Benefics being disposed in
Kendras, the 6th and 8th houses should either be
unoccupied or occupied by benefic planets. This
combination goes under the name of Parvata
Yoga.
ResiiUs. — The person will become wealthy,
prosperous, liberal, charitable, humorous and head
of a town or village. He will be passionate
also.
Remarks. — According to some, Parvata is
also caused if the lords of Lagna and the 12th are
in mutual Kendras. Thus, three sets of combinations are comprehended —
(a) Benefics should be in Kendras, and
6th and 8th must be free.
(&) Benefics should be in Kendras, and 6th
and 8th should be occupied by
benefics.
(c) The lords of Lagna and the 12th should
be in mutual Kendras.
Strangely enough, for Kumbha Lagna, the
definition mentioned in item (c) supra cannot hold
good in asmuch as the lord of the 12th and the
Lagna happen to be Saturn. Instead of the 6th
and 8th being occupied by benefics, it is better
they are entirely free, in which case, the
native will be free from the machinations of enemies and debts. In my humble

38 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
opinion, Parvata Yoga cannot be bo powerful as to
minimise the strength of other important yogas.
Its presence, no doubt, adds to making the person
an entity within a limited circle. The Yoga does
not seem to contribute much to political power.
One may become a District Board member or a
Municipal Commissioner. But it seems to have
capacity enough to add financial stability.
1 5. KAHALA YOGA.
Definition. — Lords of the fourth and ninth
houses should be in Kendras from each other and
the lord of Lagna should be strongly disposed.
Results. — The native will be stubborn, not
well informed, daring, head of n small army and
a few villages.
Remarks. — No yogas ‘^1 n'd be interpreted
verbatim if the results are lo hold good to modern
life and conditions. An appropruite and intelligent interpretation of K.dialaYoga should suggest
that the person concerned will eke out h's existence as a member of the army or police or in the
capacity of a Collector or Tahsild?ir and the like.
Kahala Yoga is a.lso caused when the 4th lord
IS exalted or in his own house being conjoined
ith or aspected by the lord or the lUdi. Both
the definitions of Kahala Yoga mentioned above
assume the strength of Lagna, the 4th and 9th.
For Kumbha Lagna, Venu.. happens to be the
lord of the 4th and 9th. Therefore, Kahala Yoga
is applicable to Kumbha Lagna only according to
the second definition, which means that Venus

VESI YOGA
should be in Pisces or Taurus or Libra in conjunction with or aspected by Mars. Naturally,
Venus in Pisces and Mars in Dhanas will be an
ideal Kahala Yoga.
In Chart No. 1 lord of the 4th and 5th
happens to be Venus. He is in a Kendra and the
Lord of lagna is in the 4th fairly strongly disposed.
But Jupiter aspecting lord of lagna takes away
much of the evil aspect of the Yoga.
16. VESI Y06A.
Definition. — If planets other than the Moon
occupy the 2nd from the Sun, Vesi Yoga is
formed.
Results. — The person will be fortunate, happy,
virtuous, famous and aristocratic.
Remarks. — Excepting the Moon and Rahu
and Kethu, any other planet or planets may cause
Ve.si Yoga. If malefics occupy the second from
the Sun, papavesi is caused while subhavesi is
given rise to by the presence of benefic planets.
The degree of the yoga to do good or bad
depends to a large extent upon the Sun and the
planets causing the Yoga. The results given
above are for Subhavesi yoga. Obviously quite
the reverse holds good in case of papavesi. If tbe
Sun is exalted, Lagna being Cancer and the
subhavesi is caused b}^ the presence of Venus in
Taurus and both the Sun and Venus are inherently strong, then inspite of the fact that both
the Sun and Venus are natural enemies, the Yoga
becomes supremely powerful and almost all the

40 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
good results attributed to it would find full play
when the Dasa and Bukthi of the two planets
operate. Obviously, if more than one planet causes
the Yoga, one of the planets being a malefic, say
Saturn, the good influences have to be sufficiently
moderated. Thus it will be seen that proper
interpretation of a Yoga is not a joke. It demands
on the part of the astrologer great analytical
powers and a thorough acquaintance with the
technicalities of the subject.
Chart No. 18. — Born on 8-8-1912 A. D. at
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth; years 5-6-15.
Here Vesi Yoga is caused by the presence of
Mars, Mercury and Venus in the 2nd from the
Sun, the Lagna being Aquarius. Out of the
Yogakarakas, Mars is the least powerful inasmuch
as he is removed from the Sun by nearly 29
degrees while Mercury and Venus alone can
function as Yogakarakas. The yoga having been

OBHAYACHARI YOGA
primarily caused by the owner and the residents
of the 7th house, the results will pertain to the
Bhava in question, so that the person will be
generally fortunate in respect of all the functions
of the seventh house subject, of course, to the
inherent strength of the house concerned.
17. VASI YOGA.
Definition. — Planets other than the Moon
occupying the 12th from the Sun give rise to
Vasi Yoga.
RestcUs. — The subject will be happy, prosperous, liberal, favourite of his ruling classes.
Remarks.— Here again, the definition and
results are in reference to subhavasi. If malefics
are present in the 12th, the results will be quite
the reverse. The explanations given for the
previous Yoga apply to this as well as to the next
Yoga.
18. OBHAYACHARI YOGA.
Definition. — If planets other than the Moon
are present on either side of the Sun, Obhayachari
is caused.
Results. — The person will be an eloquent
speaker. He will have well proportioned limbs,
will take delight in everything, will be liked by all,
wealthy and famous.
Remarks. — One or more of the above three
Yogas caused by the Sun would be present in
almost every horoscope. Mercury is always confined within a certain elongation from the Sun and
unless the Sun is in the last part of a sign and

42 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Mercury has attained his greatest elongation, in
which case, he will be in the 3rd or 11th house from
the Sun’s position, Vesi or Vasi Yoga will invariably be present. Obviously, these Solar Yogas
cannot be compared in their eminence to Rajayogas. They indicate more or less the ‘ego’
development of the individual concerned. Sometimes the Solar Yogas may be merged into other
more important Dhana or Raja Yogas with the
result their interpretation is always subject to a
closer analysis of the more powerful combinations
obtaining in the horoscope.
19. HAMSA YOGA.
Definitions. — Jupiter should occupy a Kendra
which should be his own house or exaltation sign.
Results. — His legs will have the markings of
a couch, lotus, fish and ankusa. He will possess
a handsome body ; he will be liked by others he
will be righteous in disposition and pure in mind.
Remarks. — This and the following four Yogas
go under the special distinction of Panchamahafiurusha Yogas producing five kinds of great men.
Varahamihira has extolled these five combinations
in his Brihat Samhita. Hamsa Yoga is caused if
Jupiter is in a Kendra which should be identical
with his own sign (Swakshetra) or the sign in
which he gets exalted. In other words, Hamsa
Yoga is possible in respect of all common and the
movable signs Aries, Libra and Capricorn. The
assumption here is that Lagna is also a Kendra
or Quadrant. Those born in fixed signs (Taurus,
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius) cannot possess

HAMSA YOGA
Hamsa Yoga inasmuch as neither Jupiter’s
exaltation sign nor own house can be identical
with his situation in a Kendra. The strength of
the Yoga is dependent as usual on the strength
of Lagna and Jupiter and in which Kendra he is
disposed. Obviously, the tenth Kendra is the
most powerful. The ownership of Kendra by
Jupiter is not desirable but when Hamsa Yoga is
present, the general principle loses its significance.
As between the situation of Jupiter in a Kendra
identical with Swakshetra and a Kendra identical
with his own uccha, Hamsa Yoga caused by the
latter is preferable inasmuch as even the trace of
evil due to Jupiter’s quadrangular ownership disappears. Hamsa Yoga should be very carefully
interpreted, as it is supposed to produce a man of
sterling character and immense moral fibre.
after sunrise.
The Lagna is Dhanas and Jupiter is in
Pisces — a kendra hence causing Hamsa Yoga.
The Yoga is also caused when reckoned from the

44 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Moon. But still the native is neither a King nor
a high personality. The reason is obvious. The
Moon who has also caused the Hamsa Yoga
has given rise to Papadhi Yoga and Jupiter is
powerfully aspected by Saturn and Mars. But
still Jupiter is capable of giving rise to the results
of Hamsa Yoga to a good extent in his Dasa.
The native has a good personality, good-tempered
and liked by his associates. The above horoscope
is illustrated with a view to showing the restrictive
effects of a Hamsa Yoga when Jupiter is subject
to malefic aspects and associations’.
after sunrise hat. 18' Af. Long. 5 h. 34 m. E.
Balance of Venus’s Dasa at birth years
Hamsa Yoga has resulted on account of the
disposition of Guru in his own sign in 10th from
Lagna. The iOth is the most powerful Kendra
and Jupiter is in conjunction with lords of Lagna,
5th and 9th and hence fortified. Still the Yoga is
not completely unadulterated with the result the

HAMSA YOGA
native is not a King. He was a well-known figure
in Indian Politics and Journalism, self-made and
earned good reputation for his sober and balanced
views.
Lat. 51° iV. longitude 5' E.
Balance of Sani’s Dasa at birth years 18-2-9.
Here is a typical example of Hamsa Yoga in
its full swing. The Lagna is Thula and Jupiter
is in a Kendra in exaltation in the 10th house.
Naturally, the Yoga has manifested in regard to
the 10th house. In addition to Hamsa Yoga,
Malavya and Sasa Yogas are also present in as
much Venus and Saturn are respectively in
Kendras identical with their Swakshetra and Swauccha. No wonder the horoscope belongs to a
great King of our age. Sasa Yoga has rendered
the native to covet for other’s possessions. Consequently he is to-day the head of the greatest
imperial possession, an anachronism with modern
concepts of democracy and freedom.

46 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
20. MALAVYA YOGA
Definition. — Venus should occupy a quadrant
which should be his own or exaltation sign.
Results. — The person will have a well-developed physique, will be strong-minded, wealthy,
happy with children and wife, will command
vehicles, endowed with clean sense organs and
renoAvned and learned.
Remarks. — Malavya Yoga can come into
existence if Venus is exalted in a Kendra or
occupies a Kendra which should be his own house.
Malavya Yoga cannot occur with reference to
every sign of the Zodiac. Consistent with the
nature of Venus, Malavya Yoga will make one
resolute, immensely rich and give him happiness
from wife and children and fame and name.
Venus is the indicator of conveyances, sensual
pleasures, music, dancing, fine arts, luxury and
material comforts. Naturally Malav}'a Yoga
renders one inclined towards all the indications
of Venus, wdth the result his spiritual advancement and outlook will be in inverse ratio to his
material comforts and pleasures. In other words,
while both Hamsa and Malavya are Raja Yogas,
the former makes one more idealistic, spiritual,
broad-minded and selfless while the latter indicates love of pleasure, and a predominantly
materialistic outlook of life. Malavya Yoga can
manifest in reference to the various Bhavas as
given hereunder for persons born in different
Lagnas.

SASA YOGA
TauruSj Libra, Pisces
Aries, Scorpio and Virgo
Gemini, Leo, Capricorn
Julianas, Aquarius, Cancer
First bouse.
Seventh house.
Tenth house.
Fourth house.
Chart No. 20 mentioned on page 44 may
be taken as an example of Malavya Yoga inasmuch as Venus is exalted in the 10th house which
is a Kendra. It may be noted that all these five
Yogas going under the special distinction of
Panchamaha Yogas, can occur unblemished only
in exceptional cases and with regard to the
generality of horoscopes, these Yogas will not be
of much political value.
21. SASA YOGA.
Definition. — Sasa Yoga is given rise to if
Saturn occupies a Kendra which should be his
own or exaltation sign.
Results. — One born in this Yoga will command good servants. His character will be
questionable. He will be head of a village or a
town or even a King, will covet other’s riches and
will be wicked in disposition.
Remarks. — Here Saturn comes into the
picture. He should be exalted in a Kendra or
occupy a Kendra being his own house. Birth in
movable or fixed signs can give rise to Sasa Yoga
by a certain disposition of Saturn. Naturally,
common signs are exempted. Saturn’s inherent
nature seems to play a large part in giving rise
to the Yoga. Saturn is cruel, mean, undignified
and sinful and consistent with these characteristics, the results of Sasa Yoga should be depicted.

48 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
The man no doubt becomes famous and
happy but his sexual outlook would be
perverse. He would be sporting with other
men’s wives and he would employ every unscrupulous means to gain other’s money. Most of our
‘ war-contractors ’ would perhaps be having Sasa
Yoga ; otherwise they could not have minted
millions at the cost of the poor man.
In interpreting the Sasa Yoga, due consideration should be bestowed on the disposition of the
Moon. If this luminary is free from affliction,
then the person having ‘Sasa Yoga’ will not covet
other’s wealth nor will he be unscrupulous.
Where the Moon is not afflicted, the evil results
attributed to Sasa Yoga can have only a
‘restricted play.’
Lat. Long.
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at birth yrs. 5-1-16.
Saturn is in the 4th a Kendra in exaltation.
The Moon is free from affliction. On the other
hand, Jupiter’s exaltation has immensely improved

RUCHAKA YOGA
the Moon’s situation with the result the native
cannot entertain unholy thoughts. The Sasa
Yoga is powerful inasmuch as it has occurred in
the 4th or house of lands, houses, etc. This will
make the native more or less equal to a King and
his earnings would be by lakhs. Saturn makes
the native a great industrialist.
22. RUCHAKA YOGA.
Definition. — Mars should be exalted in a
Kendra or occupy a Kendra which should be his
own sign.
Results. — The person born in Ruchaka will
have a strong physique, famous, well-versed in
ancient lore. King or an equal to a King, conforming to traditions and customs. He will have
a ruddy complexion, attractive body, charitable
disposition, wealthy, long-lived and leader of
an army.
Remarks. — The Pancha Mahapurusha Yogas
can be said to exist only when the planets concerned are strong and are full of vitality. The
meaning implies five types of great men.
Naturally a really powerful Yoga would be a rare
phenomenon. Emphasis is laid on the world
halishta so that if a planet is weak by debilitation, association or aspect the Yoga does
not operate in its real sense, though nominally,
it may exist. Here importance is attached to the
de facto rather than de jure presence of the
Yoga. Out of the several horoscopes given
above illustrating the Pancha Mahapurusha Yogas,
excepting Nos. 20 and 21 the rest are of no

50 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
practical value inasmuch as their strength is either
nominal or completely negligible.
Ruchaka Yoga is caused by the strong disposition of Mars in a Kendra identical with his own
or exalted sign. Ruchaka Yoga makes one martial,
a leader of men, a great Commander, an aggressive
but a patriotic ruler or an equal.
Balance of Venus’ Dasa at birth yrs. 16-4-6.
In Chart No. 23 Mars is in the 7th, a
Kendra, in his own house. Mars is rendered
extremely powerful by conjunction with the Sun,
lord of the 10th and Saturn a Yogakaraka and
Mercury lord of the 9th. Mars is no doubt very
powerful but highly malefic- So Ruchaka Yoga is
present in all its strength but because Mars is
subject to the other evil rays, there is an element
of destructiveness in this Yoga. Ruchaka Yoga
made the native daring, extremely aggressive,
arrogant, a great leader and the greatest ruler and
tyrant of modern times leading his country to

BHADRA YOGA
abysmal depths of destruction. Though born m
humble circumstances, he became ruler of a most
powerful country and a whole continent trembled before his mite and power of destruction.
23. BHADRA YOGA
Definition. — Bhadra Yoga is caused by the
disposition of Mercury in a Kendra which should
be identical with his own or exaltation sign.
Results. — The person born in Bhadra Yoga
will be strong, will have a lion-like face, welldeveloped chest ; well-proportioned limbs; he will
be taciturn, will help relatives and will live upto a
good old age.
Remarks. — Mercury is the planet of intellect
and in consonance with the inherent nature of
Mercury, Bhadra Yoga will manifest. Mercury
must be very powerful as otherwise the presence
of the combination will be simply de jure.
after sunrise. Lat. 12° N. Long. 5 h. 10 m. 20 s. E.

52 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
InCha.rtNo. 24 Mercury is in the 10th in
his own house having caused Bhadra Yoga.
Mercury is not subjected to any evil influences.
Though the physical features of the person have
partaken of the characteristics of the Lagna, in
the matter of intellectual development, learning,
wealth and generous instincts, Bhadra Yoga has
been fully illustrated.
24. BUDHA-ADITYA YOGA
Defimtion. — If Mercury combines with the
Sun, the combination goes under the name of
Budha-Aditya Yoga.
Results. — Highly intelligent, skilful in all
work, good reputation, personal respect and surrounded by all comforts and happiness.
Remarks. — Generally, any planet in association with the Sun becomes combust or Astha
and loses its power to do good. Perhaps Budha
is an exception. It should not be taken for
granted that irrespective of the distance between
the Sun and Mercury, Budha-Aditya Yoga would
be present. On the contrary, Mercury should not
be within 10° of the Sun to give rise to BudhaAditya Yoga. This combination is not, of course
rare.
25. MAHABHAGYA YOGA
Definition. — In the case of a man, the Sun,
the Moon and the Lagna should be in odd signs.
In case of women, when the birth is during night,

MAHABHAGYA YOGA
the Sun, the Moon and Lagna must be in even
signs.
Results. — A male born under this Yoga will
have good character, will be a source of pleasure
to others, will be liberal, generous, famous, a ruler
or an equal to him and lives to a good old age. A
female born in this combination will be blessed
with long-lived children and wealth; she will be of
good behaviour.
Remarks. — Mahabhagya means good fortune.
Obviously, one born in this combination will be
really fortunate. The Lagna, the Sun and the
Moon form the tripod of life ruling as they do the
body, the soul and the mind respectively and when
these three elements are diposed in odd or masculine signs, the person will be an ideal one.
Lat. IP iV; Long. 78° 40° E.
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth years 3-8-8.

54 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
In this horscope, the Lagna is Aries, the Sun
is in Leo and the Moon is in Libra — all odd signs,
consequently Mahabhagya Yoga is fully present.
But since however the Lagnadhipathi is bereft of
Jupiter’s influence, the native is miserly, though
in very affluent circumstances. Has risen by sheer
merit.
26. PUSHKALA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the sign occupied by
the Moon (who should be associated with lord of
Lagna) should be in a Kendra or in the house of
an ml. mate friend aspecting Lagna and at the
same time, Lagna should be occupied by a powerful planet.
Results. — Wealthy, sweet speech, famous,
honoured by the king and a lord.
Remarks. — The Yoga is somewhat complicated. First of all, the lord of Lagna should be with
the Moon. Lord of the sign occupied by the
Moon should be in a very friendly sign or in
Kendra aspecting the Lagna and the Lagna
should have a strongly disposed planet. Pushkala
Yoga in actual practice is full of significance
inasmuch as it comprehends that Lagna, the lord
of Lagna, the Moon and lord of Chandra Lagna
should all be powerful.

LAKSHMI YOGA
Kethu
Mercury
Moon
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth yrs. 5-6-15.
In this Chart, Lord of Lagna Saturn is with
the Moon ; lord of Chandra Lagna is in a Kendra
aspecting Lagna. But there is no planet in
Lagna. Subject to the absence of the third
condition, Pushkala Yoga may be said to be
present. The native has been enjoying all the
blessings of this Yoga. An absolutely favourable
Yoga is an impossibility.
72. LAKSHMI YOGA.
Definition. — If the lord of Lagna is powerful
and the lord of the 9th occupies own or exaltation
sign identical with a Kendra or Thrikona,
Lakshmi Yoga is caused.
Results. — The person will be wealthy, noble,
learned, a man of high integrity and reputation,
handsome appearance, a good ruler, and enjoying
all the pleasures and comforts of life.
Remarks. — Different definitions are given for
Lakshmi Yoga. I mention a few versions for the
readers’ information. Lakshmi Yoga is said to

56 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
arise (a) by the mutual association of lords of
Lagna and the 9th ; (b) by the lord of the 9th
occupying Kendra, Thrikona or exaltation and
the lord of the 9th being disposed powerfully;
and (c) by the lord of the 9th and Venus being
posited in own or exaltation places which should
be Kendras or Thrikonas.
Obviously, Lakshmi Yoga presumes the
strength of lord of Lagna, Venus and the lord of
the 9th. Lakshmi has predominantly to do with
wealth and one born in this combination will be
w'ealthy, the degree of wealth varying with regard
to the degree of strength or weakness of the
planets causing the Yoga. The definition given
in Para (c) supra will producethe most powerful
type of Lakshmi Yoga indicating immense wealth,
while the mutual association of or aspect between
the lords of lagna and the 9th in houses other than
3, 6 and 8 would also result in an ordinary type
of Lakshmi Yoga which might be fortified by the
presence of other Dhana Yogas.
Balance of Kethu’s Dasa at birth years 2-0-6,

LAKSHMI YOGA
Lakshmi Yoga is present in the above horoscope by the association of lord of Lagna (the Sun)
and the lord of the 9th (Mars) both being posited
in the 11th. Mars’ Dasa was very bright and it
gave the native much wealth, name and
reputation.
Where a reall_v strong Lakshmi Yoga is
present, and this is indeed a rare phenomenon,
the results will manifest fully.
But in almost every horoscope of any
pretence to wealth, Lakshmi Yoga in some form
or other is likely to be found.
Balance of Budha Dasa at birth years 11-10-0.
In Chart No. 28 lord of the 9th is in a
Thrikona in his own house. But Venus though
in his own house is not in a thrikona or kendra.
Lakshmi Yoga is present. Besides this, the
Dhana Yoga is excellent because lord of the 2nd

58 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Mercury is in the 5th exalted and in association
with the 4th lord Sun. The native was the ruler
of a small but independent state and he commanded much wealth.
28. GAURI YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of the 10th should join the 10th
in exaltation and combined with the lord of
Lagna.
Results. — The person belongs to a respectable family, owns several lands, charitable,
performs religious rites, his sons will be of good
character and he will be praised by all.
Remarks. — Here again two definitions are to
be found. Apart from what is given above,
another school of Astrologers hold that Gauri
Yoga is produced if the lord of the 9th and the
Moon be posited in their own or exaltation signs
identical with a trine or quadrant. The view held
by certain orthodox Pandits that Gauri Yoga will
manifest only between the ages of 36 and 48, does
not seem to be reasonable inasmuch as there is no
special injunction warranting such a belief. We
shall stick to the definition we have first propounded and deem that in order to cause Gauri Yoga,
the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 10th
lord should be in the 10th exalted. Such a definition does not exclude the possibility of some other
planet occupying the 10th house.

BHARATHI YOGA
after Sunrise Lat. ll*" N. Long. 78“ 40' E.
Balance of Sun’s Dasa at birth: years 4-8-18.
In the above Chart, lord of the 10th is the
■Vloon. He is in Sagittarius in Navamsa. The
lord of this Navamsa is Jupiter and he is exalted
in the lOth. Thus here is a typical horoscope
illustrating the presence of Gaun Yoga. The
native is in the Indian Civil Service and has all
the characteristics of Gauri Yoga.
29. BHARATHI YOGA
Definition. — The lords of the Navamsas
occupied by the lords of the 2nd, 5th and 11th
should be exalted and combined with the 9th lord.
Results. — World famous, a reputed scholar,
!<md of music, romantic, handsome, attractive,
religiously inclined and bewitching eyes.
Remarks. — Three Yogas are given rise to
inasmuch as the 9th lord cannot be in simultaneous conjunction with all the three Navamsa lords.

60 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Therefore, Bharathi Yoga maybe said to exist (a)
if the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 2nd
lord is exalted and in conjunction with the 9th
lord (6) if the lord of the Navamsa occupied b)?-
the 5th lord is exalted and combines with the 9th
lord (c) and if the lord of the Navamsa occupied
by the 11th lord is similarly disposed, Bharathi
Yoga IS not quite a common combination.
Chart No. 30. — Born
after Sunrise, Lat. 13° N
Balance of Rahu Dasa at birth : years 7-0-7.
The Lord of the 5th Venus is in the Navamsa
of Gemini, the lord of which, viz.. Mercury is
exalted in the fourth and in association with
the lord of the 9th. Thus this chart is a typical
example of Bharathi Yoga. On account of other
evil combinations, the significance of the Yoga in
question has to be practically ignored.

CHAPA YOGA
30. KUSUMA YOGAS
Definition. — If Jupiter is in Las^na, the Moon
in the seventh and the Sun in the 2nd, the
combination goes under the nanme of Kusuma.
Results. — King or equal to him or helping
others, and becoming head of a town or city after
the age of 20.
Remarks. — Professor Rao gives an altogether
different version in his Satayoga Manjari when he
says that Kusuma Yoga is caused if Venus
occupies a fixed sign in a Kendra, the weak Moon
a thrikona and the Sun the 10th house. When
Jupiter is in the 7th from the Moon, Gajakesari
Yoga is caused while Jupiter being posited in the
12th from the Sun, results in Vasi Yoga so that in
such cases, where two or more Yogas are merged
together, the most powerful of the lot is to be
taken into account.
31. CHAPA YOGA
Definition, — If the Ascendant lord is exalted
and the fourth and tenth lords have interchanged
houses, Chapa Yoga is caused.
Results. — The person will grace a King’s
Council, wealthy, full of strength and an Exchequer or a Comptroller of treasury.
Remarks. — My observations extending over
nearly twenty years lead me to conclude that Chapa
Yoga makes one control the wealth of others
rather than make him rich. Horoscopes of bank
cashiers, financial secretaries and exchequers
could be advantageously studied.

62 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
32. SREENATHA YOGA
Definition. — If the exalted lord of the seventh
occupies the tenth and the lord of the lOih is in
the 9lh, Sreenatha Yoga is caused.
Results. — The natne will have on his body
the insignia of Vishnu, viz., the conch, the wheel,
etc., agreeable speaker, godly, good wife and
children and loved by all.
Remarks. — Sreenatha Yoga may be said to
be one of the important Raja Yogas inasmuch as
a point of contact is established between the 7th,
9th and 10th he uses. It is held to gi\e lise to
power as well as wealth. The lord of the 7th should
be invariably exalted in the 10th, the lord of which
in his turn must be in the 9th. Obviously Sreenatha Yoga can occur only in respect of Dhanas
in which case Mercury, lord of the 7th could
remain exalted in the 10th. For no other Lagna
can the seventh lord remain exalted in the 10th.
Since the original writers have laid emphasis on
the fact that the 7th lord should be in the 10th
exalted, w'e have to conclude that the Yoga is a
rare one and that it cannot arise with regard to
any other sign of the Zodiac than Dhanas. If
the definition could be extended to mean that the
exalted 7th lord could also aspect the 10th, then
Cancer and Thula could be included. Whether
such a departure is permissible, I cannot yet
say as the materials at my disposal are too inadequate to admit of a definite opinion.

MALIKA YOGAS
33 to 44. MALIKA YOGAS
Definition. — If all the seven planets occupy
the seven houses contiguous!} , reckoned from
Lagna or any particular Bhava, the appropriate
Malika Yoga is caused.
Results. — Lagna Malika — King, Ruler or
Commander, wealthy; Dhana Malika — very
wealthy, dutiful, resolute and unsympathetic ;
Vikrama Malika — Ruler, rich, sickly, surrounded
by brave men; Sukha Malika — Charitable and
wealthy ; Putra Malika — highly religious and
famous; Satru Malika — greedy and somewhat
poor ; Kalatra Malika — coveted by women and
inliuential ; Randhra Mahka — poor and henpecked ; Bhagya Malika — Religious, well-to-do,
mighty and good ; Karma Malika — respected
and virtuous; Labha Malika — skilful and lord of
lovely women and Vraya Malika — honoured,
liberal and respected.
Remarks. — Twelve types of Malika Yogas
one for each Bhava are caused. Thus the Yoga
beginning from the first is Lagna Malika, the one
beginning from the fifth Putramalika and so on.
The seven planets (excluding of course Rahu and
Kethu) should occupy the seven houses contiguously from a Bhava in question. While the
generality of Astrologers hold the vierv suggested
above as regards the twelve kinds of Mahka Yogas,
Bhavartha Ratnakara makes a departure and
suggests that the Malika Yoga should always
commence from Lagna and be disposed within
five to nine houses from Lagna. According to
thi-, view, evidently no contiguitv is implied.

64 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
45. SANKHA YOGA
Definition. — The lords of the 5th and 6ih
should be in mutual kendras and the lord of
Lagna must be powerful.
Results. — Fond of pleasures, humanitanan,
blessed with wife, children and lands, righteous]}'
inclined, doing good deeds, learned in sciences
and living upto a good old age.
Remarks. — Where the planet or the house is
not powerful, all the results attributed to a particular Yoga cannot happen but only traces of them
will be present. Where Sankha Yoga is' present,
the sixth lord also becomes beneficial inasmuch as
by causing the Yoga, he must also be capable of
producing the good results of the Yoga in his
Dasa or Bhukthi. But still the blemish due to
the sixth lord-ship must express itself by way of
the native suffering from the machinations of
debts, diseases or enemies.
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : years 5-6-15.

BHERI YOGA
Lord of the 5lh Meicui y is in a Kendra from the
Moon ; lord of the 6th and lord of Lagna Saturn
are powerful by being placed in the 4th in a
friendly house aspecting Lagna.
46. BHERI YOGA
Dejinition.- -l\ Venus, lord of Lagna and
Jupiter are m mutual Kendras and the lord ol the
9th IS powerfully disposed, Bheri Yoga is caused.
Long-lived, free from disease, ruler,
various sources ol income, happiness from wife
and children, exalted soul, generous instincts and
religiously inclined.
Remarks. — The sum and substance of Bheri
Yoga is that it will make the native lead a happy
and comfortable life.
Balance of Mars Dasa at birth : years 1-6-8.
In this horoscope, Venus is lord of Lagna
and he is in i Kendra from Jupiter and Mercury

65 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
lord of the 9th is powerfully disposed. The native
is a high Educational Officer and is enjoying all
the blessings of the Yoga subject of course to
other evil dispositions o' planet'.
47. MATSYA yoga
Definition. — Maiefics should be disposed in
Lagna and the 9th ; the fifth house should contain
both malefics and benefics ; and the fourth and
8th should be occupied by malefics.
Results. — The nati\e will be a clever prophet,
an ocean of kindness, intelligent, well-behaving,
famous and learned.
Remarks. — Malefics must invariably occup}'
Lagna, 4th, 8th and 9th and mixed influences
should prevail in the fifth house. In actual practice, this Yoga seems to be a rare one.
48, MRIDANGA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the Navamsa occupied by an exalted planet ■should be posited in a
trine or quadrant identical with friendly or exalted
sign, and the lord of Lagna should be strongly
disposed.
Results. — Respected by rulers, famous, attractive and commanding much influence.
Remarks. — The definition of the Yoga is
somewhat confusing. Some planet is exalted and
he occupies some Navamsa. The lord of the said
Navamsa should occupy a Kendra, or Thrikona
which should be either his own or exaltation or

PARIJAi'HA YOGA
friendly house. In addition to this, che lord of
Ldgna should also be powerful.
at Sandrigham, England.
Balance of Saturn’s Dasa at birth: years 18-2-9.
In this horoscope, Jupiter an exalted planet
is in Sagittarius. The lord of this is Jupiter himself and he is in a kendra identical with his own
exaltation. Even taking Venus lord of the Amsa
in which Saturn (another exalted planet) is placed,
we find that he is in a kendra identical with his
own house while lord of Lagna is also Venus. In
a sense, therefore, Mridanga Yoga is present. The
native is ruler of a vast Empire.
49. PARIJATHA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the sign in which
the lord of the house occupied by the Ascendant
lord; or the lord of Navamsa occupied by the lord

88 THREE HUNDRED IMPORT A\1 COMBINATIONS
In rdl such cases, where big results are attributed to yogas, the astrologer should be ver\
careful in assessing the leal strength of the mam
lord causing the yoga. The combination of the
9th and 10th loids constitutes m itself a powerful
Raja and this occurring in the 2nd, combined with the Amsa lord, is indeed a powerful
Dhana Yoga so that there is a blending of Raja
and Dhana Yogas The combination implies that
the 2nd house must be occupied by at least three
planets and hence not of very frequent occurrence
at Bangalore
Balance of Venus Dasa at birth years 4-2-0
The lord of the 9th \enus is in Tauius
Hence the lord of this Amsa is again Venus.
Fie IS in the second along with the 10th lord and
he himself happens to be the 9th lord Flence
Vishnu yoga is present though it cannot have lull
play because ol Rahu’s presence also in the 2nd
The horoscope is that of an influential man oi
high rank

BK\riM^ \OGA
Mar^
Balance of Rahu’'5 Dasa at birth : y eats 17-5-9.
In this chart, Vishnu Yoga is more pionounced. Venus happens not only to be the loi d of
the 10th but also loid of the amsa occupied by the
9th lord Mercury. Both Mercmy and Venus are
in the 2nd. The native has been enjoying almost
all the blessings of this Yoga. He has e lined in
lakhs Fie is in the good looks of some of the
Indian princes and the British Goveinment, he is
highly learned, a brilliant statesman and a capable
lawyer.
65 BRAHMA YOGA
Definition.— Jupiter and Venus are in
Kendras resphfctively from the lords of the 9th
and 11th, and Mercury is mb. similar position
from the lord of eiftief'lagna or the 10th, Brahma
Yoga IS caused. ' ’ '

90 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Results. — The person will enjoj luxurious
foods, will be respected by Brahmins and learned
men, will be highly learned, long lived, charitable
and always bent on doing good deeds.
Remarks. — The Yoga in question seems to
bestow highly beneficial results implying that the
native would command health, wealth, fame and
above all instincts for serving others. It will be
seen that in the formation of this yoga, all the
natural benefics are involved. Even here, the
exact strength and signification of the j’oga rests
to a large extent upon a number of other horoscopic factors. For Mesha Lagna for example, this
\oga cannot be deemed to be formed in all it-,
aspects inasmuch as lord of the 9th is Jupiter so
that Jupiter’s disposition in a kendra from the 9tli
lord IS entirely ruled out. Similarly when Cancer
IS the lagna, two conditions of the yoga would be
absent as lords of the 9th and 11th, respectueh
become Jupiter and Venus. Again li lagna is
Kanya or Dhanas, the j’oga cannot be full, because
in regard to Kanya, Mercury becomes lord of the
10th while in regard to Dhanus Mercurx and
Venus become lords of the 10th and 11th so that
the disposition of Venus and Mercury respectively
in kendras from the lords of the 11th and lOth is
not possible. So far as Dhanas is conce' ned, in
the place of the lOth lord„ lord of lagna may be
considered. Therefore we may assume that Brahma
Yoga is possible to the full extent in respect of all
the signs except Aries, Cancer and Virgoi However, it does not seem to be quite erroneous to,
assume that even in respect of ArieSf. (^^apcer apd

BRAHMA YOGA
Virgo, this yoga could be present with slight modification. If, say three factors are necessary to
make up a certain yoga, the presence of even one
or lwo cannot but suggest that the yoga does
operate, may be feeblv .
Chart No 44 — Born on 7-5-1886 at J-30 p.m.
Balance of Rahu’s Dasa at birth : yrs. 13-1-4.
In the above horoscope, . J upiter is in a
kendra from the lord of the 9th, viz., Venus ;
Venus is in a kendra from the lord of the llth,
viz.., the N^oon. The third combination cannot
obtain because Virgo is Lagna. Therefore Brahma
Yoga IS present with a slight variation. The native
of the horoscope was a ruler of an ladian State
and enjoyed all the results attributed to this yoga.
This may be t^iken as a rare - combination oecurringiin a small number of horoscopes.'’

92 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
66. IMDRA YOGA
Definition. — It the lords of the 5th and 11th
interchange their houses and the Moon is in the
5th, Indra Yoga is caused.
Results. — Highly courageous, lasting fame, a
King ol Kings, good enjoyments and living upto
36 years.
Remarks. — Unleis the house of longevit) is
powerful, one has to assume that Indra Yoga does
not confer longevit) Professor Rao has offered
very suggesti\o remarks in his Sata Yoga Manjari
in suggesting that Christ, Shankara and Alexander are e.Yainples oi short life but of lasting name
and I would refer the readers to these notes.
Though classical writers have attributed highly
favourable results to this Yoga, I have my own
doubts, which mav be due to want of sufficient
experience.
67. RAVI YOGA
Definition. — The Sun should join the 10th
and the lord of the 10th must be in the 3rd in
conjunction with Saturn.
Results. — Respected by rulers, well-versed in
sciences, becoming famous after the 15th year,
highly passionate, liking simple food, possessing
lotus-like eyes and well developed chest.
Remarks. — Each rule has an exception.
Whilst Saturn’s association with any favourable
horoscopic element is not desirable, under this
Yoga, the 10th lord should occupy the third in

RAVI YOGA
conjunction with Saturn so that in the course of his
Dasa, Saturn, under such a combination would be
capable of giving rise to highly favourable results.
Ravi Yoga comprehends a point of contact between the Sun, Saturn, the 10th and 3rd houses.
The Sun should occupy the 10th, while the iOth
lord should be in the 3rd with Saturn. For Mesh.-,
Vnshabha and Vrischika Lagnas, Ravi Yoga
cannot at all be said to exist in its real sense
For Dhanus, Makaia, Simha and Kanja
Lagnas, Ravi Yoga would be almost impossible
bee luse in these cases the 10th lord happens to
be either Mercury or Venus: when the Sun is in
the 10th, Mercury or Venus cannot be in the 3rd
from Lagna as it implies a distance of nearly 150
to 180 degrees irom the Sun which is astronomically impossible. In view of the above explanations, one can easily <-te that Ravi Yoga is
indeed ot rare occuiunce.
Chart No, 45. — Born on 21-3-1921 at 12 noon

96 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
. Remarks. — Jupiter ife Dhanak^raka or indicator of wealth. He should occupy his Moola
Thrikona with the lord of the 2nd and the ascendant lord naust remain in exaltation.
The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus and Saturn, respective!} have as their
Moolathrikonas, Leo, Taurus, Aries, Vir^o,
Sagittarius, Libra and Aquarius. For Scorpio and
Aquarius, since the second happens to be owned
by Jupiter, the question of association with the
spcond lord does not arise.
Jupiter’s Moola Thrikona being confined to
the first thirteen degrees of Sagittarius, Go Yoga
can be present only in respect of those born when
Jupiter occupies this particular arc in the heavens.
In other words, this yoga, unlike Gaja Kesari, Vasi
or Vesi, is subject to a law of periodicity, coming
into effect only w'hen Jupiter occupies the constellation of Moola.
Chart No 47. — Born on 2-1-1901 at 8 p.m. at
Bangalore City.
Balance of Moon’s Dasa at birth : years 1-6-0.

TMRILOCHA.NA YOGA
In this horoscope, Cancer is lagna ; the 2nd
lord Sun is in Sagittarius with Jupiter uho, being
placed in Moola, occupies his own Moola Thnkona. Lord of Lagna, viz., the Moon is exalted.
Hence Go Yoga is present in the horoscope. Of
course, the Moon’s conjunction with Kethu and
Saturn’s presence in Sagittarius liave produced
adverse influences so that the yoga cannot at all
be effective. The example is onh illustrative of
the presence of the particular yoga.
70. GOLA YOGA
Definition. — If the Full Moon is in the 9th m
conjunction with jupitei and \’enus, and Mercury
joins Navamsa Lagna, Gola Yoga is produced.
Results. — Polite, learned, Magistrate or head
of a village, long-lived and eating wholesome
food.
Remarks. — The yoga can come into effect
provided the Moon is full and not otherwise.
Mercury must occupy Navamsa Lagna. Such a
Full Moon should be in the 9th with Jupiter and
Venus. In other words, ev^en Gajakesari Yoga
gets merged into Gola, inasmuch as when Jupiter
and the Moon are in conjunction, they would be
supposed to be in a kendra from each other.
71. THRIIOCHANA YOGA
Definition. — The Sun, the Moon and Mars
should be in trines from each other.
Results. — Great wealth, a terror to his
enemies, highly intelligent and good longevit}.

'98 THREE HUNDRED IMPORT \NT COMBINATIONS
Remarhs. — Irrespective oi the presence of any
particular kind of Yoga, dispositions of planets in
mutual trines is always held to be highly favourable.
One born in such a combination will have a smooth
career and will not have to contend against
■unfavourable forces.
72. SAMUDRA YOGA
Definiiton.—li all the planets are disposed in
the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 12th houses,
SamudraYoga is caused.
Results. — The native will be a king or an
equal to him.
Remarks. — This is indeed a somewhat rare
combination because all the seven planets have to
occupy six alternate signs beginning from the
second. x\ll odd houses reckoned from Lagna
should be free from occupation.
This is one of the several Akriti Yogas dealt
with by the great Varaha Mihira. In our humble
experience, Akriti Yogas by themselves cannot
■exercise any definite influences unless the horoscope has gained strength otherwise.
73. JAYA YOGA
Definition. — When the lord of the 6th is
debilitated and the lord of the 10th is exalted, the
resulting combination goes under the name of
Jaya Yoga.

JAVA YOGA
Results. — The person will ahvays be successful,' h'ippy and long-lived.
Remarks. — As the name implies, jaya means
victory and one born under this combination
would always be successful. Success would be
his watchword. As the sixth represents enemies,
debts and diseases, when the 6th lord is debilitated, all the indications of the sixth house would
be on the minus side. Added to this exalUition
of the 10th lord invests the horoscope with
inherent' strength rendering it highly invulnerable.
Chart No. A%—Born on 25-2-1894 at about
Balance of Rahu’s dasa at birth ; Yrs. 1-1-7.
, tn this horoscope, the lord of the 6th Mercury
is debilitated while the lord of the 10th Saturn
is exalted definitely causing Jaya Yoga. The
horoscope is that of a great religious leader and
prophet who influenced the world in no ordinary

100 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
way. He i"- one ol the most extraordinary characters m the stage ot the world’s religious drama.
He had to deal with very rough and uncontrollable elements and the Jaya Yoga seems to have
gone a long wav in enabling him to enlist
the sympathies <.>f millions nf people for his cause.
There are of course othet strong elements in the
horoscope.
74. KULAVARDHANA YOGAS
Defimiion. — All planets should be in the 5th
from Lagna, the Sun and the Moon.
Results. — Unbroken line of successors, wealthy, healthy and long-lived.
Remarks. — A.s the name implies, one born
when the benefics are disposed in the 5th from
Lagna, the Sun and the Moon will have plenty of
children and the family traditions will be perpetuated by his children, grand-children and so
forth and so on in an unbroken fashion. The
fifth house becomes the focal point. The man
will also be capable of producing a large number
of children.
75 to t06. NABHASA YOGAS
Varaha Mihira has dealt with these various
yogas in his immortal Brihat Jataka and the
English rendering of this work by late Prof.
B. Suryanarain Rao, would be of inestimable help
to students of astrology. The Yavanas have
extensively treated with Nahhasa Yogas.

NABHASA YOGAS
The Nabhasa Yogas consist of four groups, viz.,
Aknli Yogas ... 20
Sankya Yogas .. 7
Asraya Yogas ... 3
Dala Yogas ... 2
According to Varaha Mihira, the effects of
Nabhasa Yogas aie said to be felt throughout
one’s life and not merely during the Dasa and
Bhukthi periods of the planets causing the Yoga.
75. Yupa Yoga
76. Ishu Yoga
77. Sakti Yoga
78. Daiida Yoga
Definition. — When all the planets occupy four
signs contiguously from the Lagna and other kendras, Yupa, Ishu, Sakti and Danda Yogas are
caused.
Results. — One born in Yupa becomes liberal,
self-possessed and noted for charitable deeds.
Ishu makes one successful as a superintendent
or head of a jail, concentration camp, etc.,
Sakti renders the native lazy, slothful, devoid of
riches, and generally disliked by people and Danda
suggests that the person will lack happiness due
from wife and children.
Remarks. — These four yogas arise by virtue
of the seven planets being disposed in four contiguous houses as reckoned from the Ascendant and

102 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Other kendias. Thus, if all tiie planets are placed
m Lagna, 2nd, 3rd and 4th houses, Yupa is caused ;
111 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th, Ishu or Sara is produced ;
in 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th, Sakti is caused and in the
10th, 11th, 12th and Isl Danda is caused.
Personally, we are of opinion that ail these
various Akriti yogas do not contribute much to
the making of the horoscope In fact they seem
to give rise to clues as regards the means of
Inelihood (>ne is likeK to have Thus, for
instance, Ishu yoga, said to be caused by the
seven planets occupying the 4th, 5th, 6tli and 7th
houses IS common in the horoscopes of persons
who may have anything to do with prisons,
lock-ups, concentration camps, etc Of course
these deductions are based on our own observations
and readers have to view them with due reserv'e.
,,5alance.p{ Saturn's Dasa at birth: years '3-Sr5.«.

NABHASA YQGA
Baitince <>1 Rahu’s dasa at birth ; yrs 12-1-17.
In Chart No. 49, all the planets liave occupied
the tour signs contiguously Irom lagna kendra
causing Yupa Yoga while in Chart No 50, the
disposition of planets in the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th in
a contiguous manner suggests the presence of
Ishu Yoga. Whether' the various Nabhasa Yogas
can have an independent effect on the horoscope
or they get themselves mixed up with other Yogas,
we shall discuss on a subsequent occasion. Now
suffice it to say that they will have important
bearings on certain aspects of one’s life depending
upon the stress that is laid on particular bhavas
by the dispositions of planets in or around them.
Out of the four yogas mentioned above, Yupa
and Danda are better than Ishu and Sakti because
in the latter two, planets are about to culminate
or about to set. , , , ,

104 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
79- Na\ Yoga.
•sO. Kuta Yoga.
81. Chhatra Yoga,
82. Chapa Yoga.
Definition. — By virtue of the disposition of
the seven planets in seven contiguous houses from
Lagna, fourth house, 7th house and 10th house
respectively, Nav, Kuta, Chatra and Chapa Yogas
are produced.
Results. — Nav makes one occasionally happy,
famous and miserly; one born in Kuta becomes
a liar and a jailor. Chatra Yoga produces a
happy individual while one born in Chapa
becomes brave and happy in the first and last
periods of his life.
Remarks. — The above definitions are simple.
The seven planets should occupy the seven houses
without a break from lagna, fourth house, seventh
and tenth houses to produce the four kinds of yogas.
Apart from the results ascribed by the classical
writers, we may make a few observations.
In regard to Nav Yoga (79), all the planets
will be in the invisible sphere of the heavens. It
seems to be generally productive of good and to
have a bearing on the native having to do with
water, watery places and aquatic substances.
In regard to Kuta, when all the planets will
be in the seven houses from the fourth, it will be
more or less an equal distribution of planets in the
visible and invisible halves of the zodiac. The
mative may frequent caves, mountains, etc., and

NABHASA YOGAS
he will be addicted to evil habits. Robbers,
drunkards, cheats and others may have this combination. In Chatra Yoga, all the planets will be
in the visible half and hence may be deemed to be
favourable. The native will be happy in the
beginning and end of his life. He will possess great
strength of mind and will earn much wealth. In
Chapa Yoga all the planets will be in the 10th and
subsequent houses and one born in this yoga will
lead a comfortable life delighting in good deeds.
83. Ardha Chandra Yoga
Definition. — All the planets should occupy
the seven houses beginning from a Panapara or
Apoklima.
Results. — The native will have fair features
and will be happy throughout life.
Remarks. — There are four Panaparas (cadent
houses) and four Apoklimas (succeedent houses).
Consequently there are eight kinds of Ardha
Chandra Yogas, the planets occupying (i) from
2nd to 8th, (ii) 3rd to 9th, (iii) 5th to 11th, (iv) 6th
to 12th, (v) 8th to 2nd, (vi) 9th to 3rd, (vii) 11th to
5th and (viii) 12th to 6th.
84. Chakra Yoga
Definition. — All the planets should occupy
the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th houses.
Results. — The subject will be a king or an
equal to him. He will command respect and
submission from others and he will earn and
spend well.

106 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Remarks. — On page 113 we have dealt with
Sumudra Yoga which is said to result by all
the planets occupying the even ' signs, where as in
this regard, all the odd signs must be occupied.
The combination is not a rare one. So far as the
results are concerned, the Yoga cannot produce
rulers or emperors, but one who has this combination would certainly become an entity amongst his
own people.
85. Gada Yoga.
86. Sakata Yoga.
87. ViHAGA Yoga.
Definition. — All the planets occupying two
adjacent kendras, the first and seventh houses,
and the 4th and 10th houses respectively will
produce Gada, Sakata and Vihaga Yogas.
Results: — Gada Yoga makes one highly religious and wealthy ; Sakata renders one poor and
unhapyy in domestic life ; and one born in Vihaga
•will be a vagrant, quarrelsome and mean.
Remarks'. — A study of the Nabhasa Yogas
outlined in Brihat Jataka and the comments
made by Varah9,mihira clearly reveals that attempts had been made to assess clearly the
strength due to every conceivable combination.
Gada Yoga is caused when the planets
occupy two successive kendras. Four varieties
are to be seen in this viz., (a) All the planets may
occupy the 1st and 4th houses, (b) 4th and 7th
houses, (c) 7th and 10th houses and (d) 10th and
1st houses. The Yavanas consider these as four
■distinct Yogas and not merely as variations of a
single combination and call them as Gada,

NABHASA YOGAS
Sanaha, Vibhuka and Dhuriya respectively. It
is clear from the above that Gada Yoga and its
variations, which the Yavanas recognise as four
distinct yogas, are nothing but the disposition of
all the planets in mutual square aspects. Of
course Rahu and Kethu are omitted. The effects
of Gada Yoga are assumed to be good so that the
Western astrological theory that square aspects
are all evil, has no warrant in Hindu astrology.
Sakata Yoga is said to arise by the disposition
of all the planets in the lagna and the 7th. It will
be seen that the 1st and 7th houses become focii
of attraction so that there seems to be justification
in attributing evil results especially pertaining to
the native’s body and wife. Sakata will make
one derive his livelihood by manual labour ; he
will be sickly and his wife will be quarrelsome.
Vihaga means a bird and Vihaga Yoga is
caused if all the planets are in the 4th and 10th
houses Evil results are attributed to this combination. The native is said to be a vagrant and in
modern parlance the yoga must be common in the
horoscopes of travelling agents or guards of trains
who are required to be always moving. One who
has a powerful Vihaga Yoga is said to become a
tale-bearer also.
It is evident that the ancient writers have
attributed evil results for opposition aspects though
certain yogas such as Gajakesari must have been
treated as exception. The results due to a single
Yoga or a combination of yogas are always
dependent upon the inherent strength of the
horoscope.

108 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Balance of Rahu’s Dasa at birth ; yrs. 16-7-24.
In the horoscope given above all the planets
are in the 4th and 10th houses so that it is a typical illustration of Vihaga Yoga.
88. Vajra Yoga.
89. Yava Yoga.
Definition. — Benefics occupying the ascendant
and the seventh house, while malefics occupying
the 4th and the 10th give rise to Vajra Yoga ; the
reverse will be the case in Yava Yoga.
Results. — Vajra gives rise to a happy and
• handsome person ; Yava makes one happy in
his middle life.
Remarks. — The difference between Vajra and
Yava Yogas is very thin. In the former, benefics
will be found in the ascendant and the descendant,,
and malefics in the.meridian and the nadir while

NABHASA YOGAS
in the other, the lagna and the descendant must
have malefics and the meridian and the nadir
should have benefics. Even in the production of
results the difference between the two yogas is
hardly worth attention, for while Vajra makes one
fair, brave and happy, the effects of Yava are
restricted to a particular period of life, viz., the
middle portion. If one makes a serious attempt
to study a number of horoscopes, he will not be
slow in appreciating one important truth, viz.,
that Yava Yoga is hardly conducive to the health
and bodily happiness of the native or his wife ;
for, if malefics occupy the lagna and the 7th, their
effects, unless counter-balanced by other horoscopic
factors, such as more powerful yogas or inherent
strength etc., would necessarily converge on these
two houses. These two yogas are not after all
very important, because often times their influences
become merged with those of other more powerful
yogas.
Chart No. 67 Chart No. 68

110 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Chart No. 67 illustrates Vajra Yoga because
iagna IS occupied by Jupiter and the 7th by Venus,
the 4th by the Sun and the 10th by Saturn and
Mars. Chart No. 68 is a distinct case of Yava
Yoga.
90. Sringhataka Yoga.
91. Hala Yoga.
Defimtion. — If all the planets occupy the
ascendant and its trines, Sringhataka is caused.
If planets are confined to other triangular houses,
Hala Yoga arises.
Results. — One born in Sringhataka becomes
happy in later life while Hala Yoga makes one an
agriculturist.
Remarks. — Sringhataka may mean junction
of four roads or a square. Planets must invariably
occupy the 1st, 5th and 9th houses. Lagna represents body, the 5th indicates progeny and the 9th
suggests fortune in general. If these three houses
are well fortified, then the native will have a
smooth career, progeny and success in life. One
born in Sringhataka is said to be happy in his
later life. With due deference to the sages who
have attributed this result, I have to observe that
the period of happiness depends upon the stress
laid on any one of the trines by virtue of a larger
number of benefics being placed in it. Thus if
the stress is on the iagna, the beginning of life
will be happy ; if in the 5th, the middle part of
life ; and if on the 9th, the last part. This is a
simple observation that any student of astrology
could conveniently carry on.

NABHASA YOGAS
Hi
Hala implies a plough. Consistent with this
meaning, Hala Yoga is said to make one an
agriculturist. Three variations can be seen m
tins Yoga. All the planets may occupy (a) the
2nd, 6th and 10th houses, (b) the 3rd, 7th and
11th houses and (c) the 4th, 8th and 12th houses.
Hala Yoga would be helpful in deciding one’s
profession, for a number of horoscopes possessing
this combination, belong to agriculturists, farmers,
estate managers, zammdars and petty landlords.
Balance of Venus’ Dasa at birth : yrs. 2-6-27.
The above horoscope is an example of
Sringhataka Yoga,
92. Kamala Yoga.
93. Vapee Yoga.
Definition. — Kamala Yoga will result when
the planets are situated in the four kendras, while
Vapee is caused when they are ranged in the four
panaparas or the four apoklimas.

112 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Results. — One born in Kamala will not
become much wealthy, but he will command high
prestige, wide fame and innumerable virtues.
Vapee makes one a hoarder of money.
Remarks. — Kamala Yoga is practically the
same as Chathussagara Yoga though not synonymous with it. Kendras are strong holds in a
horoscope and when all the four kendras are
occupied, the horoscope is rendered highly powerful. Kamala Yoga lays emphasis on fame, virtue,
and prestige as different from mere earning
capacity. Vapee, which means a well, on the
other hand is said to make one mean, trickery
and always pine for and hoard wealth. Panaparas
are the 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th and Apoklimas are
3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th. The planets should
occupy exclusively all the Panaparas or all the
Apoklimas.
Balance of Moon’s Dasa at birth: yrs. 4-4-19.

NABHASA YOGAS
In Chart No. 70 all the planets are disposed
in Panaparas. It is a typical example for
Vapee Yoga.
94. Samudra Yoga.
Definition. — All planets must occupy the six
even houses.
Results. — The native will be a ruler or live
like him free from care and worry.
Remarks. — With this we complete the 21
Aknti Yogas, comprising the first of the 4 groups
of Nabhasa Yogas. Yogas like Vajra and Yava
which require the positions of the planets exclusively in kendras do not seem to have the approval
of Varahamihira. He deals with them in his
Brihat Jataka simply adopting the views of
Yavana and others and feels sceptical about their
possibility with the query ‘ How can Mercury and
Venus occupy the 4th sign (Bhavana) from the
Sun. The possibility or otherwise of Vajra,
Yava and similar yogas which require mutual
angular dispositions of the Sun and Mercury and
Venus depends upon whether these yogas refer
to the positions of planets in the Rasichakra or
Bhavachakra. If the former, as is clearly implied
by the latter Bhavana used by Mihira which
means a sign, then the Sun can never be in a
kendra from Mercury or Venus. If on the other
hand, the reference is to Bhavachakra as some

114 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
scholars contend, then Mercury can occupy a
kendra bhava from the Sun, which could be possible in very high latitudes. Therefore the ancient
writers have not eired if the Vajra and Yava Yogas
refer to the positions in the Bhava Chakra.
95. Vallaki Yoga.
Definition. — All the planets must occupy any
seven signs.
Results. — The person will have a large number of friends, fond of music and fine arts,
learned, happy and famous.
Remarks. — This is the first of the Sankhya
Yogas or numerical combinations. Vallaki is also
known as Veena Yoga. All the seven planets
should be disposed of in any seven signs. It will
be seen, as would be shown subsequently that
some times Sankhya Yogas actually coincide with
Akriti Yogas (already discussed above). In such
cases, Sankhya Yogas lose their individuality and
they should not be considered at ail. There seems
to be some justification in adopting this course,
because in almost every horoscope since all the
seven planets will have to occupy any seven, or
less than seven rasis, Sankhya Yoga must be
present in some form or the other. Provided noother Nabhasa Yoga is present, then aloneSankhya Yogas have to be reckoned. Vallaki
and the six other Yogas to follow, belong to thecategory of Sankhya Yogas.

SANKHVA YOGAS
Balance of Moon’s Dasa at birth ; years 6-2-8.
The above is a typical illustration of Vallaki
or Veena Yoga for all the seven planets (Rahu and
Ketu excepted) have occupied any seven RasisWhether the Yoga is able to independently function or has been absorbed by some other more
powerful Nabhasa Yoga, the reader can easily
find out.
96. Damini Yoga.
Definition Mi the seven planets should’
occupy any six signs.
Results — The person will be highly charitable,
always helping others and a protector of cattle.
Remarks : — In ascribing results to these
Yogas, classical writers have differed from each
other. For instance, the effects given above for
Damini are based on Varahamihira while Saravali glorifies the Yoga considerably. But ai
writers seem almost agreed about the genera

116 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
good or bad nature of the results due to a yoga,
Damini or Dama Yoga seems to give a man
intellect, fame and wealth also. Of course, the
exact nature of the effects depends upon the
general disposition of the chart.
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at birth : years 9-3-5.
Balance of Moon’s Dasa at birth : years 8-1-15.

PASA YOGA
Both the horcopes given above illustrate the
presence of Damini Yoga. But yet, a careful
examination of the two reveals that chart No.
73 IS stronger and more potential. 72 is marred
by the weakness of Lagnadhipathi while chart No.
73 IS considerably fortified by the presence of
Mars, a yogakaraka in the 5th and another trine
lord Jupiter in the 11th. In point of fame
and wealth. Chart No. 73 is decidedly more powerful. Such illustrations furnish clues as to how the
same Yoga can operate in different ways in different horoscopes.
97. Pasa Yoga,
Definihon: — The planets should occupy any
five signs.
Results : — The person will acquire wealth
through right means and he will always be surrounded by friends, servants and relatives.
Remarks : — Saravali suggests that one born
in Pasa Yoga will suffer from incarceration. This
statement should not be taken in its face value.
Pasa Yoga in itself cannot make one a prisoner
unless there are other combinations indicating the
same event. The presence of the lagna and the
lord of lagna in the 6th and 8th in Pasa Drekkanas
would be a powerful combination for imprisonment-

118 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Cliart No. 74 — Born on 4-3-1886 at ll-ZQ p.m.
Balance of Rahu’s Dasa at birth : Yrs. 12-9-3.
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at birth: yrs. 15-1-1.
Both the above horoscopes are examples of
Pasa Yoga. Chart No. 74 belongs to an exspeaker of a Provincial Legislative Assembly who
has suffered incarceration a number of times as

SANKHYA YOGAS
would be evident by the Rahu-Mars combination in
the 10th aspected by Saturn. The tenth house has
received no other benefic aspect. The disposition
of Pasa Yoga may have also contributed its share
of evil in making the subject undergo imprisonment. In Chart No. 75 on the other hand, the
tenth is considerably strengthened by the
presence of Mercury and Venus while the birth is
fortified by the aspect of its own lord, in this
case Jupiter. The native of the horoscope is a
Joint Secretary in the Government of India and
has been getting on very well. These illustrations
are provided with a view to driving home to the
reader that great care must be exercised in sifting
the evidence furnished by different combinations.
In both the horoscopes the sweeter aspects of
Pasa Yoga have manifested considerably.
98. Kedara Yoga.
Definition, — All the planets must be ranged
in any four signs.
Results. — The person will earn his livelihood
by agriculture and be highly helpful to others.
Remarks. — A comparative study of a large
number of horoscopes possessing Akriti Yogas
leads me to the perception that these yogas could
furnish helpful hints for guessing one’s profession
which has always been a hard nut to crack. Hala
Yoga, {vide page No. 110) makes one pursue
agriculture. Similarly Kedara also is said to
make one an agriculturist. Saravali points out
that one having Kedara Yoga will have a dull

120 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
intellect or poor comprehensive power. The presence of Kedara can easily be recognised and
hence no illustration seems to be called for.
99. SuLA Yoga.
100. Yuga Yoga.
101. Gola Yoga.
Definition- — Sula Yoga. Yuga and Gola are
given rise to by the Se\en planets occupying respectively, any three signs, two signs or single sign.
Results. — Sula makes one devoid of wealth,
courageous, cruel, and possess marks of wounds
received in battle ; Yuga renders one poor, ostracised by society, heretical and a drunkard. Gola
gives rise to a poor, dirty, unnamed, ignorant and
indolent individual.
Remarks. — All the above three yogas are said to
cause poverty, render the person unfit for
company by his wrathsome conduct and habits
and make him miserable. Probably the joining
together of all the seven planets within a space of
90 degrees would release a conglomeration of evil
forces that the rays of benefics would lose their
lustre and get themselves merged together with
those of the evil planets. As however, no Yoga
can exclusively manifest itself, the results due to
it should not be applied in their entirety. Sula
Yoga may be present in a horoscope. The native
may be poor, and may have sustained injuries in
fights but yet, on account of the strength of lagna
or the Moon he may be a man of sterling character.
Therefore judgment in astrology has a number
of pitfalls which a clever student has to avoid.

NABHASA YOGAS
Balance of Saturn’s Dasa at birth : Yrs. 6-7-21.
In the above Chart, Sula Yoga is present, as
all the planets have occupied three signs. It
pertains to a living Commander in the Royal
Air Force. Therefore some of the results attributed to Sula Yoga are to be found in the native.
But he is neither poor nor cruel.
Balance of the Moon’s Dasa at birth : Yrs. 7-11-2

122 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Yuga Yoga is brought out in Chart No. 77
as all the planets are situated in two signs. But
as the horoscope has a number of other relieving
features, viewed from Chandra Lagna, the effects
of Yuga Yoga have been considerably restricted.
Gola Yoga is indeed a rare combination, as
it requires the presence of all the planets in a
single sign.
102. Rajju Yoga.
103. Musala Yoga.
104. Nala Yoga.
Definition. — If all the planets exclusively
occupy movable, fixed or common signs respectively, Rajju, Musala and Nala Yogas are caused.
Results. — The person born in Rajju will be
fond of travel, handsome, searching for wealth in
foreign countries, somewhat cruel and envious.
One born in Musala will be endowed with selfrespect, wealth, learning and a steady mind,
engaged in many works, famous and proud. Nala
Yoga makes one deformed, shrewd and dejected.
In Chart No. 78 all the planets are in
movable signs and therefore illustrates Rajju
Yoga.
Remarks. — The above three yogas constitute
the Asraya group being one of the sub-divisions of
Nabhasa Yogas. All the planets must occupy
exclusively movable signs, or exclusively fixed
signs or exclusively common signs to give rise to
these three yogas. Here no reference is made to
the situation of the lagna or the disposition of the

NABHASA YOGAS
planets in the cardinal, fixed or common signs
with reference to the lagna. Some commentators
are of the opinion that in order to cause Asraya
Yogas, all the four movable, all the four fixed
and all the four common signs should be occupied.
But Garga refutes this view and thereby implies
that the only condition is that when the movable,— all or any of the four — signs are occupied,
the fixed and the common signs should be vacant
for causing Rajju Yoga. Similarly with regard to
Musala and Nala. As Rajju has reference to
movable signs, one born under its influence
would always be wandering about in quest of
wealth and fame. When all the planets are in
immovable signs, the native is expected to be
fixed in determination. Whereas planets being
confined to common signs are held to make the
person depressed and disappointed.
Chart No. 78 — Born on 1-11-1910 at 1 p,m.
Balance of Rahu’s Dasa at birth : Years 16-7-24.

124 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
105. Srik Yoga
106. Sarpa Yoga
Definifion. — If all the benefics occupy
kendras, Snk Yoga is caused. If all the malefics
occupy kendras, Sarpa Yoga is produced.
Results. — The person born in Srik Yoga will
live in comfort, will possess conveyances, and will
have many enjoyments. Sarpa Yoga renders one
miserable in manj'- ways, cruel and stupid.
Remarks. — Snk also known as Mala and
Sarpa Yogas aiethetwo Dala Yogas mentioned
by Parasara. The kendras must be exclusively
occupied by benefics or malefics. It must be
noted that so far as this yoga is concerned, the
Moon is completely left out ol account so that
there remain only three benefics and three
malefics. We have formulated above in a fairly
exhaustive manner all the Nabhasa Yogas mentioned by Varahamihira. In locating these yogas,
there are certain factors to be considered. By
carefully remembering the definition of Asraya
Yogas, Akriti Yogas, Dala Yogas and Sankhya
Yogas it would occur to any student of
Astrology that sometimes Asraya Yogas become
identical with Akriti Yogas ; Sankhya Yogas
become identical with Akriti Yogas ; Asraya
Yogas coincide with Sankhya Yogas and Dala
Yogas coincide with Sankhya Yogas. When
such identification of two yogas belonging to two
different groups of the Nabhasa Yogas happens,
one of the two will cease to operate. Mihira
answers this point clearly and succinctly.

NABHASA YOGAS
It will be seen that the three Asraya Yogas
(Rajju, Musala and Nala)are practically the same
as Yava, Abja, Vajra, Andaja or Pakshi, Gola,
Gada and Sakata, among the Akriti Yogas and
Sula and Kedara among the Sankhya Yogas, while
the two Dala Yogas (Srik and Sarpa) give results
similar to those of benefics and malefics occupying
kendras (Vajra and Yava). Elaborating the comparison further let us suppose that in a horoscope
Cancer and Libra (movable signs) have been
occupied by all the planets, thereby causing Rajju
Yoga. Two adjacent angles are occupied. If
the ascendant is either Cancer or Libra, then
Gada is caused with the result it becomes
identical with Rajju. Similarly if all the planets
occupy Cancer and Capricorn and the Lagna is
Cancer or Capricorn, both Rajju and Sakata
Yogas merge together. Nala and Sakata coincide
if we switch on to Gemini .and Sagittarius provided one of these two signs is rising. Thus, if
the ascendant falls elsewhere, then both the yogas
will be present. Similarly examples for coincidence of Asraya or Dala Yogas with other Akriti
and Sankhya Yogas can be given. These coincidences do not include all possible instances of
Asraya and Dala Yogas in the Akriti and Sankhya
Yogas. Therefore, in order to show that Asraya
and Dala Yogas are also Nabhasa Yogas
Varahamihira has treated of them separately.
We have now to consider another point. When
Sankhya Yogas coincide with Akriti Yogas, the
latter alone prevail. When Asraya Yogas coincide
with other yogas (Akriti) the former cease to
function. When Dala Yogas coincide with

126 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Sankhya Yogas the latter become defunct. And
if Asraya Yogas coincide with Sankhya, i.e.,
Kedara, Sula and Yuga, the former alone will
prevail and finally if an Asraya Yoga coincides
with Gola Yoga, the Asraya Yoga becomes
defunct. Thus it will be seen that the differences
between some of the yogas are very thin and calls
forth on the part of the astrologer keen perception
and analytical power.
t07. OURYOGA
Definition. — If the lord of the 10th is situated
in the 6th, 8th or 12th Duryoga is caused.
Results. — The person will not derive the
fruits of his own bodily exertions ; he will be
looked down by others ; highly selfish and always
intent upon deceiving others, he will live m a
foreign place.
Remarks. — The tenth is the pivot of the
horoscope and its lord should be strong if one’s
life is to be tolerably happy. When the 10th lord
is in Dusthanas he will lose his vitality and is
therefore said to confer on the native just those
qualities which render him insignificant in the
eyes of the public. Harming others, selfishness
and gluttony are not qualities conducive to make
one virtuous. One who has Duryoga is supposed
not to derive the benefits of his own bodily exertions. Duryoga seems to indicate that one would
earn his livelihood by manual labour. Of the
three Dusthanas, the twelfth seems to be the least
malefic so far as this Yoga is concerned, because
whilst depriving one of the fruits of his labours,

VIMALA YOGA
it will at least give him noble qualities and
therefore a certain amount of respect in society.
108. DARIDRA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the 11th in the 6th,
8th or 12th will give rise to Dandra Yoga.
Results. — The native will contract huge debts,
will be very poor, will suffer from auditory
troubles, will be mean and will commit sinful and
criminal deeds.
Remarks. — The yoga is a simple one and is
quite common. Therefore one should not rush to
ascribe all these results to a horoscope in which
Daridra Yoga is present. When the Lagna is
strong and the 2nd lord is in the 10th or 11th,
Daridra Yoga exists nominally. Because, such a
disposition whilst rendering the person mean and
inclined to pursue sinful activities, will not make
him very poor. Criminal intentions are not the
sole monopoly of the poor. The rich are equally
culpable to such a tendency because the richer a
person the more avaricious he becomes to gain his
selfish ends. Generous instincts and the tendency
to worship the mammon are indeed poles apart.
109. Harsha Yoga.
110. Sarala Yoga.
111. ViMALA Yoga.
Definition. — The lords of the 6th, 8th and
12th occupying the 6th, 8th and 12th will give rise
to Harsha, Sarala and Vimala Yogas repsectively.
Results. — Harsha makes one fortunate, happy,
invincible, physically strong, wealthy, famous and

128 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
afraid of sinful deeds. One born in Sarala
becomes long-lived, fearless, learned, a terror to
enemies, celebrated and prosperous. Vitnala
renders the person frugal, happy, independent
and possessed of ennobling qualities.
Remarks. — These three yogas furnish us with
a clue as to how lords of Dusthanas by occupying
Dusthanas can overcome the evil due to such
malefic ownership. Even though the author of
the above yogas has ascribed very pleasant results
to these three combinations, yet in actual practice,
quite the contrary have been the results. Parasara and Lomasa do not seem to favour the
conception that the sting arising from an evil
lordship can disappear entirely as a result of the
lord occupying another Dusthana. On the other
hand, the intensity will be somewhat modified.
This is evident from the fact that according to
Parasara, when the 6th lord is in the 6th, the
native’s relatives become enemies while he would
befriend the outsiders and when the sixth lord is
in the 8th or 12th, “the person becomes sickly,
hates learned men, goes after others’ women and
takes pleasure in causing violence.” Therefore in
interpreting the three yogas given above, one
should have an eye on the intrinsic evil nature of
the ownership.
112. SAREERA SOUKHYA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of Lagna, Jupiter or
Venus, should occupy a quadrant.
Results. — The subject will be endowed with
long life, wealth and political favours.

DEHAKASHTA YOGA
Remarks- — If all the three factors above
referred to, viz., the ascendant lord, Jupiter and
Venus are in Kendras, the Yoga would be rendered
highly powerful with the result all the blessings of
the yoga will manifest. The Yoga is fairly
common but hardly noticed.
113. DEHAPUSHTl YOGA
Definition. — The ascendant lord in a movable sign aspected by a benefic, gives rise to this
Yoga.
Results. — The native will be happy, will
possess a well-developed body, will become rich
and will enjoy life.
Remarks. — Leading a happy life is different
from having amenities needed for it. Lord of
Lagna must be in a movable sign and some
benefic must aspect him. Some people will hardly
possess bodily comforts while there are others who
in spite of meagre earnings will look after their
body with the utmost care.
1 14. DEHAKASHTA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of lagna must join a
malefic or occupy the 8th house.
Results. — The subject will be devoid of
bodily comforts.
Remarks. — As the name implies, Dehakashta
Yoga means difficulty for the body. Most of the
manual workers belong to this category. The
Yoga is said to become defunct if a benefic aspects the ascendant lord.

130 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
115. R0GA6RASTHA YOGA
Definition. — (a) If the lord of lagna occupies
the ascendant in conjunction with the lord of the
6th, 8th or 12th; or (b) if the weak lord of
Lagna joins a trine or a quadrant, Rogagrastha
Yoga is caused.
Results. — The native will possess a weak
constitution and will become sickly.
Remarks. — The Yoga comprehends two
combinations, viz.., (1) the ascendant lord being
placed in the ascendant and joined by the lord of
the 6th, 8th or 12th and (2) the weak ascendant
lord occupying a trine or a quadrant. It is a
general astrological precept that when the ascendant lord joins a trine or a quadrant he acquires
vitality. When he is weak, by which term is
implied that his shadhala pinda (sum total of
strength) falls short of the requisite quantity, the
distinction attached to location in a kendra or
thrikona becomes lost. It is found in actual practice that the lordship of the 12th is less malefic
than that of the 6th or 8th and hence when the
lords of the Lagna and 12th join, the affliction expresses itself more in the nature of financial stress than in terms of Dehakashta Yoga.
One born under this combination will hardly have
a healthy constitution. It will lack the requisite
power of resistance so that the native falls an
easy prey to disease.
116&117. KRISANGA YOGA
Definition. — The ascendant lord should

KRISANGA YOGA
occupy a dry sign or the sign owned by a ‘dry'
pianet (116).
The Navamsa Lagna should be owned by a
‘dry’ planet and malefics should join the Lagna
Results. — The subject will have an emaciated
body and will suffer from bodily pains.
Remarks- — Dry signs are Aries, Taurus,
Gemini, Leo, Virgo and Sagittarius ; while dry
planets are the Sun, Mars and Saturn. Mercury
may also be held to be a dry planet for all
practical purposes. The same result can be
judged if the lagna and the lord have acquired a
large number of dry vargas or divisions such as
Rasi, Hora, etc.
Chart No. 79 — Bom on 8-8-1912 at about
Balance of Mars’ dasa at birth : Yrs. 5-6-15.

132 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Here the amsa lagna belongs to a dry planet and
it is occupied by two first-rate malefics, viz.,
Rahu and the Sun. The result is obvious, viz.,
the native has a lean and emaciated physical
appearance.
118 to 120 DEHASTHOULYA YOGAS
Definition. — Lord of Lagna and the planet in
whose Navamsa the lord of lagna is placed, should
occupy watery signs (118).
The Lagna must be occupied by Jupiter or he
must aspect the Lagna from a watery sign (119).
The ascendant must fall in a watery sign in
conjunction with benefics or the ascendant lord
must be a watery planet (120).
Remarks. — Possessing a strong body is different from having on unwieldy and corpulent
appearance. Tn the above three combinations, by
dehasthoulya is meant stoutness of the body and
has no reference to a well-built or strong physical
appearance. Watery signs are Cancer, Aquarius,
Capricorn, Pisces, Scorpio and Libra, and the
watery planets are the Moon and Venus. Of
course. Mercury and Jupiter are also water
resorters and a predominance of the water element
in regard to lagna or lagnadhipathi would
invariably make the person corpulent.

SADA SANCHARA YOGA
after sunrise; lat. 13°iV., long. 5 h. 10 m. 20 s. E.
Balance of Mercury’s Dasa at birth: Years 6-8-27.
In this horoscope, Cancer, a watery sign is
rising and the Moon, a watery planet is in Scorpio
another watery sign. The Moon (lord of the
ascendant) is in Aquarius (a watery sign) in
Navamsa aspected by Jupiter. The subject has a
stout body, nervous and unimaginative.
121. SADA SANCHARA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of either Lagna or the
sign occupied by Lagna lord must be in a movable sign.
Results. — The native will almost always be a
wanderer.
Remarks. — The combination referred to
above is very common in the horoscopes of travelling agents, diplomats and globe-trotters. If both

134 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
the lagna and the Navamsa lagna are in movable
signs, the subject would hardly confine himself to
any particular locality. On the contrary, he will
be seen moving about almost always.
122 to 126. DHANA YOGAS
Definition: — If the 5th from the Ascendant
happens to be a sign of Venus, and if Venus and
Saturn are situated in the 5th and 11th respectively, Dhana Yoga is caused — 122.
Mercury should occupy his own sign which
should be the 5th from lagna and the Moon and
Mars should be in the 11th — 123.
Saturn should occupy his own sign which
should be the 5th from lagna, and Mercury and
Mars should be posited in the 11th — 124.
The Sun must occupy the 5th identical with
his own sign and Jupiter and the Moon should be
in the llth — 125.
If the 5th from lagna happens to be a house
of Jupiter with Jupiter there and Mars and the
Moon in the llth, Dhana Yoga arises — 126.
Results. — In all the above cases, the native
will acquire immense wealth.
Remarks. — The above five Yogas caused by
the disposition of certain planets in the 5th and

DHANA YOGAS
1 1th houses are really significant as they indicate
great riches. In the first case, the lagna must
invariably be Capricorn or Gemini. When Makara
is the Ascendant Saturn wall have to be in Scorpio
the 11th. Lord of lagna in the 11th is indeed a
fine combination. Similarly when Gemini is
lagna, Saturn will have to be m Aries. This cannot be as powerful as in the first instance unless
Saturn gets Neechabhanga.
In 123 Lagna must fall either in Kumbha
or in Taurus. In legard to Kumbha, the combination in the 11th will be due to the lord of the
10th and 6th while for Taurus, the location in
the eleventh would be of the lords of the 3rd and
7th. The degree of wealth would be the same
but the source of getting it would be different.
Combination 124 has reference to Virgo and
Libra. If Virgo is lagna, then Mercury lord of the
10th will be in the 11th. If Libra is Lagna, then
the 9th lord will be in the llth. Both the dispositions are highly favourable though in the first
instance, Mercury being lord of Lagna also in
addition to the lordship of the 10th would certainly have greater significance.
Combination 125 is applicable only to Aries
in which case the Sun as lord of the 5th would be
in the 5th and the Moon lord of the 4th and
Jupiter lord of the 9th would be in the 1 1th. MoonJupiter combination itself comprehends two
powerful Raja Yogas, because firstly they are
lords of a kendra and thrikona respectively, and

136 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
secondly, Gaja Kesari would be formed — all
occurring in the 11th house. 125 would indeed
be a powerful Dhana Yoga.
If Jupiter could be in the 5th identical with
his own sign (as required in combination 126) in
respect of Scorpio and Leo, the Yoga could be
expected to be more powerful in respect of
Scorpio, because when Mars and the Moon
occupy the 11th, they do so as lords of 1 and 9
and hence of considerable significance.
It will be seen that all the five combinations
given above have reference to the fortification of
the 5th and 11th houses.
Balance of Jupiter’s Dasa at birth ; Years 12-1-6

DHANA YOGAS
In the above horoscope the 5th from lagna
is owned by Venus, and Venus and Saturn
occupy respectively, the 5th and 11th houses,
hence illustrating combination 122. Saturn’s
dasa proved highly beneficial from the point of
view of finance, prosperity having set-in, as
soon as Venus’ sub-period commenced.
Balance of Saturn’s dasa at birth : Yrs. 0-0-9.
Chart No. 82 is a typical example for combination 124. Saturn owns and occupies the
5th and Mars fiord of the 2nd) and Mercury
(lord of the 9th) are in the 11th in association
with the Sun, the lord of the 11th. The peculiarity
in this case is that during Mercury’s dasa
the native’s father became extremely wealthy,
probably due to the fact that Mercury having
caused Dhana yoga is associated with the Pitrukaraka Sun.

138 THREE HUNDRED IMPORfANT COMBINATIONS
Chart No. 83.— Bom on 20-8-1891 at lO p.m.
Balance of Rahu*S'©asa at birth ; Years 2-6-15;
Balance of Moon’s Dasa at birth ; Yrs. 3-8-21.

DHANA YOGAS
Chart No, 81 illustrates coiubinat^n 125^.
The Sun occupies the 5th which is ^
sien while the Moon and Jupiter .
;®th"lUh. It will be seen that the Moon a„d
luDiter have caused two yogas viz. Ga)akesaci
and another Raja Yoga thus fort.iying the
house of gains considerably.
Chart No. 84 is an example for
126 which requires the presence of Jupue
5th (in his own sign') and Moon and Ma „
11th A powerful Chandramangala yoga occurs
‘n the u*. As Mars and the Moon of
the 11th and 9th respectively a powerfu
Yoga is also caused.
Definitions If the Sun is ^ and
with Leo, and aspected or joined b> Mars
Jupiter, Dhana Yoga is formed-12/.
If the Moon is in lagna
and aspected by Jupiter and Mars, Dhana A og
is caused — ^^128. • u a Vq
Mars should be in lagna identical
or Scorpio and joined or aspected by the Moon,
Venus and Saturn —129. ^ -.vuMercury should be in
own sign and joined or aspected by Saturn and
Tupiter should be in lagna identical with his
own sign and joined or aspected by Mercury and
Venus should be in lagna '“(VT and
own sign and joined or aspected by Saturn and
Mercury— 132.

140 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Results : — In all the above cases, the subject
acquires immense wealth.
Remarks : — In the above six combinations,
planets from the Sun to Venus are to occupy
lagna which should be the own sign of the
planet concerned and it should further be conjoined or aspected by certain other planets as
per details given below : —
Planet Ascendant Conjunction or aspect of
It will be seen that except Capricorn and
the rest of the signs have been taken
into account. In all the above cases, the lord of
lagna must be in his own sign identical with lagna
and aspected by or associated with certain
favourable lords.
Each of the above combinations can have a
number of variations as could be seen from the
following explanation. Take for example the Sun.
Leo is lagna, and the Sun is there.
The Dhana Yoga in question may be caused
by
{a) Jupiter and Mars being in Lagna.
{h'' Jupiter being in Dhanas and Mars in
Makara.
(c) Jupiter being in Dhanas and Mars in
Aquarius.

DHANA YOGAS
Jupiter and Mars being in Kumbha.
(e) Jupiter beingin Aries and Mars in Taurus.
The same variations can be seen in regard to
the Dhana Yoga arising out of other planets also.
Chart No. 85 — Born on 15-5-1904 at 6 a.m.
Rasi I — —
ljupuer
Ketu
Lagna
Venus
Ketu
Saturn
j ^ Moon 1
! Navahsa 1 i
> Sun
Balance of Jupiter’s Dasa at birth : Years 3-1-17.
Chart No. 86 — Born on 20-8-1944 at 8 pan.
Ketu
Rasi
I Saturn
Rahu
Lag. Sun
Moon
Mars
Venus
Mer. Jup
Balance of Venus’ Dasa at birth : Years 13-4-19.

142 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Combination 132 is shown by Chart No. 85.
The lagna is Taurus and Venus lord is in Lagna in
conjunction with Mercury and aspected by Saturn.
Chart No. 86 is an example for combination
127. Lagna is Leo and the Sun is in Lagna in
conjunction with Mars and Jupiter.
133. BAHUDRAVYARJANA YOGA
Definition ; — Lord of the lagna in the 2nd,,
lord of the 2nd in the 11th and the lord of the
11th in lagna will give rise to this yoga.
Results: — The subject will earn lot of money
and will amass a good fortune.
Remarks : — A point of contact is established
between the lagna, 2nd and 11th houses — the lords
of these three houses inter-changing their respective positions. Here again, the real value of the
Yoga depends upon the strength of the lords
concerned and how they are disposed in* regard to
the general scheme of the horoscope.
lai. 13°A, long. IT 35" E.
Balance of Venus’ Dasa at birth : Years 11-7-45.

SWAVEERYADDHANA YOGA
In the above horoscope lord of Lagna is in
the 2nd, the lord of the 2nd is in the 11th and
the lord of the 11th in lagna thus showing the
presence of a verj/ powerful Dhana Yoga.
134 to 136 SWAVEERYADDHANA YOGA
Definition: — The lord of lagna being the
strongest planet, should occup}^ a kendra in conjunction with Jupiter and the 2nd lord should join
Vaiseshikamsa — 134.
The lord of the sign in which the lord of the
Navamsa occupied by the Ascendant lord should
be strong, and join a quadrant or a trine from the
2nd lord or should occupy his own or exaltation
sign — 135.
The 2nd lord should occupy a quadrant or
trine from the first lord or the 2nd lord being a
benefic should be either in deep exaltation or in
conjunction with an exalted planet — 136.
Results: — The subject will earn money by his
own efforts and exertions.
Remarks: — Inherited wealth cannot last long
nor is it made use of properly. Generally such
wealth is squandered away on pleasures and
valueless purposes. The person concerned will
have no experience as to how difficult it is to
earn money by fair means. On the other hand,
wealth acquired through personal effort would
be rightly spent or at least not wasted because
of the exertions put forth in making the money.
The above three combinations are quite clear
and need no clarification.

144 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
According to 134, the ascendant lord must
be the strongest planet in the horoscope and he
should be in Vaiseshikamsa or in a kendra in
conjunction with Jupiter.
135 is somewhat confusing. Lord of Lagna
is in some Navamsa. The lord of that Navamsa
occupies some sign. Its lord must be disposed
in a kendra or thnkona from the 2nd lord. Suppose Lagna is Kan^^a and the lord is in Makara
Navamsa. The lord of Makara is Saturn and
suppose he occupies (in Rasi) Mesha. Then the
lord of this sign, viz., Mars should be in a kendra
from Venus, lord of the 2nd. 136 is quite simple.
Balance of Mars’ Dasa at birth ; Yrs. 5-6-15.
In the above horoscope, lord of lagna, Saturn
is in Mesha Navamsa ; the lord of which, viz.. Mars
is in Leo. Its lord Sun is in a trine from Jupiter
lord of the 2nd. The native started life with no

MADHYA VAYASI DHANA YOGA
financial facilities but earned decently by his own
exertions.
137 MADHYA VAYASI DHANA YOGA.
Definitions : — The 2nd lord possessing Kalabala must join the lords of lagna and the 11th
in a quadrant or a trine and be aspected bybenefics.
Results. — The person will acquire money by
self-effort towards the middle part of his life.
Remarks. — Kalabala or temporal strength is
one of the six sources of planetary strength enumerated at length in my GRAHA & BHAVA
BALAS. Kalabala consists of various sub-divisions based upon the lunar phases, week day,
time, solstice and planetary fights Generally
speaking, planets are said to acquire Kalabala in
their week days, months and years. The Moon,
Mars and Saturn are powerful during the night.
The Sun, Jupiter and Venus are powerful during
the day. Mercury is always powerful. Malefics
and benefics are powerful during the dark half and
bright half of the lunar month respectively.
In order to make one get wealth in the middle
part of his life, lord of the 2nd having acquired
Kalabala should be in a kendra or a thrikona in
conjunction with the lords of lagna and the 11th.
A perusal of astrological literature bearing
upon ‘ Wealth’ reveals clearly that in order to
become rich, one should have in his horoscope
combinations which comprehend a point of contact between lords of lagna, 2nd, 11th, 5th and

146 - THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
9th.' It is the pernfiu-tations arid combinations of.
these lords that give I'ise to a stupendous number
of Dhana Yogas.
138. .ANTHYAVAYAS! DHANA YOGA .
■ '^ Definition: — The planet owning the sign in
which the lords of the 2nd and ist together with;
a natural benefic are placed, should be strongly
disposed in lagna.
Results. — The subject will acquire finance
through various means towards the last part of his
life.
Remarks. — ^There are some who eke out a
miserable existence almost throughout their lives
but all of a sudden, just at the fag end of their
lives fortune dawns on them. Such instances are
not rare. The combination requires that lords of
lagna and the 2nd should be in conjunction with
a benefic and the lord of this sign should, be.
strong and occupy lagna. The combination is
not of frequent occurrence.
139. BALYA DHANA YOGA
Definition. — The lords of the 2ad and 10th
should be in conjunction in a kendra aspected by
the' lord of the Navamsa occupied by the ascendant lord.
Results. — The person acquires immense
riches in the early part of life.
Remarks.-— The Yoga is a round about one.
Three conditions have to be fulfilled for its presence, viz, {<?) the 2nd and 10th lords should be

BBRA-T.RUMOOLADDHANAPRAPTI. YOGA 147;
in .‘.-Gonjunction.-. (6) they , must occupy a.kendra
from lagna, (e); and they , must be aspected lay .
thet.plaiaet who, owns the Navamsa in which the
lord of lagna. is- located. ■
Balance of Moon’s Dasa at birth : Yrs. 2-6-23.
. The .above horoscope illustrates combination
140 & 141. BHRATRUMOOLADDHANAPRAPTI YOGA
'• Definition.- — The lords of lagna and the 2nd
should join the 3rd aspected by benefics — 140.
The lord of the 3rd should be in the 2nd with
Jupiter and aspected by or conjoined with the lord
of iagna who should have attained Vaiseshikamsa
.Results. — The native gets money through
brothers and relati.ves. :

148 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Remarks. — Predicting the source of income
astrologically is a difficult job. The above two
combinations give a hint that one can earn moneythrough brothers by a certain disposition of the
2nd and 3rd lords.
142. MATRUMOOLADDHANA YOGA
Defimtion. — If the lord of the 2nd joins the
4th lord or is aspected by him the above yoga will
be caused.
Results. — One earns money with the help of
one’s mother.
Remarks. — The combination may also be
interpreted to mean that depending upon the
nature of the 4th lord, the source of earning could
also vary. Thus if the 4th lord is Mars, agriculture may be the source.
143. PUTRAMULADDHANA YOGA
Definition. — If the strong lord of the 2nd is
in conjunction with the 5th lord or Jupiter and if
the lord of lagna is in Vaiseshikamsa, the above
yoga arises.
Results. — The person gets wealth through
his sons.
Remarks. — There are several instances of
persons living from hand to mouth but becoming
rich after their sons come to age and assist them
in founding and developing some business or
otherwise extending them financial facilities. The
lagna must be in Vaiseshikamsa and the strong
2nd lord should be associated with the fifth lord.

SATRUMDLADDHANA YOGA
Chart No. 90. — Bom on 1-6-1895 dt Gh.
45-12 after Sunrise.
Balance of Sun’s Dasa at birth ; Years 1-6-13.
In the above horoscope, the 2nd lord is
Jupiter and he is in conjunction with the 5th lord
Mercury. The lagnalord is not in Vaiseshikamsa
but he is decidedly strong. Till the age of 50, the
native had never seen the bright side of life but
beginning from the 51st year, father and son
jointly floated a small business which was steadily
developed into a substantial concern. When the
Yoga is present, it does not necessarily imply that
the son would help the father with money. It
may mean that after the birth of a son the father
would become rich. In such a case the son only
brings invisible luck to the father.
144. SATRUMULADDHANA YOGA
Definition. — The strong lord of the 2nd should
join the lord of the 6th or Mars and the powerful
lord of lagna should be in Vaiseshikamsa.

150 IHREL UmDREI) IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
Results — riie native earns moiie)" through
his enemies
Remarks — In ill these Yogas, stress is
evidenth laid on the stiength oi the 2pd lord and
the poweitul disoosition of lagiiadhipathi m
A aiseshihams i To gi\e the results suggested in
ihe iDo\c Yoga, the 2nd loid may edhei join the
6lh luid 01 Mars oi be i^pected b} one them
1 45 KALATRAMOOLADDHANA YOGA
Difimiion — Tm stiong loid ot the 2nd
should j lii 01 be aspecicd by the seventh lord
and \ enim and the loui of lagna must be
ponertid
Results — The subject wil^ earn iTuney
through wife
Remarks — P the 2nd lord, whose inheient
stiength is of coume assuoicd, is c-t^sociated with
the 7th lord and AYnus, one would become iich on
account of one’s wife
146 AHARANANTHA DHANA YOGA
DefiniUon — Ir a numbei of planets occupy
the 2nd house and the wmalth-giving ones aie
strong or occupy own or exaltation signs the
above Yoga is caused
Results — The native v\ill enjoy wealth
throughout life
Remarks — The 2nd should be occupied by a
number of planets Besides this, wealth-giving
ones, VIZ, the 2nd lord and Jupiter should be
strongly disposed The Yoga given rise to in this

DARIDliA YOGA
wa} would enable the person concerned command
iiches all thiough life When a horoscope is
inherently strong in respect of anj particular
bhava, its results will manifest peimanentH as
different from those gi\en rise to by Yogakarakae
whicii generally hold swa> during the Dasas
concerned
147 AYATNADDHANALABriA YOGA
Definition — The lords of the lagna and the
2nd must exchange their places
Results. — The person eains wealth without
much effort
Remarks. — There are some who lead a miserable existence in spite of their best attempts to
enrich themsekes w'hilst there are others who
without straining themselves much earn decently
We attnbute this to chance oi luck Actually it
IS neither luck nor chance but the result of one’s
good previous Karma Panvarthana between the
first and 2nd lords is a highly desiiable feature.
148 to 157 DARIDRA YOGAS
Definition — The lords of the 12th and lagna
should exchange their positions and be conjoined
or aspected by the loid of the 7th — 148.
The lords of the 6th and lagna interchange
their positions and the Moon is aspected by the
2nd or 7th loid — 149.
Kethu and the Moon should be in Lagna — 150.
The loid of lagna is in the 8th aspected by
or in conjunction with the 2nd or 7th lord — 151.

152 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
The lord of lagna joins the 6th, 8th or 12th
with a malefic aspected by or combined with the
2nd or 7th lord — 152.
Lord of lagna is associated with the 6th, 8th
or 12th lord and subjected to malefic aspects — 153.
The lord of the 5th joins the lord of the 6th,
8th or 12th without beneficial aspects or conjunctions— 154.
The lord of the 5th is in the 6th or 10th
aspected by lords of the 2nd, 7th, 6th, 8th or
Natural malefics, who do not own the 9th
or 10th should occupy lagna and associated with
or aspected by the Maraka lords — 156.
The lords of the lagna and Navamsa Lagna
should occupy the 6th, 8th or 12th and have the
aspect or conjunction of the lords of the 2nd and
Results. — All the above Yogas produce dire
poverty, financial straits, wretchedness and
miseries.
Remarks. — Poverty is a horrible spectre more
grim-like than even death. Death puts an end
to life and settles all worldly states. What happens
after death, nobody knows. It is supposed to put
an end to all the worldly miseries, sorrows and
anxieties. Hence there are some misguided people
who prefer death to abject poverty. A poor man
leads a wretched life. He will be compelled to
live in squalid and unhealthy houses. The children
will have no facilities for education, health and
decent existence. The poor man is generally

YUKTHI SAMANWITHAVAGMI YOGA
Bhunned everywhere. He will be an unwelcome
ofuest at the doors of the ‘ well-to-do classes. His
feeitimate activities are obstructed by financial
difficulties and want of sympathy. Poverty
is the hot bed of crime and vice and the imperious
sensations of hunger and thirst drive him to disaraceful acts. Whatever may philsophers say, the
pangs of poverty are difficult to bear.
In all the above combinations, reference is
made in the original to the conjunction of lords of
lamia and the 5th with maraka lords. Evidently,
the maraka lords are the 2nd and 7th lords. Some
authors include 6th, 8th and 12th houses also as
belonging to maraka category.
158 and 159. YUKTHI SAMANWITHAVAGMI YOGA
Definihon.—The 2nd lord should join a
benefic in a kendraor thrikona, or be exalted and
combined with Jupiter 158.
The lord of speech should occupy a kendra,
attain paramochha and gain Parvathamsa, while
Jupiter or Venus should be in Simhasanamsa 159.
Results. — The person will become an eloquent
and skilled speaker.
Remarks.— The art of speaking is not an easy
one. The gift of eloquence can influence men
and’ manners. Men can succeed beyond expectation by convincing speeches. Different occasions and conditions call for different degrees of
eloquence or skill. In order to gain this power,
lord of the 2nd must be well aspected and conjoined- Mercury must be free from affliction if
one is not to become witty in the vulgar sense.

154 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
For being an eloquent speaker, the lord of
the 2nd should join a trine or a quadrant with
Jupiter or get exalted. Parvatamsa, Simhasanamsa, etc., have been defined in the index of
technical terms given at the end of the book.
The nature of vocabulary and the dignified or
low tone of the speech depends upon the good
and malefic influences the planet of speech is
subjected to.
160. PARI H ASA KA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the Navamsa occupied by the Sun should attain Vaiseshikamsa and
join the 2nd house.
Results. — The person becomes a humorous
and witty speaker.
Remarks. — People of jolly temperament take
things easily and humorously while there are
some w'ho take even trifles as serious. Humour
is the spice of life and all cannot claim it with
equal facility.
The Sun occupies some Navamsa and its
lord should be in the 2nd besides attaining
Vaiseshikamsa.
It will be seen that a planet can occupy its
own Rasi, its own Amsa, its own Drekkana etc.,
in which case it is said to be in Swarasi or Swakshetra, Swa Hora, Swa Drekkana, etc. In all
these cases it is in Swavarga. There are Shodasa
Vargas or sixteen types of divisions. A planet
can therefore occupy its own varga sixteen times.

PARIHASAKA YOGA
Astrological writers have attached great significance to the special distinction of a planet being
in its own Varga more than once. The following
are the important Amsas (distinctions) often
alluded to in the astrological literature.
When a planet is in its own Varga —
When a planet attains Vaiseshikamsa, it is
par excellence.
161 ASATYAVAD! YOGA
DeAnitton. — If the lord of the 2nd occupies
the house of Saturn or Mars and if malefics join
kendras and thnkonas, the above Yoga is caused.
Results. — The native will be a liar.
Remarks. — According to the above combination, lord of the 2nd must occupy Aries, Scorpio,
Capricorn or Aquarius and the kendras and thrikonas must have malefics. The same Yoga is also
said to be caused if the lord of the Navamsa
occupied by the lord of the 2nd happens to be
either Mars or Saturn or happens to stay in the
signs of these two planets.

156 THREE HUNDRED IMPORTANT COMBINATIONS
162. jADA YOGA
Definition. — The lord of the 2nd should be
posited in the 10th with malefics or the 2nd must
be joined by the Sun and Mandi.
Results. — The person becomes nervous in
public assemblies.
Remarks. — There are some people who though
learned, well-informed and capable of eloquence
lose their balance of mind and become extremely
nervous when they are called upon to speak in
large gatherings. Such people will generally have
the 2nd lord afSicted. Even when the above
combination is present, if the 2nd lord is in a
benefic Navamsa, the Yoga is found to lose its
significance.
