READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: uttara_kalamrita_kalidas.json
Dataset number: 404 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 255,849 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: uttara-kalamrita-kalidas
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: uttara-kalamrita-kalidas
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Uttara Kalamrita XML
  • total_pages: 166
  • total_words: 45118
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.879
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UTTARAKALAMRITA
(OF KALIDASA)
Translated by
S.S.Sareen
SAGAR PUBLICATIONS
72, JANPATH
VED MANSION
NEW DELHI - 110001

é
BNANSPWNCONTENTS
KANDA
Subject
Time of Birth, Planets and Bhavas
Computation of Several kinds of Strength
Length of Life
Planets in the Various Bhavas with their effects
Karkatva of Bhavas and Planets
The Dasas and their effects
On Queries
Miscellaneous
KANDA II (105 SLOKAS)
Page

Introduction
Uttara kalamrita is an invaluable contribution in the field of Astrology
by the poet Kalidasa. Some authorities have expressed their doubts about
the authorship inspite of the referrences in the first three Slokas about the
poet and the king Vikramaditya and Claim that the text has been composed
by some Astrologer of South India. Whatever may be the truth, the fact
remains that it is a praiseworthy compilation of Astrological findings on
the various aspects of human life pertaining to a native and makes the
study both instructive and profitable to all-whether casual readers or
scholars.
This Book is divided into two Kanda : the first consists of 8 sections
dealing with Time of Birth, Planets, Bhavas, Strength of Planets, Length
of Life, Planetary effects in several Bhavas, Saturn and Jupiter combining
to make the philosopher, Function (Karkatva) of Bhavas and Planets (this
part is unparellel), Dasa Periods and on Queries; the second kanda deals
with issues like the Sraddha ceremonies, rituals and the adoption of sons.
As no one Book is enough and complete in itself and a good collection
of books on any one subject is essential, this Uttarakalamrita will
certainly make a wonderful companion of the reader, whatever else he
might have studied. Remember in the absence of a Guru, books are the
best Guide. Such a Guide will be the Uttarakalamrita.
My thanks are due to Narinder Sagar of Sagar Publications in bringing
out this book so successfully.
B-4 South Extn - I
New Delhi - 49 S.S.Sareen
ist Jan, 1993

ll Aalaa 4a: UI
FaTHISTITT UN
UTTARAKALAMRITA
ll sarees: Ul
1, WARING?
AaTAAICITTAARTAMITHIa: ge:
sraicrafadl antares fetAAT |
TalaqasesaiRoageasa waa
AaeRAIINSAR se Va AaT uel
KANDA |
Section 1. Time of Birth, Planets, Bhavas, etc,
Sloka-1. I bow to the Gajanan Bhagwan Ganesh, the son
of the Goddess Bhavani, whose feet are adored before commencing any auspicious work by Gods like Brahma, Vishnu,
Mahesh and Indra; who is distinguished by holding in his four
hands a Pasa (a weapon) a lotus (flower), symbol of peace and
Laddo (sweet) gleaming and who protects and looks after the
Suryavrata Pratapi Raja Vikramaditya.

RAIA Gataamesat warkasenict
TS THAIN J ay eeacat Bary |
fazut afhavenlahat 24 Gates
Nafsanaansant ez aera = NP
Sloka-2. I bow to the benign Goddess, Maha Kali, who
is Vamangi of Lord Siva, who confezs om her devotees all that
they yearn, holding a conch, a chakra, fearlessly showering
benediction, mounted on a lion, Goodmess incarnated, adorned
by the Chandra Chudamani, with her Tri Netras brilliantly shining
and always promoting the cause of Srimad Vikramaditya.
amas anagka dks Rew
Qa waTTafa quatsa fas a Har |
we gana aiened nessfabea
aaa Tay Teal Hee Tat 2
Sloka-3. In the Purvardha (Purva Kalamrita) I have already dealt with the Principles of Astrology imciuding definitions and the like in considerable length (The reader may
conveniently go through them). Im this Uttarardha (Uttarakalamrita) I shall deal with, for the benefit of the learmed and
the wise, the Jataka Shastra and Prasma Shastra Paddhati with
greater clarity in a lucid style about the past, present and future; the effects regarding wealth and property etc. the Jataka
may obtain, in Sardulavikridifa metre.
ASA AAG thea ana: wera wariafar
Aasefaaay Baars: afaesrach |
Bz en fhiaesary wea Wear, asa
may danny AKI SA sek: att: ue
Sloka-4. The birth time of the mative passed m Ghatikas
etc. since the Sun-Rise should be ammved at very accurately
with the help of the gnomonic (Sanks or the Sundial) shadow
or the other appliances. Also find out the length of the day and

night on the day of birth. Ascertain the Ishta Lagna from the
correct position of the Sun in relation to the First Point of Aries. '
Thereafter, with the help of the preceptor, delineate the other
planets mathematically according to the ‘Drik’ system of calculation in their Rasi and Amsas as in the zodiac. So should the
wise Astrologer cheerfully compute the Bhava-spashta a
with the Bhava-Sandhis.
asaya afer: Ha (4) TU: aalearaeag—
Ree caqqiafaah Bin-Ay ca: |
qzifiestzaar fatearaatia (225) eta)
AITSIs(15)GITA (30) A TWTAMAT: (45) WBA (60)
yarn fast: mararaseafeae: waar
nifearaataasaaniaez gar at azz
aaziaIa GATEAAgay nes at
aH earaaatauhiaaaifaaraseq tl &
Sloka-5,6. (a) | Nakshatra Suddhi: Multiply the Ghatikas and Vighatikas of the Ishta Kala by 4 and divide the product by 9. The remainder should be counted beginning with Aswini,
Magha or Moola in whatsoever Paryaya it falls. The 27 Nakshatras are distributed in 3 Paryayas consisting of 1st to 9th, 10th
to 18th and 19th to 27th. This will give the Janma Nakshatra.
Example : Suppose a native was born on 6.3.1980 at Ishta Ghatika
56.12. Therefore,
Here the remainder is
8. a Nakshatra which may be Aslesha, Jyestha or Revati.
| (b) Man- Woman Janma Suddhi : Convert the Ishta
Ghatikas into Palas. Divide the same by 225. If the remainder
is :

0 tt ID -acx birth will be a male
16 to 45 snes - do - a female
in a | - do - a female
151 1: Zea wwenane - do - a male
These five groups represent, in their order male, female, male, female and male respectively.
Example :Ishta Ghatikas are 56.12, i.e., 56x60+12 = 3372
+ 225 = 14x225+222. Therefore, the birth will be that of a male.
(c) Lagna Suddhi : Find out the Rasi occupied by
the Moon and Mandi; and also their Navamsas. The native will
have his birth either in the Rasi occupied by Mandi or the Moon
whichever be stronger; or in the Lagna Rasi which will be 7th,
5th or the 9th from either of them. If instead of these two Rasis,
the Navamsa Rasi owned by Mandi or the Moon be stronger,
then the Janma Lagna will be in the stronger Navamsa Rasi or
the 7th, 5th or the 9th from it.
Cf. Phaladeepika IlI-16.
Notes: In this sloka an effort has been made to arrive
at Janma Nakshatra, Janma Lagna and the sex (male or female)
of the native with the help of Ishta Ghatika and Vighatika.
Knowledge of the sex of the native can also be gained through
Pranpada. Distribute the 27 Nakshtras in 3 Paryaya of 9 Nakshatras each. Aswini to Aslesha should make the 1st Paryaya; Magha
to Jyestha, the 2nd and the 3rd should comprise of Moola to
Revati. When the Ishta kala is multiplied by 4 and divided by
9, the remainder will give the Janma Nakshatra. This will also
tell about the accuracy of the Ishta kala. When the Janma Nakshatra
discovered through this Paddhati is identical with the one indicated
by the Rasi occupied by the Moon in a nativity, the Ishta kala
should be taken as correct, otherwise some addition or deductions will have to be made in it. Similarly, the correctness of
the Janma Lagna should also be verified in this manner.
lS: Bl FSi agy Az AA Sa Talalaa
aisigq thaaaciesenacHeyA ares: |

Tan AA AAINA ASAT AA
THMTAMTARAAT AVANT BST: 11 9
Locating Mandi and Gulika
Sloka-7. On the week days reckoned from Sunday onwards multiply the Dinmana (length of the day from Sun Rise
to Sun Set) respectively by Charu (26), Khari (22), Jata (18),
Vayo (14), Nata (10), Tanu (6) and Roon (2) and divide the
product by Khanga (30) and the quotient arrived at in Ghatikas
and Palas etc., taken as Ishta, compute the Lagna. The Lagna
discovered will be Mandi Sphuta. The Eighth part of the Dinmana
or that of the Ratrimana is the period of each planet. When the
birth is during the day, the lords of the Ist seven Muhurtas beginning with Sunday onwards will respectively be the Sun, the
Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn.
Here the words Charu, Khari etc. have been interpreted
with the help of Katpayadi system.
rata f& Raata aa: o:laeafan
atafee qaniea a7 ASEAN VA |
eaat aeaaqaataaaaayqs ghnivgeq: Fee aa cb Rad aaa eiadd tl < 1
Sloka-8. The 8th Muhurata has no lord. In the case of
day births the portion belonging to Saturn is called Gulika. In
the case of night births, the lords of the Ist 7 Muhuratas will be
in the same order as stated above, but the lord of the Ist seven
Muhuratas are reckoned not from the lord of the week day
chosen, but from that of the Sth from it. Here also the portion
belonging to Saturn will be taken as that of Gulika. But Gulika
will be from the last portion of Saturn Viz., at the end of Ghatikas
10, 6, 2, 26, 22, 18 and 14 respectively.
Ghulika and Mandi are taken as two sons of Satum and
according to Mandavya Rishi they are most harmful: wherever
they are posited they destroy the effects of that Bhava completely. In some old Text-books they have been accepted as

one and the same thing; and it is a popular view. But the author
here on the basis of Rishi Mandavya’s view has maintained
their plurality. Therefore, to arrive at Mandi multiply the
Ghatikas of the Ishta kala by the number assigned to the weekday and divide the product by 30. The Ghatika-Palas thus
obtained should be used to fix Mandi in the Rasi, Amsa, Kala
and Vikala the same way as is done to place the Lagna.
The reader should remember about Gulika that the portion
owned by Satum, on the week-day of the birth, belongs to Gulika.
For this purpose, divide the Dinmana in eight-equal parts and
the lord of each Mahurata will be computed from the week day
of the birth. The portion allowed to Saturn will belong to Gulika.
In the case of night birth divide the Ratrimana in eight equal
parts and count the Sth Muhurata from the week-day of the
birth and find out the portion belonging to Saturn, that will be
called Gulika. In short, note the week-day of the birth and
divide its Ratrimana or Dinmana by eight. The eighth part will
be one Muhurata. In the day birth the lord of the first Mahurata
will be denoted by the planet owning the week day of the birth
and in the case of night-birth it will be the 5th from the lord of
the week-day. Write this Mahurata in one place and count the
position of Saturn; such as, Sunday as 7th, Tuesday as 5th and
Wednesday as the 4th etc. In the night-birth count from the 5th
planet denoted by the week-day. Note the position of Saturn.
This should be multiplied by the 8th portion of the Ratriman.
The product will give the Ishta of Gulika. Compute with this
the Lagna, it will give Gulika Sphuta Lagna or Gulika Sphuta.
Example. Gulika is to be found in the case of Day
birth on Monday, Dinaman is 32 Ghatikas.
Therefore, 32 + 8 = 4 Ghatikas for one Mahurata.
Count upto Saturday from Monday. It is 6th (in order).
Hence 4 x 6 = 24 Ghatikas. This is Gulika’s Ishta Kala
as desired. This will help posting Gulika the way the Lagna is
computed.
In the case of Night birth the position will be :

On Sunday 10 Ghatika after Sunset
On Monday 6 Ghatika after Sunset
On Tuesday 2 Ghatika after Sunset
On Wednesday 26 Ghatika after Sunset
On Thursday 22 Ghatika after Sunset
On Friday 18 Ghatikas after Sunset
On Saturday 14 Ghatikas after Sunset.
it may also be noted that the exact position of Mandi or
Gulika on any week-day ts never the same.
eaiafateaty aaa Feryqe ake:
fae ai aaastt ar afe Hara g4 afae I
SUNITA saa Jeazsi=at faaftaa saaaigaersreergg azaq 8
I 5 the Lal R firecti
Sloka-9. If the birth of the native is in the Cancer, Aries,
Scorpio, Libra or Aquariws Lagna, the bed of the Woman (in
labour) will be in the Eastem portion of the house; when it is
Leo or Capricom, a will be Souther portion; should it be
Taurus, it would be im the Western portion and; if it is Virgo,
Sagittarius, Gemini or Pisces, the birth of the native will take
place in the Northern portion of the house. But when the Ascending
Navamsa is stronger than the Lagna, the direction of the labour
room should be as mdicated by that Navamsa Rasi only. The
direction of the labour room should be predicted according as
the Lagma or the Navamsa is stronger of the two (in the aforesaid manner). In other wonds, if the Navamsa belongs to Can- |
cer, Aries, cic. Rasis, the labour room will be in the East; if it
is of Leo or Capricom, # will be in the South; if Taurus, it will
be in the West part and; if it is Virgo, Sagittarius, Gemini or
Pisces it will be in the North side of the house.
wa Bast a Gala at arateat a fat
ama faa ale act att fa: eng feafa: |

FH AAIAsaTsSTANA Aagzaaal
aaa afed asafe frat ara: aafa: ama tol
Father at Birth Tim
Sloka-10 When the Lagna is not aspected by the Moon
and the Sun is posited in the 8th or the 9th Bhava: if the Sun
occupies a movable sign, the father will be in another village;
if it is in a fixed sign, he will be in his own village; if it is in a
dual sign, the father will be on his way home. When the Moon
is associated with malefic planets, the mother has to endure
much distress and pain.
‘Notes: Remember the signs from Aries to Pisces
(turnwise) are movable (Char*, fixed (Sthira) and dual (Dweswabhava):
Movable Fixed Dual
Aries Taurus Gemini
Cancer -Leo Virgo
Libra Scorpio Sagittarius
Capricorn Aquarius Pisces
The Sun is the Karaka of the father. When the Sun, Karaka of father, occupies a movable sign the father should be
somewhere far on the move; if he is in a fixed sign, he (father)
should be at home and; if he is in a dual sign, the father will be
somewhere on the way.
In the same way, the Moon being the Karaka of mother
denotes for the position of the mother. When the Moon conjoins evil planets the mother has to suffer at the labour time and
this suffering will be in proportion to the evil character of the
associating planets.
SUSI TUADEN IWel A Wa Tat
TASANTAAL Hagat ATT Ta; |
aa wHgaqacaRatar afar: wag
Rezeadiacanay git Vaca: Weer

About the Lamp and the Oil in the Labour Room:
Sloka-11. The number of midwives attending on the woman
in labour will correspond with the number of planets between
the Lagna and the Moon. The planets outside the Moon and the
Lagna will denote the number of women attending her without
the Chamber. The Moon denotes the oil in the Lamp, i.e., quantity of oil left in the lamp will correspond with the degrees yet
to be traversed by the Moon in her sign. The wick of the lamp
is to be assessed from the Lagna- the portion of the Rising Sign
yet to rise - and that of the Lamp itself, from the Sun. The lords
of the various directions respectively are the Sun of the East;
Venus , South - East; Mars - South; Rahu, South - West; Saturn,
West; the Moon, North - West, Mercury, North and; Jupiter of
the North - East.
The door of the delivery room will be in the direction
indicated by the powerful planets occupying the Kendra (Angular)
houses or in the absence of such a position, by the strongest of
them (kendra) in the chart.
Notes: These Astrological indications have been devised
in order to check the accuracy of the Janma Lagna and the satisfaction of the parents of the native born. The females present
in the Labour Room to help are called mid- wives. Their number
should be devised on the basis of the planets being between the
Lagna and the Moon. But remember, if perchance all the planets are so placed, do not indicate more than 5 to 7 midwives. If
any planet is with the Moon or in the Lagna, the planet in the
Lagna should be of higher degrees than that of the Lagna and
the planet with the Moon should be of lower degrees than those
of the Moon.
The oil, already burnt in the lamp or is left, is to be assessed by the degrees the Moon has traversed in her sign or yet
to traverse. This sounds incongruous in the days of electricity;
but it will be true where there is no electric current available
and people live by oil lamps. The same way the direction of the
door of the labour room should be indicated from the strongest
planet occupying the Angular House

2. WaTyqyArs;
aq gizatiaa: aghear waka aal—
arate a aa: farafeat qzalaug aq |
BA MIA Aya Tees
WAUFAIA WUAAIMNTAKS DAA = Vi
Sec II. Calculation of the several kinds of
strength, etc.
Sloka-1 All the 12 Rasis (Signs) rise by tum from the
East. The first six of these from the Lagna (Asc.) represent the
right side of the native and the same denote the left side of his
wife. In the same manner, the Rasis from the 7th upto the Lagna
are his left side and that for the wife are the night side. The
Lagna should be taken as life and soul of the native and the
Bhava occupied by the Moon as his body. In this way these two
Bhavas will denote all about the soul and the body of the native. While reading the birth chart of a native, the effects arising out of the several bhavas (whether reckoned from the Lagna
or the Moon) should always be based judiciously on the auspicious or otherwise character of the respective houses, their
lords and their Karakas. For example, all about the mother of
the native will be devised from the 4th Bhava, its lord, its Karaka,
the Moon and all the benefic/malefic influences falling on them.
In this connection it may be mentioned here that in
Astrology ‘*hree Lagnas are taken into account, viz., the Sun,
the Moon and the Lagna; out of these, Lagna and the Rasi
occupied by the Moon deserve special attention. It has been
experienced that in certain cases a study of the nativity proves
more fruitful in considering the respective effects of the various Bhavas when reckoned from the Moon’s position in the
chart rather than the Ascendent. That is one of the reasons why
the Moon Rasi has been considered as the body of the Kalapursha; and a sound mind and a great soul are not possible
without a strong body.

Cf Chandra Kala Nadi by Dev Keralkar:
Chandra Lagna is body and the Lagna is soul. Therefore, in Astrology results have been devised after examining
the various Bhavas from both the Lagnas. It is customary in
Northern India to prepare the Moon Ascendant Chart also along
with the Lagna Chart when writing the Horoscope.
Along with this, the basic principle of predictive Astrology is to examine also the lord of the Bhava under consideration, its Karaka and the Bhava itself. Without this no consideration of a nativity would be commendable. |
qaxsaamal feareegal aaezsflaraa:
Valataagymaaa Gat THR AT |
Rraeqenacraata fiqay aeciatsal aa:
aca gl fagta anager aazi aa 8
anifefaaa mataanead an cima
Mesa Matas Baw: Hea eIea! |
Pl een
Sloka 2,% The Sun considers the Moon, Jupiter and Mars
as his friends; the Moon , to the Sun and Mercury, Mars, to the
Sun, the Moon and Jupiter; Mercury, to Venus and the Sun;
Jupiter, to the Sun, the Moon and Mars; Venus, to Mercury and
Saturn and; Saturn considers Venus and Mercury as his friends.
The Sun looks at Venus and Saturn as his enemies; the Moon
does not look upon any of the planets as his enemies; Mars
counts Mercury as his enemy; Mercury, to the Moon; Jupiter tc
Venus and Mercury; Venus, to the Sun and the Moon and; Saturn
treats the Sun, the Moon and the Mars as his enemies. The rest
of the planets are neutrals. Assess the natural and temporary
friendship between the two planets and then arrive at the results (whether they are exceedingly friendly or exceedingly
inimical, etc.).

Table showing the natural friendship of the Planets
Planet Friend Neutral Enemy
Sun Jup.,Moon,Mars Mercury Ven., Sat.
Moon Sun,Mercury Ven,Mars,.
Jup.,Sat 7
Mars Sun,Moon,Jup. Sat.,Venus Mercury
Mercury Sun,Venus Jup.,Sat.,Mars Moon
Jupiter Sun, Moon,Mars Saturn Merc., Venus
Venus Saturn,Mercury Mars, Jup. Sun, Moon
Saturn Mercury,Venus Jupiter Sun,Moon, Mars
Notes: It is not difficult to arrive at these three results:
Friendship, neutrality or enemity between the planets. Examine the position of the Sun. His Mooltrikona is Leo. [The Mooltrikona signs respectively of the Sun etc. are 5, 2, 1, 6, 9, 7 and
11. A planet’s friends are the lords of the 2nd, 12th, Sth, 9th,
8th and the 4th houses from his Moolatrikona Rasi]. The 2nd,
12th, Sth, 9th, 8th and the 4th places from Leo are respectively
Virgo, Cancer, Sagittarious, Aries, Pisces and Scorpio. Aries
is the exaltation sign of the Sun. Their lords respectively are
Mercury, the Moon. Jupiter, Mars, Jupiter and Mars. Singularly they are Mercury, the Moon, Jupiter and Mars. Aries has
been counted twice. Therefore, actually only the 6 houses have
been ‘dealt with. The remaining 6 are Leo, Libra, Capricorn,
Aquarius, Taurus and Gemini. Their respective lords are the
Sun, Venus, Saturn, Venus and Mercury. When we count Saturn and Venus once only and drop the Sun, we are left with
Venus, Saturn and Mercury. Compare these with the former set
of planets; viz., Mercury, Moon, Jupiter and Mars. Mercury
alone has come as a friend and an enemy in both the list. Therefore,
he will remain neutral. Thus Venus and Satum are left as his
enemies and the Moon, Mars and Jupiter are his friends. Similarly, we can compute with the other planets. This is called
Natural relationship of planets.
Planets occupying the three houses before or after from
any particular planet in the birth chart become the friends of

that planet and the rest become his enemies for the time being.
This is called Temporary Friendship or enmity (relationship).
Some authorities opine that the planets occupying the exaltation sign of a particular planet are also his friends. Combining
the three natural relations with the two temporary ones we get
the ‘Panchdha’ (five) following types of friendship of the planets:
Atimitra (great friend) Mitra (friend) Sama (neutral), Satru
(enemy), and Atisatru (great enemy).
Atimitra Both ways friends;
Atisatru Both ways enemies;
Sama one way friend and the other,enemy.
ala: BRaeTaaaa aRstlaaay
weasa: BAT: Hale TEM: BlaraRAl WEA 3
alti aa ce faanahha genet
aatat aaReal tacafaatag aia: |
Planetary Vargas and the Moolatrikona
Sloka 2 %3 “From Aries to Pisces respectively the lords
are : Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, the Sun, Mercury, Venus,
Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and Jupiter. One complete Varga
is called a Bhava or Rasi, half of it is Hora and the 1/3rd part
is called Drekkana. In the same way the 1/7th part is Saptamamsa; 1/9th is Navamsa; 1/12th is Dwadasamsa and; of a Rasi
1/30th part is called Trimsamsa.
Notes: These seven divisions of a Bhava are called Saptvargas [Bhava, Hora, Drekkana, Saptamamsa, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa and Trnmsamsa.] When Saptamamsa is excluded, they
are known as Shadvargas; and if Dasamamsa, Shodasamsa and
the Shashtiamsa are added to the Saptavargas they become
Dasavargas.
fadraaaqagata! qefaaoufian:
Ha BAA Ta: frag) amiwasger =v

Ham VIE A ava aa. fa ar
dia eafha ag Paton qafaann qq |
maassis alaraaa ne eatesgaqamiafeaa acganqaaaeatg: ay KI
Sloka 3 %-5 The Moolatrikona Rasi from the Sun to Saturn
respectively are : Leo, Taurus, Aries, Virgo, Sagittarius, Libra
and Aquarius. Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo, Cancer, Pisces
and Libra are the exaltation Rasis of the Sun, the Moon, Mars
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn respectively. When a planet
occupies his exaltation Rasi, his Bala (strength) is equivalent
to 1 Rupa (full); in the Moolatrikona it reduces to 3/4th of a
Rupa; in his own Rasi, it becomes 1/2 of a Rupa; in the Rasi of
an Adhimitra it contracts to 3/4th of a Rupa; in that of his mitra,
it is 1/4th, in that of a Sama it is 1/8th; in that of a Satru (enemy)
it is 1/16th and; in that of an adhisatru it is 1/32nd of a Rupa.
Notes: when a planet is in its exaltation part it has the
maximum bala (strength) of 60 Shastiamsas, and at intermediate positions it is the proportionate value. Look at the following table:
Exaltation 60 Shastiamsas
Moolatrikona 45 =
Swashetra 30 =
Adhi mitra 22.5 ”
Mitra 15 ”
Sama ae 3
Satru 3:13 i
Adhisatru 1.875 ma
aa lade: aamafea eq qs aZa
aA AAI: Adlqaar alas ANAT |
Tae zalsastiaa Ala g aed aS
faa: Tiga: ay figangaash ag Taq NEI
Sloka-6 The strength of a planet, retrograde in his
motion, should be taken as similar to that when he is in his

exaltation. When a planet is in association with a retrograde
planet, the strength he gets is 1/2 a Rupa. When a planet occupies his exaltation Bhava, but is retrograde in his motion, he
gets only his Neechabala: he is without any strength. Should a
planet be retrograde while in his debilitation Bhava, his strength
is akin to that when in his exaltation. A planet in conjunction
with another planet which is in exaltation gets 1/2 a Rupa.
When he conjoins another who is in his debilitation he gets
nothing. When a planet associates himself with malefics who
may be his friends, or with benefics who happen to be his enemies,
gets only 1/2 a Rupa.
RAUeIVR had F WAG TlBaKaTst—
wafer sat aft aa a4 fag ufaq |
Sloka 6% The highest exaltation points of the planets reckoned
from the Sun are the 10th, the 3rd, the 28th, the 15th, the 5th,
the 27th and the 20th degrees of their several Rasis,
Sloka-3 1/2-5 Supra; their points of ‘Fall’ being the corresponding degrees in the 7th Bhava from their exaltation ones.
This strength of planets is called one that is derived from the
Rasis.
Notes: When in a birth chart Saturn is in the Ist Navamsa of Libra, his exaltation Navamsa, he will not be given
one Rupa as his strength under ‘Navamsa’ in the Saptavarga
bala but he will be given only what is due to him by occupying
a Navamsa belonging to Venus according to the kind of relationship he holds with him in the nativity under reference.
HHAvIAsag aye elisa FIR
PAAETRAIATS asyauerg: fet io
Gra =a a aa g faaga aataaeaad
SAMAR T TARTS aataMeTANT |
Sloka 61/2-71/2 In an odd Rasi, the Horas or halves of a
sign belong respectively to the Sun and the Moon, and in an

even Rasi, to the Moon and the Sun. The Drekkanas (1/3rd of
a Rasi) are owned by the lords of (1) the 1st, 5th and 9th witp
respect to that Rasi in the case of movable signs; (2) the 9th, 1st
and 5th in the case of a fixed sign and (3) the Sth, 9th and Ist
in the case of a dual sign. The lords of the Saptamsas or 1/7th
portions are in odd Rasis to be reckoned regularly from the lord
thereof, while in the case of an even Rasi they are to be counted
from the lord of the 7th onwards. Next, as to the order of the
Navamsas.
Notes: There are in vogue 3 ways to find out the lord
of the three Drekkanas in each Rasi
(1) The lords of the 1st, 5th and the 9th with respect to that
Rasi;
(2) They are the lords of :
(a) the 1st, 5th and 9th in the case of a movable sign;
(b) the 9th, 1st and 5th in the case of a fixed sign;
(c) the Sth, 9th and ist in the case of a dual sign.
(3) The lords of the ist, 12th and 11th with respect to that
sign.
The (1) one has been propounded by Varahmihira only;
The (2) one is held by the present author.
The (3) method has been recommended by Yavaneshwara when attending a query (Prasna).
44 faeae aqsasaataccaaaetA—
atard waahiagheraeaaragy | < Il
aTmsqeqtaay aay dbafeadeeat:
TA SAA Tata Ta TAY Aeagaeaay |
Sloka-7 4-8 4 The Navamsas (1/9th portions) of Aries, Leo and
Sagittarius belong to the nine Rasis from Aries onwards and they end
with Pisces. The owners of the Dwadasamsas 1/12th portions ofa Rasi
are to be counted from the sign itself. The Trimsamsas (1/30th
portions) of a Rasi allotted in an odd Rasi to Mars, Saturn, Jupiter,
Mercury and Venus are respectively in the order of 5, 5, 8, 7 and 5. In

the case of an even Rasi Venus, Mercury, Jupiter, Saturn and Mars
have 5, 7, 8, 5 and 5 degrees respectively. The aforesaid seven kinds
of divisions form the Saptavargas.
ena aaafea sare safgfecay asiifecahh seq acaftanznaleataiger 1% |
ae aqmaiaasey agantza
ena facka dagka ag aah |
Sloka 8'%9'% [Draw a table and write the names of
all the planets beginning with the Sun on the top of it horizontally. In the extreme left in a vertical column note down the
Rasi, Hora, Drekkana etc the Saptavargas] Enter against the
Rasi under the columns of the 7 planets the strength in terms of
Rupas already obtained for the Rasi. Similarly note down against
the other six Vargas beginning with Hora: the portion of the
strength assigned to the Rasi Varga for the planet owning the
Varga in question. The sum total of all these seven kinds of
strength makes the Saptavargajabala of the planet. This method
should be applied to all the seven planets.
dtarcqxaaragaaaa Aatava-aat
Fared BNI{ sofas Treat Safes BHAI k ell
Me F ata yeqahe Besqwle wa
ala ergata afe aa Fezfey facahs |
Slbka 9%10% When a planet is approaching its exaltation, the Uchchabala in terms of a Rupa will be represented
by the fraction: Planet’s present position-minus Planet’s depression point + 180° .The difference of this from unity will
indicate the planet’s uchchabala when the planet be descending (Avaroha) i.e.,/when ‘it |has reached the exaltation point and
heading towards its depression point. Should a planet occupy a
Kendra (Angle), a Panaphara, or an Apoklima Bhava its respective strength will be 1, 1/2 or 1/4 Rupa.

yaalana: Ratahy wah: We as sa
aalat say ant f& analecqAaaeay 11 22
aa vets TAA AITFAITTT
Tararany ala: agfed ala fae eras
Sloka 10 %11% When the Moon and Venus occupy an
even Rasi or an even Navamsa, the strength they derive is 1/4
Rupa. The Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn and Mercury acquire 1/4
Rupa if they are in odd Rasis or Navamsas. Should the male,
hermophrodite and female planets be posited respectively in
the 1st, middle or the last portion of a Rasi, they will get 1/4
Rupa of strength. The total of these five kinds of Bala is called
Sthanabala or the strength of planet due to their occupation in
a Rasi and forms one part of the Shadbalas.
Asa) audal Raracaqaad) ateaaat
alaigt Tay q Reaahs suis fg way zl
aman aia fRate aufarzea
aate ake aarazfiay Hzaq
Sloka 11 %-12 % Mercury and Jupiter are strong in the
Lagna (East). The Moon and Venus are powerful in the 4th
(North); Saturn, in the 7th (West) and; Mars and the Sun are
strong in the 10th (South). They become powerless when they
are in the 7th place from the one mentioned above. The Digbal
(Directional strength) in the intermediate positions must be
computed by the rule of three process. The planets become
effective corresponding with their respective Directional strength
in their respective direction.
as wNafeey aeaaa: eyiaaalsat:
ag fequ faa Vera qaaq ll (3H
qeqig tia aeaaga aear Aaa:

smal aalfaqngaaa sat Para ea: |
Gi: Mla: Add AST |TTERqaaNltiag
areas faq Ad BEETS) BAT Ul Ve Ul
Sloka 12 %14% In the Shukla Paksha (the bright haif)
the strength (Pakshabala) of benefic planets goes with the
number of Tithis passed in the Paksha where as in the case of
malefic planets it is the number of Tithis remaining to be passed
or gone through. During the Krishnapaksha (dark half) this
process is reversed. The Pakshabala in the case of the Moon
will be doubled. When a native is born in the middle portion of
the day the strength of 1 Rupa is credited to the Sun. Saturn
gets this strength if \it/is in third portion of the day. The Moon
gets if it the birth is in the Ist portion of the night. When the
birth will be in the middle portion of the night the strength will
go to Venus. Should the birth be in the 3rd (last) portion of the
night, the strength will be shared by Mars. Mercury enjoys it in
the ist portion of the day. Jupiter has this strength at all times.
It is termed Ahoratraja or Dinaratribhagabala. Multiply the
Nata in Ghatikas by 2 and divide the product by 60. This will
give the Natabal in terms of a Rupa.
qTaGeqagaaaatls BRA ad
RUA ISIsaMa aAaifeaaeqaAa |
Sloka 14% When this is subtracted from unity it will give
the strength resulting from Unnata. The Moon, Mars and Saturn have the Natabala whereas the Sun, Mercury, Jupiter and
Venus have Unnatabala.
alent eqaddaal faces qaant—
Maxifaqaraataze aeaiee qaaq i 24
faseoraarad FI AaEAS| RANHIaH
| at aqaaite a uted are 38 sug |
Sloka 14415% The duration of Ghatikas between midday and the Sun at a birth is called Nata, while unnata shows

similar interval in Ghatikas between the Sun and midnight.
These two intervals when divided by 30 denote the Natonnatabala of planets in terms of a Rupa and form a_ sub-division of
Kalabala. The appliances and instruments required to measure
the time have been detailed in the earlier part of the work,
Purvakalamrita.
ata A MIA fearfaeacerageadr
Alaa aaa Imaal aay 1 8g |
eqorea afar: aefaRear aoraraiaar:
atachashtiigadisarra aa sar: |
Sloka 15 %16 % = The lord of the year, the lord of the month,
the lord of the week- day and the lord of the Hora respectively
get 1/4, 1/2, 3/4 and 1 Rupa strength if a native is born under
their influence. The sum of these four kinds of strength goes to
add in the Kalabala. To find the lord of the Hora, for any Particular time, multiply the Ghatikas that have passed since Sunrise
by 2 and divide the product by 5. The quotient will show the
number of Horas that have elapsed. The lord of the Ist Hora on
any week-day will be the lord of the week-day itself, the lords
of the 2nd and the succeeding Horas should be counted from
that planet in the following order: the Sun, Venus, Mercury,
the Moon, Saturn Jupiter and Mars.
ary wraAt Tae aaa AaueT atraza
Caldasagahte sada af: away | to I
Sores Vrazaas aacatan Var
Daaeanysagasay waza Sar ast |
Sloka 16%17% The Moon and Satur are powerful when
they are in their Southern Course. Mercury is always strong.
The rest of the planets become powerful when they are in their
Northern course. The strength as a result of this course is called
their Ayana Bala. The planets taken in their regular order from
Mars should be considered strong when they are in their retro-

grade motion and their Cheshtabala is calculated from the degrees
in their respective Sighra Kendras. When two planets associate
themselves in such a way that they have to be in the same
Bhava and their longitudes agree even to the degree and minute,
they are said to be in war and that planet which is North of the
other is considered to be Victorious and gains the strength of
the other in the South, the Vanquished planet.
qa Teas wgafaray Aarcewzar
Ha faatsgaafeat wleqaysey = ke
ad veadiaahaeca wala aasay
fraraeaaftan a cea: Bz faaetaa: |
Sloka 17 4 -18'2 Saturn casts a full glance over the 3rd
and 10th Bhavas, when the other planets aspect them with a
quarter of a glance. Jupiter views the Sth and the 9th with a full
eye, while the rest look at these Bhavas with half a glance.
Mars casts his full aspect over the 4th and the 8th Bhavas and
the other planets aspect them with 3/4 of a glance. All planets
aspect the 7th Bhava with a full eye. Planets do not cast any
glance on the 2nd, the 11th, the 12th and the 6th Bhavas counted
from the place occupied by them.
zal aiyacashzaamaaces Ble
AIMPAeqAUAseaHSRay FI THA | LS
aa RITA 4 aihadeer alga
Sua Gau Gaafayal aigrat easy |
Sloka 18 %19 % Substract the aspecting planet from the
aspected one. The result will show the extent in terms of signs,
degrees, etc, of the range of aspect. The Drigbala of the aspected planet in Rupas can thus be computed from these degrees, etc, by the mle-of-three process, adding to or substracting
from, as need be, of the proportionate difference in strength
between that fixed for that sign and the strength allotted for the
sign succeeding.The Drigbala thus arrived at can be grouped

under ‘Malefic’ and ‘Benefic’ according to the aspecting planets, whether malefic or benefic. Thus should be noted down in
two columns in terms of Rupas. Their numerical sum will show
the exact Drigbala so obtained for each planet.
MARTA SA Bat—
a egelaaar agharhee Aas meet lol
ai Migqanfarated aerate BAT
MAMAS Besar |
Sloka 19 420% The Sun, the Moon, Venus, Jupiter,
Mercury, Mars and Saturn decrease successively by 1/7th of a
Rupa in their natural strength. The Nisargabal of the Sun should
be noted as one Rupa. the several kinds of strength , viz, those
collected from (1) Sthana-Position, (2) Dik-Direction, (3) KalaTime, (4) Nisarga- Natural and (5) Chestha - Motion should
now be summed up.
eian adena af adi aca enfaa
nquahtd TH egeat Bee fa waq AH
aq shewatang Rhee eqerasies
Agia Ras aad cahacaracaq aqareq |
Sloka 20 '%21'% Further more add to this the rectified
Drigbala of the planet. Next, should the planet be victorious or
be vanquished in the planetary war add or subtract accordingly
1 Rupa. The sum-total when so rectified of the several balas
referred to above, will be the planet’s Shadbala in Rupas. When
this strength is found to be less than 5 Rupas, the planet should
be taken as week. If it possesses from 5 to 10 Rupas it should
be considered as having the normal strength.
aT | TTaMe alae: eaega: |
Qzcaey Tacadla Yacnierfasewiar RV
ANAT ATSAISTISA aheaaa

dar carafe saaaar talaces 7 |
Sloka 21 422% When this strength exceeds 10 Rupas it
will be considered Purnabla. Without doubt such a planet will —
be most auspicious. His Dasa will be exceedingly favourable
and will bestow upon the native all that he would dream of;
such as, wealth, happiness, etc., provided the planet is proceeding to his exaltation point. A planet possessing medium
strength but going towards his exaltation point, his Dasa will
also prove productive of prosperity and happiness. But when a
planet is on his way to his depression point the Dasa will be
unfavorable, A planet having the strength less than 5 Rupas
will only cause misery and misfortune during his Dasa period.
3, waciaeve:
Taq Baaaa Re Asa tH Avs
aA BugwMnzatea ataaal aa: |
ATA AITACAIA Ataled ararkea
atiafesaata Jaa: aaeTasaaR UL I
Section Iil--Ayurdaya.—Length of life.
Sloka-1. Count the number of Nakshatras from Aswini
traversed by a planet; divide it by 3 and ignore the quotient.
Multiply the remainder by 4 and increase it by the number of
quarters already passed in the next star. This result will indicate the nuinber of Navamsas from Aries already traversed by
the planet and it will correspond to the number of year contributed by the planet in the Nakshatra Pada (Amsayurdaya) system. The Months, days, etc, besides the years referred to due to
the planetS position in the portion of the next pada should be
computed from the interval lying between the end of the last
Nakshatra Pada and the position occupied by the planet in the
next one through the measure in days, ghatikas, etc., taken by
the particular planet to run through its full course. Similarly,
obtain and sum-up the years so contributed by all the planets as
well as the Lagna.

aig: aeqnufyacaveiaag Riga
alm Fg AS TA ale qala WIawsfeaq |
faust aisaaaa BafFainke
aga fe way gay earzararafeaeyq il 2
Sloka-2. If malefic planets occupy the 6 houses reckoned backward from the 12th, a reduction in full, one of onehalf, one-third, one-fourth, one fifth and one-sixth shall be
made respectively in their Ayurdaya. Should benefics occupy
the said bhavas the loss will be half of what is incurred by the
malefic ones. When a malefic is posited in the Lagna, the whole
of the Ayurdaya contributed by the Asc. is to be taken away. In
the case of a planet in its depression point one-half of the period
assigned to it is lost. When a planet is housed in an inimical
bhava, a reduction of one-third of his Ayus is to be made. When
he is set or defeated in planetary war his Ayurdaya is further
reduced by half. Amsayurdaya method is peculiar in this way.
Cf. Brihat Jataka VII 2-4, 9-11.
Vid UMRVANSH ANU AAI Tes
qgify aqueteh aat aavarerfeeq |
aq MAawaadge aahaafaa
ax aia uafeaanaeqgats ger: ll 3
Sloka-3. The number of Ghatikas that have passed in the
Rising Sign at birth when multiplied by 9 and divided by the
number indicating the Ghatikas etc., of the rising time of that
sign will show the length of years contributed by the Lagna.
The remainder will give the months, days, etc., when suitably
multiplied and divided by their appropriate factors. If the Lagna
is powerful being occupied or aspected by its lord or a benefic
planet or by its lord being in his exaltation, the number of years
contributed by the Lagna will correspond with the years signified by the Rasis, etc., reckoned from Aries, in the figure denoting
the Lagna. This view is held by some great Astrologers.
Cf BJ VII-12 Sripatipaddhati V - 18.
a
uaa aaerA FHI KAZ:

arasiadaafiaed goa & suf eaq |
aaaaaar TIfHla ABTA aa Wat
gra Brqaea ale wrahewaacag = ef
Sloka-4. Find out the two decanates that precede and
‘succeed immediately to the Lagna Drekkana. Compute their
Saptavargajabala in Rupas (as done earlier) of the lords of
these three decanates (or of the planets occupying them, if
Tadbhavai is to be accepted for Tadbhapai), and take only a
fourth. This will denote the religious inclination of the man
concerned. When the same is subtracted from 4 it will indicate
evil mind of the native. Record these two results carefully and
if their difference be 4 Rupas of Punya, the native will certainly attain emancipation at the end of this life.
UTM HAUT MAecesiag: ataar
deat MIAA War fagfqoa ama aa: |
Ig: afaqaaefy aaiiafe senza
aacidines aggqat Wea aatagG =n & Il
Sloka-5. Obtain the figures for the auspicious and inauspicious portions of the Saptavargajabalas of the lords of the
afore said three decanates. Multiply the malefic portion by
120. Divide the product by 7. The result thus obtained will
indicate the number in years. Take away from it as many 120
year-periods as are possible. The remainder will reveal the
Ayus of the man concerned in the respective Janma out of the
past, present and future. This method has been pointed out here
by way of discussion and also because it is simpler than the
Amsayurdaya method.
$x BUN? fiaat: Hazan: qtarana—
ALUIACAAAY Fa A aaa oH featfa fear: |
QS AWeuy sqqieqHNIA AeTITY Gar:
HeAZATRAMM A YAAT AAT Gas aat ll & Il
Sloka-6. When in a nativity Venus, Jupiter and Mercury
are in the Kendra (Angles) and Kona (Trines) Bhavas the man
concerned enjoys a full life (he is longlived).If these planets
should he in the 2nd 3rd and 11th honses the native ull have

medium life, i.c., 60 years. Should these planets be in the 6th,
8th and the 12th Bhavas the native will live below the medium
life only. When the remaining planets (the malefics) occupy
the 8th, the 12th, a Kendra or a Kona Bhava they will not,
invariably, grant good results to the native.
Charts showing the Yogas in Sloka III - 6
Female Born on Female 29th Dec 1974 at
Cf. SL-8, supra
Aaaa aff aa Szfaalaaa:
Bia a
— aaaaftaaarfhaaft gaea a ee aa |
qeua: qazicg seal Mal VAeazar

daisagavaary qaafafaed HAA lio
Sloka-7. Ifthe lord of the Lagna is not aspected by benefics
who occupy a Kendra or Kona Bhava, if the lord of the Rasi
occupied by the lord of Lagna and the Logna itself are not
aspected by benefics, the life of the native will be a short one.
Moreover, he will be denied children, wife and wisdom. Should
it be otherwise, the man concerned will enjoy longevity, good
fortune, wealth and be wise and renowned. |
SL 7 Female
5-11-1955 at 19.15 Venus, the lord of the Asc, is in
the 7th without having the asa he pect of any benefic planet from
a Trine or an Angular house.
Mars, the lord of the sign occupied by Venus, as also the Asc.
have no benefic aspect. Hence
short life.
Rahu
Venus
Zero
Sat, Me
Turhamaaa qzat syssaaisaar
eyezeqeny cya yaa at tifa |
ara a fea gaat: Vevasraey
WRIA AAA ATTA neu
Sloka-8. When the Sputa Lagna or the Rasi occupied by
the Moon is aspected by the lord of the 8th Bhava or the lord of
the 8th Bhava either from the Moon or the Lagna be aspected
by Saturn or Mars; and in both of these cases benefics do not
aspect the lord of the Lagna or the lord of the Rasi occupied by
the lord of the Lagna, the man concerned, may he be akin to
Markandeya so far as logevity is concerned, will. enjoy only a
moiety of life.

4, WARES:
aaatageaaazen: agltataifaa:
aeahfaagaacaana: qafantonfyar: |
WAM eTAA: Waar: Fearon a:
APTA WEN GaTd Falea TMT ll i
Section 4—Planets in the several bhavas and their
effects.
Planets, when mutually related in any way, prove auspicious to the native, bring him great renown and bestow high
status. Such ‘Sambandh’(relationship) may be when they are:
(1) Occupying their exaltation, own Bhava, a friend’s
Bhava or a Trikona Bhava,
(2) Posited in a Kendra Bhava in their Vargottamamsa;
(c) Aspected by benefics, are conjoined with benefics,
or are posited betwixt benefics,
(d) in their Moolatrikona Rasis;
(e) proceeding towards the centre of a Bhava and
(f) lords of a Kendra and a Kona Bhava at the same
time.
fara quinaeaRaa: wears
HAMANN IHALSAMTIAAM: |
mMaeaeqaaqug fae: geet:
Sezifaralngargqada ars: a
Sloka-2. The auspicious or Subha Yogas of the planets
get destroyed when they are:
(1) in their fall or debilitation position;
(2) defeated in planetary war;
(3) in their inimical houses;
(4) aspected by, in association with or hemmed
betwixt malefics;

(5) associated with a retrograde planet, an Astangata or eclipsed planet or be with Rahu.
(6) in the zone of Bhava Sandhi;
(7) Weak; |
(8) Owning Dussthanas, i.e. the 6th, 8th and the
12th or their lords associate with those of the
Kendra or of Trikona Bhavas.
Sloka IV - 2
The following two charts illustrate the points contained in the
above Sloka: Female
STEN
ww
Balance of Mars Dasa : 1 yr 10 Mons 24 days
D
Husband
This native has
strained relations with her
husband and is not blessed
with the pleasures of the
bed, though living with her
husband. The lord of the
7th house, Venus, denotes
the husband, and also happens to own the 12th and is
posited in the 6th Bhava.
Balance of Sun’s Dasa: 4 mons 10 days Jupiter, the karaka of the

husband is associated with his enemy Mercury, the lord of the 8th. The
Moon is occupying the 12th house being aspected by Venus. This has
give hera good and charming look but an indifferent husband because
both Venus and Jupiter are hostile to the Moon, one by being in the 6th
house and the other being 6th from the Moon.
Husband’s chart is appended showing his association with
another woman. It was a case of love marriage.
Aa Baty acadt faaaaaa al saa
araraanat danza at usainae’ |
Hiaugeaaqaa afedt aazae at fat
adqealeaaal anfavagerfara far 2 |
Sloka-3. (1) Should the 9th and 10th Bhavas be respectively occupied by their own lords; (2) when their lords conjoin
in either of these houses, (3) when they occupy each other’s
bhava; or (4) they mutually aspect each other, then these two
lords become responsible for the Rajayoga in any nativity. (5)
Should these lords of the 9th and the 10th associate themselves
with any of the lords of the 5th, the 7th, the 1st or the 4th or (6)
occupy any of these houses they bless the man concermed with
wealth, happiness and prosperity. But these lords of the 9th and
the 10th, in no case, should own the 8th or the 11th Bhava as
well.
Sloka IV - 3 Male
Oe NE
Ze.

This native has retired from the senior most Police post of Indian Govt.
Merc, the lord of the 10th Kendra is in the Lagna with the Sun, the lord
of the 9th, inthe Sign Sagittarius. The Lagna and these lords of a Kona
and a Kendra enjoy the aspect of Jupiter from the 9th house (a Kona)
- the Lord of Lagna. Again, the Sun and Jupiter are occupying each
other's house. This Jupiter aspects Mars in the 3rd house who, in turn,
is aspecting Sat. inthe 10th house. The Link between these 5 planets
forming the great Raja Yoga may be noted. Venus, the lord of the 11th
is in the 2nd and is alone responsible for the Dhana Yoga. Hence the
native enjoyed position, status, Royal favour and prosperity.
Cf Phaladeepika XV - 30 and also Laghu Parashari_ P.33,
Sagar Publications.
wargiacaagy afe act azanqifadt
ALAR RITHA AAA MATTTIT: ATT
aaeqqaifsal 3 atalaraaeezi fal
sadiaaraazal sar vat ate: et
Sloka-4. Reckon the lords of the 9th and the 10th Bhavas
(1) from the Lagna; (2) from the 9th house from the Lagna (9th
and 10th to 9th) and; (3) from the 10th house from the Lagna
(9th and 10th to 10th). These three sets of planets will in their
order bestow upon the native a high position, an ordinary position
or a below average position in life. When these said pairs of
planets are mutually related by being in conjunction, exchange
of house (each occupying other’s house) or by mutual aspect,
and possess strength; occupy Bhavas which are mutually in
Kendra positions or; be in association with the planets owning
houses occupied by the lords of Lagna, the native will amass
great wealth and be a ruler on this earth.

Sloka IV - 2, 4 Female
Balance of Saturn’s Dasa 16 yrs 2 mons and 11 days.
The lords of the 9th and 10th (Venus and Mars) counted from the 9th
house from the Lagna aspect each other; thus forming a medium gain
which the native has already achieved as an I.A.S. This short fall is
due to the fact that the Lord of Lagna, Mercury; and the lord of the 9th,
Saturn are together with the disqualification that they are within 5 to
6 degrees from the Sun (therefore, are set). Saturn is in the 9th in his
Mool trikona. Venus is the lord of the 4th and the 9th from the Moon
Lagna and the Sun Lagna camping in his friend’s house. These 5
planets are aspected by Mars occupying the Sagittarius Navamsa and
enjoying the Sth aspect of Jupiter himself. This native will face some
difficulty during the Mahadasa of Mercury & Antar of Saturn starting
from 5.9.1995 for a period of 2 yrs. 8 months and 9 days.
Mercury/Jupiter period of 2 yrs. 3 months 6 days prior to 5.9.1995 will
be most rewarding. She should enjoy long life as Saturn, the lord of
Longevity is in good position. She will marry an equally competent
man.

Tae UssaAad sprraqaeeqea qr -
aialaerdt a at anaterey arqyeay |
THAT Tetaaaaaaaaae faa
afe afiasfeny aeqaaered 4 ta: BAT Nh
Sloka-5. (1) The lord of the Rasi (Moon’s Rasi) and Amsa
(Lagna Amsa) occupied by a planet and the lord of the Lagna;
(2) the lords of the 10th and the 9th houses; (3) the lords of the
5th, 3rd, 4th and the 7th Bhavas; (4) the lords of the 2nd and the
11th Bhavas- where these aforesaid pairs of the plamets are so
related that - though placed in any of the above mentioned
houses- they (a) are together in one house; (b) occupy each
other’s house; (3) aspect mutually and at the same time be in a
friend’s house, own house or an exaltation Rasi, they respectively bless the man concerned with prosperity, elephants, horses
and the like, progeny and prosperity and affluence (wealth).
mMIMANay aarataara aziAqy
Aaifanatsaa af vaca arafaa: |
agiae Raa gaan: gata ateaga—
qaad Taagl a f— aat aeafertat Faq il &
Sloka-6. Should the lord of a Bhava be posited in the 8th
place from the Lagna or (from it), be elipsed by the rays of the
Sun, be in his fall or occupy an inimical house and does not
conjoin nor be aspected by benefics, Munies say that in such a
planetary set the effects of that House are completely destroyed.
Even if the benefics themselves associate with the Bhava there
will be no salvation. The Lagna and the other Bhavas should be
examined in this manner only.
saaifenacanifeanad eafaata: Faq
guieerta a woeacta mafaa afesaq |
amlaeqadiada afeaaal aaa fea:
ala afgeyianeaay usa aq | w I

Sloka-7. When the lord of the Lagna is posited in the 1st,
middle, or the last Drekkana of the Ascendant, the native will
become a, judge a chieftain or a headman of his village, respectively. Should this planet be aspected by or associated with
Venus, Jupiter or Mercury or be in the Varga of an auspicious
planet or in his exaltation point, the man concemed will tum
out to be an emperor of the whole world and be honoured by
other rulers.
wages: agz eal az ant
fii asamatanaa: got Agaact |
Barceqeqam galgdaat wa fwa Away
RIT! ATM TATA: A Blgalay ely ll < II
Sloka-8. When ina nativity (1) the Moon in her full degrees
possessed of strength is in her exaltation, own Bhava or a friend’s
house, identical with the 9th, 4th, 10th or the 7th and is aspected by or is in association with Jupiter or Venus; or. (2)
should Mars and Saturn be likewise possessed of strength and
benefic aspect and occupy the 2nd and the 10th houses from the
Lagna, the native will be encyclopedic, endowed with all the
virtues, highly acclaimed by the people, generous and a great
personality.
tadiagnRae aearadiaa daa
carfraaentatarh mame |
qget: TeHeHRa: AcTEeqaaAtafaar
UETIHUTA AMSA KaAtT az: =I
Sloka-9. In a birth chart, when Jupiter owns the 3rd and
the 12th Bhavas (Capricomm Asc.) he bestows every thing upon
the native. Similar will be the effect, when he enjoys the ownership
of the 8th Bhava or when he is posited in the 8th house. Venus
is good when he is in the 6th Bhava; Rahu will be favourable
when he will be in the 7th, 4th, 8th, 11th or the 10th house. Ketu
is most benefic when he is in the 3rd Bhava.
aaa fanalshiagenaand ash a

aaa: aaalnelerha: auRaadfaa: :
Aaa qisaeaeTiehfaate:
aaa fanaa Rafts saat wag leo
Sloka-10. When the lord of a house occupies any of the
Dussthanas, i.e., the 6th, 8th or the 12th, be in his fall or inimical house or be eclipsed, not conjoined or aspected by benefics, be in association with or aspected by his enemies, be in his
inimical or debilitation Amsa, be Vanquished in planetary war
with malefics and as a result has lost the brilliance of his rays
- such a Bhava should be declared as totally lost or fruitless.
Thus should be examined all the Bhavas from the Lagna onwards.
qaqaaidtanagen: ezfaaraifyar
faalaeagatan waaata fea: a}agy: |
Req aeaagaay a qagefaal at az -
waar agai aa eas waa | vi
Sloka-11. Whenever the lord of a Bhava occupies a Trikona
house, Kendra House, the 3rd or the 11th house, a friend’s
house, his exaltation, own Rasi or Navamsa or is placed betwixt two strong benefics, while the owners of these Kona,
Kendra, 3rd or the 11th houses are also similarly situated in
their exaltation; or the said lord is associated with or aspected
by benefics: such a lord will bring unsurpassed prosperity to
_ the Bhava and that too in a very short period.
ata) alae BiTRend WIAeafwa:
qa: afefacRaaa ast: abargedifaans |
qat aageedisranar: wWoraeceq:
aqua figttaqelahiaenaeifa seq 28
Sloka-12. When a Bhava, its lord, its Karaka planet, all
the three are hemmed betwixt malefics and are associated with
powerful malefics and are thus weak and have no redeeming

association or aspect of benefics; and should the malefics occupy
the %h, 4th, 8th, 5th and the 12th Bhavas counted from each of.
the aforesaid three, and the lords of the Navamsas occupied by
these malefics be inimically situated, eclipsed or defeated in
planetary war in that house, the destruction of that Bhava should
be pronounced.
waalaizazafaalnafed weaaanTay
neq: ateqarisg Wasaga faqasy: |
AHA AAAN TIANAATAT SIRF
awiganay at fram: alsarsty aerde: 1221
Sloka-13.When an auspicious planet occupies his own,
exaltation, a friend’s house or his Moolatrikona Rasi or a
Vargottama Amsa, it will enhance the prosperity of the native.
Even a malefic planet will prove auspicious under these conditions. When the planets, owning the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the lord of a Bhava, be endowed with power, he will
promote the effects of that Bhava. Any powerful benefic occupying a friendly Rasi and Amsa in any house will bestow upon
the native the wealth of effects related to it.
finan ubiaanrAggey
By enna: faggqra: eqeay alent: |
falaeaam: ge-aafan at aleazen aa
aaa RetaqeRarraeyeen: Jar: | Vv
Sloka-14. When a planet occupies the 12th, the 8th or the
6th Bhava, his Rasi becomes inauspicious; similarly, when the
lord of any one of these three Bhavas occupies or aspects a
house, its effects are totally lost. Venus, Mercury and Jupiter
in their order, when they respectively occupy the aforesaid
three houses will bring happiness. Planets in the 6th, 12th and
the 8th, when happen to be in their friend’s houses, own or
exalted signs, or be aspected by auspicious ones, will prove
beneficial. When the planets owning the said houses be inimical, be in their fall, be eclipsed or defeated in war, then the
planets occupying them will prove beneficial.

qial Tansey fafaa: waaiaal
‘UWHUElea: VUBAAN: TGaaeTAl |
qasefeadl ee: Graenal BG: alma
qzenst aq: aRenaeaay alas at aati 24 |
Sloka-15. When planets are in their infancy (with in first
6°), in their advance age (in last 6°); eclipsed and defeated,
though they might be aspecting yet do not aspect (see) at all.
Auspicious and inauspicious planets aspect dunng the bright
and dark periods of a month towards the East and West respectively. Jupiter is strong when aspects towards West. Saturn is
strong while in his direct motion. Venus and Satur though
eclipsed will not lose their strength. Mars is powerful even in
his enemy’s house.
eR MTIaadiaaa: ssshf alzar: war:
mialraafeaat tft adfeaat Asez |
maaan safeashesa
UA geadfuash zuzl a-atavial Aar ui 2 |
Sloka-16. When benefics occupy a Kendra Bhava,
the 3rd, 2nd, 11th, Sth or the 9th and even the 6th they prove
auspicious. This will be true of malefics if they are placed in
Upachaya houses. The Sun and Saturn will be favourable when
they are in the 9th, and Mercury, when in the 8th. Saturn, when
occupying his exaltation, own house, or a Rasi owned by Jupiter, will do only good even if he be in the Lagna. Venus, will
prove auspicious, if placed in the 12th, provided the Rasi or
Amsa occupied by him does not belong to Satur.
ditzy gaigasa aga: qorgstal mara
CRS AAAITATAMA AAD TAL |
atvaed afe aaha yadt aeTNa zat
gal uses a Raefast viata: ti go
Sloka 17. (a) The Waning Moon, (b) Mercury, (c)

Venus, (d) Full Moon and Jupiter become auspicious in
the ratio of 1/4, 1/2, 3/4 and 1 respectively. Jupiter and Venus
become fully beneficial when in the Bhava of an auspicious
planet and in association with the lord of the same. (On the
contrary) (a) Waning Moon and Mercury (when malefic), (b)
the Sun, (c) Rahu and Mars and (d) Ketu and Saturn promote
evil in the same ratio as stated above.
aatat canara Ager aafisrary a
Slanfzaaianaly aar aginaaceizat |
ATEHTHUA TST AANA NES AF
AACACEMANTITTS HET TF HAT ll Ve Il
Sloka 18. When the Phala Karaka and Bhava Karaka of
any house; the lords of the Rasi and Navamsa occupied by the
lord of that house and the house itself be hostile (Naisargika),
the effects of that Bhava will be destroyed.
Should a malefic planet occupy a Rasi belonging to a
Karaka, it will harm the effects of that Karaka planet. The
Bhava Karakas when occupying the houses, they are Karakas
for, will show only a small fraction of the (otherwise usual)
effect.
qufgsaaheqat: TITAS AIT:
qeafganisty UK Ba: Gi=BlEFle |
Oa ATA I AeIAGAAIeA AT
Ai AWARE: VE BAAN: VS
Sloka 19. The full Moon, Jupiter, Saturn and Ketu are
called Chhadakas_ for the two houses (2nd and 12th) adjacent
to each of them. Should Jupiter happen to be _ hostile to the man
concerned (being owner of a Dussthana) he will be a Chhadaka
only for the 12th. The rest are Chhadaka for the 2nd only. The
lords of the various houses and their respective Karakas become auspicious to the native due to the Sambandha between
them through aspect, occupation, association or mutual exchange
of their places.

AIK AIA A AANA RITA:
AMGHATIST FARAUIAITYM FIR: |
agey afaaraaisx aRaragaafeaal
Qiat WaIaAsaa FATA) BAIA Roll
Sloka-20 A planet in the 2nd place from a Bhava becomes
Chhadaka for that Bhava, while the one in the 3rd becomes
Vedhakz. He who occupies the 4th is called Bandhaka. The one
in the 8th is termed Pratibandhaka. From this planet in the 8th
should be predicted all about the prosperity and destruction of
the Bhava. The lords of the 2nd and 7th houses with respect to
any Bhava are known to be the Markas of that Bhava
isatane afew: warftatar eat.
agacmafad a a qdlareaaar aaq |
a
qigs Tans aahanKs alsa: Geaed
aleqacaanaa rat: AVIA: BAA ur
Sloka-21 The aspect of a friendly but malefic planet on
another is known as Swadheena Vedha, while that by an inimical but malefic is termed Paradheena Vedha. The results produced by benefics will be similar and be felt at the beginning
while the same caused by malefics will be some what untoward
and be felt at the end. General luck and the span of life will
correspond with the strength of the auspicious and inauspicious planets.
Ta caaqgay equal ey say ar faa
Famanst aya tafiga gales afaeaag |
gearaana Raangqaa-ataafaa
atalsat ofa: aaeafae ay usfathaz: 1 aah
Sloka-22 If in a nativity, (a) the lord of the 8th is in the
12th or the 6th; (b) lord of the 6th be placed in the 8th or the
12th (c) the lord of the 12th should occupy the 8th or the 6th;
(d) the said three lords when connected in any way by mutual

exchange of places, mutual aspect or association and are at the
same time free from such Sambandha with other planets the
native will not be less than a great king, dominating over other
rulers and will be renowned and wealthy
Sloka IV-22 Male
ES
In this chart, Venus, the lord of the 5th and 10th houses is the
Yoga Karaka occupying the Sth position from the 10th Bhava;
whereas the Sth house is 4th from him in the 2nd house, the Dhana
Bhava. He is associated with Mercury, the lord of the 9th and the 6th;
the Sun, lord of the 8th; Jupiter the lord of the 12th and 3rd. In short
the lords of the 6th, the 8th and the 12th have conjoined with the Yoga
Karaka, Venus in the 2nd place from the Lagna. This planetary
configuration has bestowed upon the native the status of a great
statesman in one of the leading Native States of India. The native had
untold wealth as the lord of the 9th was in the 2nd with Venus.
The. presence of Ketu in the Kalatra bhava has left a scar on
the lords of the 6th, the 8th and the 12th, being sixthevery way and thus
making them instrument of casting dark shadows on the life of the
native also. They caused an early demise of the wife and as a result
very disturbed domestic life.
qt Aladal: Bal dayar: Fezfaalafwar:

az: Pals BHAVATAMT AAseaT BAM
Cat QAR ATA: Cala? TATA aa
Hara: qysatezaue: aagaea: arf: Wz
Sloka-23 Should malefics be in their debilitation and
benefics possessed of great strength be in the Kendra and Trikona
Bhavas and if the lords of the 10th, 9th and 4th conjoin together
either in the 9th or the 10th, the native will be no less than a
king, most intelligent, fabulously rich, reputed, possessed of
great valour and long- living. He will be recognised and respected by other rulers; be virtuously disposed and omniscient.
wamzqaa aque eaifha zea
ARATE HAINT BWNfeA aaTzq |
aig Gaya faqiataf azaiaaaeaifta
A BAY AeleGaIG SA A AFHITT: Ul VV Ul
Sloka-24 The Ist, 4th, 7th and the 10th Bhavas are called
_ Kendras, Kantakas and Chatushtaya. the houses next to the
Kendras, ie., the 2nd, the Sth, the 8th and the 11th are termed
Panapharas. Those next to Panapharas, viz, the 3rd, the 6th, the
9th and the 12th are known as Apoklima. the Sth and the 9th
Bhaves are termed Trikona. the 3rd, the 6th, the 10th and the
11th are called Upachaya. the Bhava occupied by the Moon is
termed Janma Rasi, while the Lagne is called Adi or the Ist
house.
ezleat afaal Mat a Aad TeaKUHaezar
dasgatiaaatRarecqayalgzal: |
aaa aataal waeala: aA:
quz ag aeaaleadt ceufanafaal = A4 Il
Sloka-25 The Sun is of the character of God Siva and is
soul and father; the Moon is of the Goddess Sakti and is the
mother of all beings. The other 5 planets (Mars, Mercury, Jupiter,
Venus and Saturn) are the product of the Panchbhoota, - 5

elements such as; Prithivi, Ap, Teias, Vayu and Akasa. Jupiter,
Venus and Mercury have risen from Satva ; Mars has originated from Rajas or passion, while Saturn is from Tamas or
darkness. The Sun and the Moon are not the Marakas (deathgiving planets); but when they happen to own the 8th Bhava,
they cause much harm and become evil.
CeAMeaAy aaaarifearat: (ar ay aa
Tal Aizaar aay afe act ala) Belaleaaz |
aqafsaaifaaafasaay faafaaleitaat
aiuigaagasatafafiaiaracal samy ll R&I
Sloka-26 Should the benefics occupy the 6th,the 7th and
the 8th Bhavas counted from the Moon and the malefics are not
any where in these houses, the native will be a king or equal to
him blessed with every variety of happiness; long-living, victorious, widly reputed, leamed, with all the pleasures of the
world, including the wife, children, friends, houses vehicles
and other such luxuries.
FELATU3O BE(16 AF6)HA8)AS=C1 0 AAU | DAAC FTAA:
a qn _ °
TARVIN FaaAMai ers alzeyey |
azist a fancarnaad aiciat rad
TMH I AAI: Asan ass ez RO
Sloka-27 The figures 30, 16, 6, 8, 10, 12 and 1 denote the
Kalas (Rasmi or the quantity of rays) of the seven planets from
the Sun onwards. Sum up the Kalas of the lords of the 9th
Bhava counted both from the Lagna and the Moon. Divide this
sum by 12. The Rasi reckoned from the Moon indicated by this
remainder, when occupied by an auspicious planet singly, without
the association of any malefic, will raise the man concermed to
the status of a Koteswara; if by a malefic only, his wealth will
be in thousands. When this malefic happens to be in an exalted
position then also the native will be a Koteswara.
B(2)an(S)a(1 1 F(o)aeaet: Aa aaa a art:

aaeqqaa aa afeat saifag zaa |
quigeqa alagatz xaaa aaoiset:
aqaazamifanaana walaa wfeaq = Re I
Sloka-28 When two or more amongst the lords of the
2nd, Sth, 11th and the 9th Bhavas are so placed in a birth chart
that they become mutually related by any one of the three kinds
of Sambandha and also strong, the native will be amongst the
Lakhpaties. Should the lords of any of the three Triksthanas
chance to be one of the partners in the aforesaid Sambandha,
the effect will be total destruction of the wealth resulting into
debts and the trouble from the enemies as well. All this will
come to pass during the Dasas of the lords of the aforesaid four
Bhavas.
Sloka IV - 28 Female
Balance of Moon's Dasa 7 yrs. 7 months 10 days
Mark the Lords of the 2nd, Sth, 11th and 9th houses. The Sun, Mars,
Venus and Jupiter - in this nativity. The Sun, lord of the 2nd and Mars,
the lord of the Sth and Venus, the lord of the 11th have conjoined in the
9th in the sign identical with Pisces. There is mutual aspect between
Jupiter who is also the lord of the 9th house and the 4 Planets

occupying it. Mercury identifies himself with the planets he conjoins
and Mars isa Yoga Karaka Planet having mutual aspect with Jupiter.
They also happen to be the lords of the 9th and the 10th from the 9th
house. Rahu in the Cancer Lagna is note-worthy. The native is a very
brilliant student of a Public School and maintains the 2nd or 3rd
position in her class. This is a powerful Dhana Yoga and the native
will be happily settled in life. The planetary position is most auspicious and promise high education, Status, recognition and prosperity
in life.
agaifeaaga ant ashy wer: feat:
aMaaTEe a Bez aaa ad yaa: |
aq gtzafaa. aranerz lsh Goria
a laid Gaafeal Waar: Got a Aqaat = NAA
Sloka-29 When all the planets occupy the four Kendras
from the Lagna onwards and are in the four Panaphara houses;
all the Apoklima houses remain unoccupied by any planet, the
native concerned will be a king or the leader of men. When in
such a case auspicioius planets and the full Moon are not associated with or aspected by malefics, the native will be a lord
and praised by the good. If the planets are not powerful, the
native will comparatively be wanting in the above mentioned
Status.
Cage asa afk Masmnay fEaremeA’a
aie araiafaahtihaa aefaenfaa: |
faq quai wagnaniz zest Hzrart:
raaraa wafad a fe vagaifand aa! Ro Il
Sloka-30 When there is a birth at about 2 Ghatikas after
midnight or mid-day the native born will be a ruler who will
dominate his enemies, observe the holy rites, code of conduct
and be possessed of good education.
But, in the above case, when an exalted planet should
occupy the 2nd Bhava and be aspected by another similarly

situated one, the Yoga will generate a Koteashwara. But when
the aspect in the last case be of a plant posited only in his own
Bhava the native born will remain a Lakshadikaree only.
Maeq BWA fut fargeraiasaaa tat
tfheaicaasafuannasa cag |
mat 3) fay neaat fay aa: are faqaeaty
zaacaty qoacaagy ca: GS Ba: = tl 3k ll
Sloka-31 An immovable Rasi is stronger than a movable
one. A dual is much stronger than an immovable one. When
three planets are posited in three Bhavas. The aspects cast by
two of the planets over the third, being placed in a Chhadaka or
Vedhaka position will be increasing in power according as the
aspecting planet in each case is occupying a movable, an
immovable or a dual Rasi. The same rule will apply with respect to the effects caused by the planets from the three Bhavas. In the case of the three Drekkanas of a Rasi, if the said 3
planets are all in (a) the Ist Drekkana of a movable sign (b) the
middle one of an immovable and (c) the last one of a dual sign,
the result will be complete. It will be medium when they all
occupy the middle Drekkana of a movable sign, the last one in
an immovable and the ist in a dual sign. The result will be very
little when these planets are all in the last Drekkana in a movable, the Ist Drekkana in an immovable and the middle one in
a dual sign.
aimencaaaiaa faa) aanzaizay:
AeA AY WaIsanassleatarar |
Sy Beasq aazhea © wWayiacns
GUTAsAaAISA Geeag: 11 32M
Sloka-32 When two planets cause a Yoga - good or badit will be seen only if they are within 12 degrees of each other.
If the planet slower in motion is ahead of the other which is
faster and is also behind, the Yoga will become effective and
it will be full if the interval between these two becomes zero;

and it will be the nil effect, when the interval is again 12 degrees. It will be proportionate in the intermediate positions.
Should the faster planet be more than 12 degrees behind the
other, the effect of the Yoga will not come to pass.
aaMaaeaazsay a yer: wT
MAAN Hea aareaHaIgeretieaar |
Tsgeegq AM: AAAaale-ga AA Baa
TAETS Al ata lan GaUATM 1 33 Wi
Sloka-33 Should the Moon Possessed of strength cast only
applying glance (II - 18 - 19 Supra) at least on one of the two
planets causing the Yoga (IV - 31 Supra) with in the recommended limits, the result will be specifically marked. This will
not be found tme if the aspecting Moon be housed in any of the
Trik Bhavas. Planets cast their aspect on all the Bhavas; but the
best effect will be felt when they are posited in their exaltation
or own house. It will be medium when he is in a very friendly
Bhava and it will be very meagre if he is sitting in other houses.
Waa ATTA Tafa Te fags aadt—
AH RA JAYANT! Sq |
aq BAaAIAHMTTSSAas eI
aay RTA AAGIT TI AAATT Ml 3V et
' Sloka-34 Note the Rasi where the lord of a Bhava is posited.
The Pada of that Bhava will be as many Rasi removed from that
lord as the lord is from the Rasi signifying the Bhava. It is with
the help of this Pada and the auspicious and inauspicious planets occupying it, that the learned Astrologer has to compute the
prosperity or destruction of the Bhava. The 8 Padas should be
determined in this fashion in the case of the ist, 2nd, 4th, 5th,
7th, 9th, 10th and the 12th Bhavas. The Pada for the 12th house
from any Bhava is known as Upapada for that Bhava, and that
of the 7th as Darapada.

A QASIS BA BIA Bzlnaraaa:
TARRVNIIA WAR eat Heifiea: |
area faraar af ga: apefthe a
aa wate: Gags arafaaaifetg 8% I
Sloka-35 When the Lagnapada is auspicious, that is, the
house of a benefic and occupied by a benefic too, the native
will have all the comforts and good fortune. When a benefic
occupies the Kendra or Kona with respect to Lagnapada, the
native will be a king and a very learned man . When malefics
are placed in the Lagnapada, in its Kendras and Konas the
result will be quite contrary. This will again be true when malefics
occupy the 6th, 8th and the 12th houses from the Lagnapada. In
this way carefully investigate the good and bad results for all
the 8 Padas.
TaTASSATAVPTIC AY Hae ATT
THIMNMA aeQraraManessay |
at erTadaafeahe BegqaagTza
anasheeaeag gira gaafe ll 34
Sloka-36 In the same way the information regarding
children should be computed with the help of the Sth, 2nd and
the 9th Pada after a careful examination of the Bhavas, Jupiter
and the lord of Lagna (or the Padas of the Sth, 2nd and the 9th
reckoned from Jupiter and the lord of Lagna) and the Upapada,
and the association and the aspect of benefic. If there is no
aspect or association of malefics the native will have a good
number of issues. The sex of the children will be according to
the dominating strength of the various planets concemed.
Taleg Iaeecaty qaeaizadiagar
ea Gzry Pigl qetawaa aaa weasaa): |
Tag TATAS: Baad granfsas faa |
' Jearetgaprafala qaeased gar: | Ro I

Sloka-37 (1) When Mercury, Saturn and Mars are posited
in the aforesaid Padas, etc. or (2) be associated with their lords;
or (3) the same three planets occupy Rasi and Amsa of the
Bhava; or (4) if Saturn and Jupiter be together in a single house,
the loss of children is certain. The 10th house and its lord, if
associated with or aspected by Saturn, will cause the native to
have adopted sons. So say the wiseman.
Ret AAAAATAATA RIA TAALAT
Zatat 3 aur a: gathtaa wan cg: ass |
sageAT: Bia FE ag sae arg :
aastazaradaaaay sa yous fea ll 3¢ It
Sloka-38 All about the first wife should be devised from
the 7th Bhava from the Lagna; the 8th Bhava therefrom will tell
about the 2nd wife; similarly can be found out the death of
successive wives- when malefics occupy these Bhavas. If auspicious planets occupy the 8th Bhava from the Lagna, death
should not be predicted. The association or aspect of Jupiter
and other benefics will denote the number of wives living, their
respective children, their character and other qualities.
ag Renzermageyg aaa aby ac
asia fe gefuft anadt ar arfaesifet |
at fland FoTINS aE AAFE aS
welstaaat: DATTA ay Fa ala: GA: «1-48 tt
Sloka-39 Also, when the benefics are posited in the
Upapada of the 7th, the wife may be said to be beautiful, long
living and noble. When a malefic occupies the Upapada and is
in his fall, the man concern will suffer the loss of two wives. In
the case when the malefic is in his exaltation and aspected by
or associated with a benefic, the native will have many wives
living. When there is no such benefic aspect or association, the
native may not get married.

AISSTM ALATA Ta:
SAHTAMATSTIA TTS TTA |
amare <fa aafta gaat aaa ayaa
aq UKgawsedl I Fast Wand Aer vel
Sloka-40 All about the first wife should be investigated from the Darapada and its Upapada. Regarding the second wife information should be gathered through the 8th Bhava
from these two Padas. The wise recommend that the number of
wives who would be lost to the native should be divined through
the number of Papatva if any, in the Pada over and above those
in the Darapada. In the nativity where the Pada to be considered is highly Subha, it will be indicative of the particular wife
that she will promote the cause of the family, bring happiness,
she will be long- living and afford enjoyment.
SUTSTHATA aaa AAhaerANalsy
« Ryfeenrrgdagearegraag |
Qa RlaatgsFaaataea: RAIS’
seta: aagaregefeedt der et
Sloka-41 The number of Navamsas that have elapsed in
the 3rd house counted backward” from the Lagna, i.e., the 11th
Bhava, will denote the number of elder brothers or sisters whereas,
the number of Navamsas still to rise in the 3rd house reckoned
in regular order from the Lagna will indicate the number yet to
born. Regarding the sex of the issues (male or female) the wise
should divine according to the rules on the subject. The number
of those surviving or otherwise should be calculated from the
strength of the auspicious and inauspicious planets respectively.
auiftaact su eanaaias asta:
Maaaea tae eae aies: |
Crsiathal wat fasraaaany
alaragaraqaa agian gs ez Ml

Sloka-42 Note the planet from the Sun onwards that has
travelled the highest number of degrees in the Rasi occupied by
him. He is designated as Adhikagraha or senior planet in the
birth chart. Should the Sun associate with this Adhikagraha,
the native will be an adviser to the king. When this position is
taken by the full Moon and Venus, the man concerned will be
very rich, learned and blessed with all the pleasures of life.
Should Mars be in their place the native will carry arms, may
be a commander of an army or a worker in metals and a wicked
man
asa: Rerauceal qerzearmeeay ef
what aera faa: macerated |
draiasqasgafaqa aeaisheecage
ureasht am eal fasfreerenfeare se: Ne
Sloka-43 Should this planet be Mercury, the native will
be a great sculptor or a dealer in earthen jars and clothes. Should
it be Jupiter, he will be a sacred Brahmin performing Veda
duties and well versed in the Vedas and the other works related
to them. When Venus be such a planet, the native will be longlived, prone to excess sex pleasure. Should it be Saturn, the
man concerned will engage himself in all sorts of vocations.
Rahu or Ketu in a similar situation will make him clever in preparing medicines for poison and engaging himself in metals
and the like.
sere taMTEIAI AINA Az:
alata & We THAga: ateasharia wag |
aqerd wqefesmaafay a araeiaifae:
afenfaezfaranfafaaa atafealeatraa: = uve
Sloka-44 If in a nativity the 2nd house counted from the
Adhikagraha is aspected or occupied by the Sun and Venus, he
will serve in a palace. Should a malefic be in the 3rd house
from the Adhikagraha the native will possess valour.Instead,
should there be a benefic, the man concerned will be a very

timid man. When the Moon occupies the 4th house from
Adhikagraha and is aspected by Venus, the native will be a
great pilot or sailor. When the 4th house under consideration is
occupied or aspected by the Moon and Venus, the native will
be blessed with several storeyed buildings and the like comforts.
ARS QUAN Cal a Aras
Aterqaeash acfeia 3 wafeguifea: |
Uy Ted AA TST AATEC AAR at
ara agate qa ge v4 i
Sloka-4S. When the Moon and Venus occupy or aspect
the 4th house from the Adhikagrahapada, the native will own a
palacial building. if a planet in exaltation occupies this 4th
place. The result will be similar, but the native himself will
develop white and black leprosy. So should the wise predict
everything as stated above from an examination of the Rasi,
Navamsa, and Dwadasamsa where in the Adhikagraha is posited. A native’s profession and manliness shauid be predicted
through the planet possessing next lower oon and Amsas
from the Adhikagraha.
5— AN taas:
ZENIT: AAQARIA WatTqAs
Harare warresaryey aaa: |
SUpahaaAaavaNgaaa
AZIGIMPANE NaC SCS AAO: neu
arawhal a saa Aafataaay
aqiziafaarsa feafa waemicTeRal: |
Section V Relating to Action, Function or Doing.
About the Action, Function or Doing of the Bhavas and
the Planets.

Sloka-1-1 % The first Bhava stands for (1) Body (2) limbs
(3) happiness and misery (4) old age (5) knowledge (6) birth
place (7) fame (8) dream (9) strength (10) dignity (11) politics
(12) longevity (13) tranquility (14) age (15) hair (16) appearance (17) pride (18) livelihood (19) gambling for others (2)
stigma (21) honour (22) Skin (23) sleep (24) proficiency (25)
embezzlement (26) nature to insult others (27) freedom from
sickness (28) detachment (29) nature (30) agency (31) perseverence in cattle breeding (32) loss of sense of decorum and
(33) blame from one’s own castemen.
afaafaaniaaasincih aa
fagisasacamaaaaal gaael Bia: 2 8
alza safanal azarae ciacafarriera:
mera aaa f-afaasaisaqaranar: |
fraranigiaareafaaa aaa
TTA WIAA AIA U3
Sloka-1 %3 The second Bhava denotes: (1) speech (2)
wealth (3) faith in sacred tradition (4) supporting others (5)
nails (6) enjoyment (7) truth and false hood (8) tongue (9) eyes
(10) clothes (11) diamond (12) copper (13) gems (14) pearl
(15) determination (16) incense (17) family relationship (18)
trade (19) softness of speech (20) liberality (21) effort to acquire
wealth (22) friendship (23) friend (24) splendour (25) miserliness in spending (26) pleasant oratorical ability (27) scholarship (28) gold (29) silver (30) corn (31) modesty (32) setting
nose (33) firmness of mind (34) a close dependent (35) cycle of
life and death (36) living power and (37) finance.
ay Mae a aN saa AAA:
AATY FTATATSTT ACI Azt faa: |
aint ys: ACASABWSIGEA SANS
afecafrarnyage fienfrnel tq 0 8
arn eeaafgaqgera sae frets

ardaraquiamazesra Stradfanrg |
Sloka-4-4 % The following are to be determined from the
third Bhava: (1) Courage (2) brothers (3) battle (4) ears (5)
legs 6) roadside place (7) confusion of the mind (8) fitness (9)
heaven or paradise (10) causing sorrow (11) dream (12) soldier
(13) heroic valour (14) relatives (15) friend (16) wandering
(17) throat (18) taking unspoiled or purefood (19) partition of
property (20) omaments (21) nobility (22) learning (23) pastime (24) physical strength (25) gain (26) Physical growth (27)
noble descent (28) attendant (29) the part of the hand between
the forefinger and the thumb (sacred to the Manes) (30) maid
servant 31) short journey by a good vehicle (32) a large undertaking (33) one’s own religious duty.
farresaraeraacratateaalea—
TEAR SAH T TIER) atazar AAs % I
ata 4 a: qneaaeay aaa Reales
famalssaqzaeiaa: eaatgarat: Sfe: |
GAUIMTATaHITAA TAAAGIET
mec cm aka = RH
alas Rergesaaaftaren: Peaasadt
firey aa qralaa 3 aaal aia: 929teaT |
vHtealtaranaaten mafraatst—
SAGAS MAGA = I
Sloka- 4 %7 Learning (2) kingdom 93) house (4) travel
(5) vehicles like rickshaws and small boats (6) oil bath (7)
mother (8) relatives (9) friend (10) caste (11) garment (12)
well (13) water (14) milk (15) perfume (16) happy man (17)
goodname (18) a life saving drug (19) trust (20) false allegation (21) tent (22) victory (23) tiresome work (24) land and
agriculture (25) a garden (26) digging of a pond or well (27)
wells for the public use (28) mother’s side (29) sharp intellect

(30) father (31) wife (32) accumulation of wealth (33) a palacial house (34) art (35) house opening (36) conclusions (37)
disposition (38) damage to one’s property (39) paternal property (40) celestial food (41) art of disclosing where abouts of
stolen property (42) an ant hill (43) promotion of Vedic and
sacred lore (44) buffalos (45) cows (46) horses (47) elephants
(48) surplus corn, of grain produced and wet lands are to be
divined from the fourth house.
daa Mapasatian aah aa
frarraftastgeM ATTA |
aUMSrIRADARga Gha PA
Sraqeearaaaaay alee Ray llc ll
wefly gaat wahan Tarde
AAATTTHEAT AAT SATABIENT: !
FARNUAAGIMA AAAI A Iq
raaeaaaAaaqia: saaelaa lS ll
franaaeqaerqueralrnte aa:
META { ara AAeTIATA |
Sloka -8-9 % The following are to be investigated through
the fifth house: (1) progeny (2) father’s virtuous acts (3) a king
(4) a minister (5) good morals: (6) mechanical art (7) mind (8)
learning (9) pregnancy (10) discretion (11) umbrella (12) instructive stories (13) auspicious letters (14) garments (15) a
great desireable action (16) paternal property (17) foresightedness (18) fortune through wife’s luck (19) liasions with courtezans (20) profundity (21) firmness (22) secret (23) decorum
(24) writing of news (25) well-being (26) fmendship (27) a
long literary production (28) engaging oneself in any business
(29) belly (30) invocation through mantras (31) Uncountable
wealth (32) gift of cooked nce (33) discnmimation between
virtue and vice (34) chanting of Veda Mantras (35) Wisdom
(36) ability for criticism (deep pondering) (37) ways of earm-

ing money (38) a festive occasion when drum or tabor is played
(39) great contentment (40) profound learning (41) hereditary
post of minister.
Tal fanwonfantasatacaTeRlit s—
HIMERTTRSIMAAVAREAT: | ol
aeaaaETTaTe fegarasa aaa
fqaeaegeay agaacgisha Arey |
faaciaaaeaaaaaaan afqeiffa—
airfare: aa sarang tl ke
qacaeafiaeafarar qaqa
altmeaalaufeaeat ca: wwarakey |
Sloka -9 4-11 % (1) Disease (2) obstacle (3) fighting in
combat (4) maternal uncle (5) phlegm (6) swelling in the body
(7) cruel actions (8) insanity (9) a boil (10) enmity (11) miserliness (12) sickness (13) venereal wound (14) cooked rice (15)
weariness (16) debt (17) reproach (18) enemy’s satisfaction
(19) consumption (20) heat (21) a wound (22) mental worry
(23) intense anguish (24) enmity with many people (25) incessant eye trouble (26) receiving alms (27) untimely meals (28)
a fall from a boat (29) trouble and fear from one’s benefactors
(30) gain (31) exertion (32) poison (33) a severe colic or gout
(34) fetters (35) guarding of one’s own credit (36) urinary trouble
(37) dysentery (38) the six flavours (39) severe reproach (40)
service (41) theft (42) calamity (43) prison house and (44)
misunderstandings with brothers and the like are to be investigated from the 6th house.
sgecafran aigaaqiagigaleqa
anisagratiagsar weranameq | kk
ars FT TUNARC VATA
talagtaargs Ga I Wa We |

aitisa 3 aa TaayTala: ageicaraa
ala dlafagaafeaaararaty vq ll 23 Il
UCt AZATAATASAAASA TA
Ta Aaya AAAs Ma aaa |
Sloka-11/%- 13% The following are to be investigated from
the 7th house: (1) marriage (2) Unchastity (3) winning of a
love (4) enmity with a debauched female (5) deviation from the
right path (6) good perfume (7) music (8) flowers (9) taking of
savoury food and drinks (10) chewing betel leaves with areca
(11) break in a journey (12) curd (13) loss of memory (14)
acquisition of garments (15) semen virility (16) faithfulness of
the husband (17) a pair of wives (18) generative organs (19)
Urine (20) the anus (21) trade (22) sweet drink (23) tasting of
nectar, soup, ghee, etc. (24) gifts (25) loss of power and status
(26) victory over enemy (27) money kept in another place (28)
controversy (29) sexual union (30) adopted son (31) relishing
food prepared in ghee (32) foreign place (33) wife (34) all
secret pleasures due to sex (35) theft.
Har ateaquaal aaaa aeeaaea afe—
FST AL MBAS THETINT FAIZ UN ty |
Wa: aeaateaser: waVTAs
FS TASATIATE THUG ETEATAT NT:
aaraagt aa Paes Zale:
arg Saar secasaesaazeih J tl 94 |
faaaeeraaTaTgaareaeaal
Agiaaaaeay J Aad AANSeLAT
Sloka-13-154 It is from the 8th house that the following
should be predicted: longevity (2) happiness (3) defeat (4)
patrimony (5) an afflicted face (6) grief due to death of relatives (7) witch craft (8) quarrel over food (9) urinary disease
(10) calamity (11) brother’s enemy (12) wife’s sickness (13) a

tuft of braided hair (14) enemy’s fortress (15) misery (16) idleness
(17) punishment from the ruler (18) fear (19) loss of money
(20) returning a debt (21) unintentional receipt of other's money
(22) long standing property (23) meeting a wicked man (24)
Vice (25) killing of a living being (26) loss of limb (27) decapi_ tation (28) formidable affliction (29) mental anxiety from a
story (30) chain of misfortune (31) overdiligence in doing cruel
acts (32) battle and (33) great mental tension.
am adadaaraanaate aaealqar—
anifgafagigzansa fren ama: 8 I
Ta AVTAT AaB ALATA:
qie: azadafa: gage yagsaeaT |
aeaga Haare: wefaaeiea—
AMMNTAACERIIATT: FOTERA: 29 I
Sloka-15 44-17 (1) Giving alms (2) Virtue and religion (3)
pilgrimage (4) penance (5) reverence to elders (6) medicinal
drugs (7) conduct (8) purity of mind (9) divine worship (10)
hardwork to acquire learning (11) splendour (12) conveyance
(13) affluence (14) destiny (15) dignity (16) fable (17) travel
(18) holy baths (19) nourishments (20) good company (21)
happiness (22) paternal wealth (23) son (24) daughter (25) all
sorts of wealth (26) horses (27) elephants (28) buffaloes (29)
coronation hall (30) establishing the Brahminic faith (31) a
Vedic sacrifice (32) circulation of wealth are to be predicted
from the 9th house.
afisq qaraaisaaa aSacisafpar
glaey SaTHaMMaans BHT: |
We Tea fenegealen—
STATA Raa: BeIga: Ys Ul Ye Ul
Hint aMgehaa | Zee sea hrarcat
gzimaataael 4 caqrersafa: meh

Sloka-18-18 % (1) Trade (2) honour from the Sovereign
(3) riding a horse (4) athletics (5) Government work (6) service (7) agriculture (8) doctor (9) fame (10) depositing of a
treasure (11) sacrifice (12) Pre-eminence (13) elders (14) talisman (15) incantations (16) mother (17) magnitude of moral
merits (18) medicine (19) thigh (20) gods (21) accomplishment
of a spell (22) prosperity (23) adopted son (24) a lord (25) road
(26) honour (27) honourable living (28) a prince (29) fame
(30) teaching (31) seal (32) supermacy (33) subjection and
(34) the intension to command are to be determined from an examination of the 10th house.
Bas aafaacriTaBeaial Tela
eMaheafaaamal afaalnaay tt 2 |
fata aagasargat @ Fafa aa
agarararnmafiidiaant 4 |
ALR USSRA HATA ERAT:
TMAAIS TA AALS SAI AAiTA: Il Ro I
fafenfiaa: gemqay aat saat
SPICE CsceCLIECOE LALA
Sloka-18 %20% (1) Gain from all sources (2) wicked desires (3) all kinds of receipts (4) dependency (5) eldest brother/
sister (6) paternal uncle (7) worshipping deities (8) worshipping the good (9) learning (10) acquisition of gold and wealth
(11) extremely clever (12) paternal property (13) the knee (14)
a pre-eminent place (15) love of ornaments and pearls (16)
master’s wealth (17) loss of interest on capital (18) gold ornaments for one’s lady love (19) wisdom (20) ministership (21)
brother- in- law (22) gain (23) dawn of fortune (24) wish fulfilment (25) easy gain (26) cooking (27) desire (28) mother
(29) longevity (30) ear (31) the shank (32) beautiful paintings
and (33) the skill in practical arts should be looked into from
the 11th house.

Azagaacaustans sala a4
drergfaensaansia: fReafsa fig: 1 Re
qnicienamaastataswaseaa
ated | faTeaeTTASiMMsraAar: |
Ta: TAstaaRel Aaaaaad
Raaecaleatranehtal Teast RAT WR
taftaharatanaa aqateaay
amicakesafankamena Rg |
Sloka -20 %22 % (1) Awakening from sleep (2) mental
agony (3) the two feet (4) fear from enemy (5) imprisonment
(6) liberation from pain (7) discharge of debts (8) elephants
(9) horses (10) paternal wealth (11) enemy (12) entry into heaven
(13) left eye (14) people’s enmity (15) mutilation of a limb.
(16) gallantry (17) loss through marriage (16) renouncing the
couch (19) termination of the appointment (20) the place of
enemy’s imprisonment in chains (21) mental agitation (22)
wretchedness (23) harm (24) a blow to the idea of happiness of
the parents and brothers (25) discussion or dispute (26) anger
(27) physical injury (28) death (29) going to another place (30)
expenditure through all sources (31) loss of wife are the issues
to be deduced from the 12th house.
MEAT TAA Mga yA TATA?
PANAAIRTKE TAT FZ WAR I
Tae WeleaysefssraeemlatE
PRIA IA RAITT AAA TTT
HEI M TATA Aas ATT TN TTT:
dal saaaiqaar gestae = aR
Rel ae naaha: aRatardated TER
arrefartenzmyccatie gat: Be: |

CS: Tefarfiaasretat Usa FTAs Ie:
TNA AAAS ATTA: Ry Il
RIES: Aelgag fgMe: MirarMaawAaqeag Ca: |
Karkatva of Planets
Sloka-22 %25 % The following belong to the Sun: (1) The
soul (2) power (3) intense severity (4) fortress (5) good strength
(6) heat (7) splendour (8) fire (9) worship of Siva (10) courage
(11) thorned trees (12) being in royal favour (13) bitterness
(14) old age (15) cattle (16) wickedness (17) land (18) father
(19) taste (20) self-realisation (21) skyward look (22) one bom
of a timid woman (23) world of mortals (24) square (25) bone
(26) valour (27) grass (28) the belly (29) strenuous effort (30)
forest (31) half a year (32) eye (33) wandering over the mountains (34) quadruped (35) king (36) travelling (37) dealing (38)
bite (39) scorch (40) circular shape (41) eye disease (42) body
(43) timber (44) mental purity (45) lordship of the whole country
(46) freedom from disease (47) Lord of Saurashtra state (48)
ornament (49) disease in the head (50) pearls (51) Lord of sky
(52) short like a dwarf (53) lord of the East (54) Copper (55)
blood (56) kingdom (57) a red cloth (58) a stone (59) public
life (60) river bank (61) coral (62) strong at mid-day (63) East
(64) Mouth (65) long standing anger (66) capture of the enemy
(67) satvika (pure) (69) red chandan or saffron (69) hostility
and (70) thick cord.
af: geranagnaaaentacas—
TOCMIT AAT AEIa A aTNTFe: —L RR Il
fagt aleasmaaqraareaatacatt
AAl RISA TANTY AS THIAAT: |
qed aftarsiaeangama: anal
ad THIET alate: W2on

aafergrarcahtern: feast
SSME Sifaga aalsactana age aa: |
arava AR fachgage feuaiaiga:
caficferaneqelaarartie aey aq: I Re II
Aa Mareeaaay za z Aeqraz:
STIATAsghe AAAI |
darn ae: adiqaegs afrerageg
TaRahienad Wes aq AH gq: 1 2¢ 1
Sloka-25-4-29 (1) Intelligence (2) flower (3) good perfune (4) going to a fortress (5) disease (6) Brahmin (7) idleness
~ (8) Phlegmatic humour (9) epilepsy (10) enlargement of the
spleen (11) mental disposition (12) heart (13) woman (14) virtue
or vice (15) sourness (16) sleep (17) happiness (18) any thing
like water (19) silver (20) thick sugarcane (21) typhoid (22
travel (23) well (24) tank- (25) mother (26) impartiality (27)
mid-day (28) pearls (29) consumption (30) whiteness (31)
waistband (32) bell-metal (33) salt (34) short stature (35) mind
(36) ability (37) pond (38) diamond (39) winter season (40) a
break of 48 minutes ((mahurata)) (41) facial lustre (42) white
colour (43) belly (44) worshipping Goddess Gaun (45) honey
(46) joking (47) nourishment (48) wheat (49) pleasure (50)
splendour (51) face (52) sharp in thought (53) love of curd
(54) mendicant (55) fame (56) beauty (57) strength at night
(58) facing westward (59) learned (6) saline (61) getting a job
(62) love for west (63) the middle world (64) nine gems (65)
middleage (66) life (67) eating (68) going to far off countries
(69) ailment of the shoulders (70) Umbrella or any other royal
insignia (71) good fruits (72) blood purity and vitality (73) fish
and other water creatures (74) serpent (75) silk garments (76)
good budding (77) brilliant things (78) clean crystal and (79)
soft and velvety clothes-all these belong to the Moon.
ala yaaraaasanitaadiae—
MN GerATAAT Se TTTBATAA?

MUA Meaqatad Nal Acs
qa: Hifagaarasaal aalwavaa: tl Re I
asngqaaaaeaeaqaneary
facarargagqadarmaag:gza aft: |
TANUIAY Val SEITE Fala
nial sizaa fgaafiawm Raed weg ak tt
taaqueahges mMefaANs wy
ate maqeadl aaraTl MaTAaeaAT |
UMANEATS PATAATSNT: TY
SqMAgaaa FIIs aaa WH
wa arafaaaaafesaea 4 affena:
HARING AT: DAH? Has |
MAMAS? EAT TAaIAE:
ay ce thaaaanyaa afeaqaaiaenar N32 I
WEVA ATTA MIM yay—
TAASZRTS FACAAT Tl Ae |
Sloka-30-33 % (1) Prowess (2) land (3) strength (4)
carrying arms for the battle (5) Kingship (6) loss of verility (7)
thief (8) battle (9) hostility (10) enemy (11) generosity (12)
love for deep red colour things (13) owning a garden (14) sound
of a trumpet (15) affection (16) quadruped (17) king (18) fool
(19) anger (20) going to a foreign country (21) firmness (22
supporter (23) fire (24) controversy (25) bile (26) heat (27)
wound (28) service under a ruler (29) day (30) sky (31) seeing
(32) shortness (33) disease (34) fame (35) tin (36) sword (37)
lance or spear (38) minister (39) fracture of a limb (40) jewel
(41) praying to God Subrahmanya (42) youth (43) pungent
(44) Durbar Hall (45) earthen pots (46) obstacles (47) flesheater (48) caluminating others (49) victory over enemy (50)

bitter (1) strong at the end of the night (52) gold (53) summer
season (54) valour (44) enemy’s strength (56) profundity of
character (57) strength (58) man (59) tendency (60) God Brahma
(61) axe (62) forester (63) Village headman (64) state inspeclion (65) pain while passing urine (66) square (67) goldsmith
(68) rogue (69) burnt place (70) good dinner (71) leanness (72)
deft in archery (73) blood (74) copper (75) a beautiful cloth
(76) facing South (77) inclining towards South (78) desire (79)
anger (80) scandal (81) house (82) an army commander (83)
Sataghni, a weapon (84) a tree (85) Sama Veda (86) brother
(87) spade or hatchet (88) looking after the wild animals (89)
independence (90) persistency (91) land (92) judge (93) serpent (94) world (95) speech (96) fickle mindedness (97) mounting a vehicle (98) sight of blood (99) coagulation of blood, all
these and many more things have been credited by the wise as
belonging to Mars. |
faidtaaqgnaaagah wags
qld feeeaqsaqz WaT U 28H
fa casalfagdiaaiaaaaagenear
WMST WIM BaP Ariaararaen:
Gata F agaaraga qaigeiarea
avagfaraecufara: aozirat a: ou 34 I
fauszitqanalafazisiadar ada
afmeaaamatezaa: SAN: TE:
aaa yaa Tl aieae TAT PSD
faclaaay eiaasa HI AAA | BK
HEMATKAM TY TaIMAaAGE aa:
AEN MAAC: AATHAR WARE:
ATM RTA HEAT aMeeT
faziemidenaaaaneraatat: attaa: ll 29 I

Sloka-34 .:-37 Mercury rules over (1) education (2) horses
(3) treasury 94) mathematics (5) wisdom (6) speech (7) Brahmin (8) infantry (9) writing (10) new garment (11) palatial
building (12) green colour (13) sculpture (14) astrology (15)
pilgrimage to holy places (16) wise lectures (17) temple (18)
trading (19) best ornaments (20) courteous speech (21) Vedanta philosophy (22) maternal-grand-father (23) bad dreams
(24) eunuch (25) facing North (26) skin (27) wet. (28) bellmetal (29) renunciation (30) Ritu (season) (31) a beautiful house
(32) doctor (33) neck (34) influencing through recitation of
mantras (35) child (36) crooked look (37) heaven (38) modesty
(39) paternal relation (40) fear (41) dancing (42) devotion (43)
humorous temperament (44) powerful in the moming (45) Hemanta Ritu (46) stone to sharpen knives (47) tranquility (48)
navel (49) family prosperity (50) mixed items (51) proficient
in Telugu language (52) worship of lord Vishnu (53) Sudra
(54) bird (55) after- born (56) depth of a language (57) the Directions (58) Atharva Veda (59) religious action (60) tower
(61) dust (62) garden (63) pudendum virile (64) even (65) benefic
(66) moving in villages (67) impartial nature (68) fond of NorthWest quarter (69) well versed in the legends of the past (70)
specialist in grammar (71) expert in testing of the precious
stones (72) a scholar (73) maternal uncle (74) sacred prayer
(75) an amulet and (76) spells of a high order.
yeaaTSaHcaT Tea
diatay Afrafarersenersara 33:
aqeafarga trast ted tay
aera starmaegerraTen ayer: Nac
stgarghatafarnt ta afin
TENA asa AMS eATSI:
ara waGTRITANTEICEAA Fae
Ma maanafyaaaraezaeam: i 3g il
Hazy aeaTey atiaqeatea Teaafea-

eta AZGAMABAT BWA WEY |
Et: astasnicaigeaaiacae faa
AAANAAABSTSAA: Was sar li vo Il
AMINES AIA: AT AGATA
da aaa a eaanssrasaifee: |
MALAITA NA AAT TANT
ANUNAAACT ATA EAA Jz: uve
Sloka 38-41 (1) Brahmin (2) Guru (3) one’s duty (4) Chariot
(5) cow (6) infantry (7) savings (8) Meemamsa (9) treasure
(10) horse (11) curd, etc. (12) large body (13) Valour (14)
reputation (15) logic (16) astrology (17) son (18) grandson
(19) dropsy (20) wealth of elephants (21) philosophy (22) great
grand-fathers (23) palacial house (24) gems (25) eldest brother
(26) grand father (27) Lord Indra (28) cold season (29) wrath
(30) jewel (31) merchant (32) physical health (33) a beautiful
mansion (34) royal honour (35) thigh (36) Gods (37) penance
(38) charity (39) religious duty (40) helping others (41) impartiality (42) facing North (43) circular (44) yellow colour (45)
moving in villages (46) North (47) close friend (48) swinging
(49) orator (50) fat (51) old garment (52) a new house (53) happiness (54) old (55) Mantras (56) twice born (57) holy water
(58) knee (58) movement in heaven (60) a house granting all
comforts (61) intellect (62) proficiency in learning (63) literature (64) tower (65) charming an audience (66) throne (67)
installation of God Brahma (68) strong at all times (69) month
(70) Vessels (71) Lapis Lazuli (72) fruits of Agnisthoma rite
(73) sweet juice (74) being Good (75) happiness (76) misery
(77) length (78) gentleness (79) reading other’s mind (80) gold
(81) omamentation (82) device (83) wind (84) phlegm (85)
topaz (86) vedic text (87) brilliancy (88) softness (89) a stone
(90) worship of lord Shiva (91) performing one’s religious duties
and (92) travelling in a well-decorated carriage,fall these are
assigned to Jupiter.

AaAeBrgaaiear faqeiafsneaigar
a} UqaHOARIZRIASAVST TNH: |
aifaalaan arataaaafaaieatfeaAITeTAU AAT ATI ITIT TT: URI
aq RaAHAl: AABN Asa
magn farsa sa a aey ag: |
fig AITEATACANAA Taf: tan
yar aafaRaaifaagaiisanaaqa: 11 83
Amtrak aeaaaraa ga
ACMA ALMA TENTa: |
aq Aaas: Fair ta aoafeal
uediafagaaaag aes: = ee
PASHAN AERTA MAHAL
THAIN) AMAT MAAZIOU:
Téafaaa ifeagePaean armas:
SOME] TA AT QAAT: MAseT? ZAG ti V4 I
TM YA AAMSEATT TTT IET TAT
aifiaeaeg tagita aa azz |
Sloka 42-45 Venus presides over (1) white umbrella (2) a
good chowrie (3) garment (4) marriage (5) income (6) a biped
(man) (7) woman (8) Brahmin (9) Subha (10) Whiteness (11)
wife (12) sexual happiness (13) short (14) sour (15) flower
(16) command (17) fame (18) Youthful vigour (19) Vehicle
‘(20) silver (21) South-East quarter (22) saltish (23) ogling (24)
scratching (25) half a month (26) the quality of passion (27)
strong (28) pearl (29) Yajur Veda (30) Vaisya (31) beauty (32)
buying and selling (33) love-making (34) watery resort (35)

elephant (36) horse (37) variegated colour (38) poetry (39)
dancing (40) middle age (41) singing (42) enjoyment (43)
happiness from the wife (44) gems (45) fond of humour (46)
swimmer (47) servant (48) luck (49) variegated lustre (50) a
handsome Youth (51) Kingdom (52) scents (53) garland (54)
Veena (55) flute (56) amusement (57) lovely gait (58) eight
kinds of wealth (all sorts of pleasures) (59) well formed limbs
(60) sparing in meals (61) spring season (62) ornaments (63)
inclined towards maintaining several women (64) eye (65) truth
speaking (66) proficiency in art (67) semen (68) water sports
(69) profundity of character (70) Pre-eminence (71) sharp-witted
(72) musical instrument (73) decoration for the stage (74) fond
of amorous sports (75) broken health (76) love, as chief business :(77) greatly respected and highly esteemed (78) fondness
for white garments (79) Bharat Natyama (80) Government seal
(81) a lord (82) worshipping Goddess Parvati and Lakshmi
(83) sexual pleasures (84) gentleness (85) much emaciated (86)
day sitting mothers (87) literary composition, deft at writing
poetry (88) black hair (89) auspicious (90) mysterious or genital
organs (91) urine (92) moving in the region of good serpents
(93) afternoon (94) knowledge of the generative organs and
the secret connected with it.
sienfeataaaanasaiasanh & |
Say ufadazaansialeaaia: 1 vz i
sear fanatsat wast Mucaqaati—
aga aaqaRraTaMeaataae hel: |
mara hadarrma eager
TAMIA = BO I
HAN eapemanaaaesara TE
TEHAAMAAMTASAAT SoTL
ala wa a fiaaraathaelcadacat:
aa Achaaralsagafaadage: geqar ll ve I

dieq arqaqarigaga dsflaaraaa
spleet afishaarqayeaiaafe: aan: |
sqieafsaaialaida aaa
aeq aaazetamadest Ainaesht qo BS.
qremiamanaa 4 farqaacaiaeas
HRzaRacegaaar: asa wa |
simian afenead cfaral aateagrear
BTU: Hlsasa Ta: ll Yo
Sloka 45 %-50 = =The following are ascribed to Saturn:
(1) laziness, etc. (2) obstruction (3) horse (4) elephant (5) skin
(6) gain (7) proof or witness (8) distress (9) sickness (10) misunderstanding (11) misery (12) death (13) happiness through a
woman (14) maid servant (15) asses and mules (16) outcaste
(17) one with disfigured limbs (18) haunting woods (19) handsome
look (20) gift (21) a lord (22) a portion of life (23) eunuch (24)
one born of the lowest caste (25) birds (26) the three sacred
fires (27) a servile duty (28) unrighteous conduct (29) one
without manliness (30) telling lies (31) long lasting (32) wind
(33) old age (34) tendons and muscles (35) strong at the end of
the day (36) Sisira Ritu or winter (37) great-anger (38) exertion (39) born of a very low mother (40) bastard (41) Golaka
(42) dirty clothes and house (42) wicked mind (44) friendship
with the wicked (45) black colour (46) evil (47) cruelty (48)
ashes (49) black grains (50) gems (51) iron (52) nobility (53)
a year (54) Sudra (55) Vaisya (56) one representing the father
(57) learning the trade of another class (58) crippled (59) sharp
(60) a blanket (61) facing West (62) life saving drugs (63)
downward look (64) living by agriculture (65) arsenal (66) a
student belonging to another caste (67) external position (68)
fondness for the North-Eastern quarter (69) serpent world (70)
downfall (71) lost battle (72) wandering (73) a spear (74) lead
(75) misdirected strength (76) a Turk (77) worn out (78) oil
(79) wood (80) Brahmin (81) the Tamas (82) travelling through
forests and over mountains (83) hard-heartedness (84) fear (85)

long standing distress (86) hunter (87) ugly hair (88) entire
sovereignty (89) alarm (90) goats and the like (91) buffalos
and the like (92) indulging in sex pleasure (93) dressing oneself for amorous appeals (94) worshipping God Yama (95) dog
(96) theft and (97) cruel-hearted.
BA WATE FAS CAATAM:
VAM TIANATIS! Gad TAC HY |
GHA gaAAg aleagenrsa
sHzUMBUISE! TAVererslat qa 1 4f Il
eenangied faradarciigcier afe:—
aa Tatelefeanfeenea stein: |
ier Adafiadl aaegua: sama)
Sal agaaMaletadiaial ages =H RI
BAVARIA TA TMUUAB! FEA
RRA IZhATASTSNsey HIATT TT:
Sloka 51-52% (1) Umbrella (2) Chowrie (3) kingdom
(4) gathering (5) fellacious argument (6) hurting by speech (7)
downcast (8) wicked woman (9) decorated vehicle (10) an
imcligious man (11) gambling (12) strong at twilight (13) ininguing with a wicked woman (14) going abroad (15) impurity
(16) bone (17) enlargement of spleen (18) falsehood (19)
downward look (20) perplexity (21) emerald (22) facing the
Southern quarter (23) shelter of outcaste or low people (24)
painful swelling (25) a big forest (26) wandering in mgged
places (27) mountain (28) pain (29) staying outside (30) tending towards South-West (31) wind (32) phlegm (33) sorrow
(34) serpent (35) night breeze (36) sharp (37) long (38) reptile
(39) reading of dreams (40) travel (41) a Muhurata (42) old age
(43) a vehicle (44) world of serpents (45) mother (46) father or
maternal grand-father (47) air (48) an acute or sharp pain (49)
catarrh (50) breathing (51) great prowess (52) forest (53)
worshipper of Goddess Durga (54) wickedness (55) cohabita-

tion with quadrupeds (56) Urdu script (58) harsh words. These
belong to Rahu.
qodaarancifegrgeainiaal Fae
da: HETTTIMAAReasAfasat: == |B I
NAPAAATANShasanz aay faseal:
TUM ANAT MAA aaa |
grasafaazaaozganaiata ala
qraAshaanaaahghe any YY
ara | Rareachasemesren ea:
qarifahegraasganat tangas |
Sloka 53-54 % ~=+From Ketu the following may be looked
for : (1) Worship of God Chandeesa, God Ganesha and many
other gods (2) doctor (3) dog (4) a cock (5) vulture (6) salvation (7) all kinds of wealth (8) consumption (9) pain (10) fever
(11) bathing in the Holy Ganges (12) great penance (13) wind
(14) a Hunter (15) friendship (16) conferring of prosperity (17)
stone (18) wound (19) witchcraft (20) inconstancy (21) knowledge of Brahma (22) belly (23) eye-sore (24) stupidity (25)
thorn (26) deer (27) knowledge (28) observing silence as a fast
(29) philosophy (30) all sorts of luxuries (31) luck (32) trouble
from enemies (33) loss of appetite (34) indifference to the world
(35) paternal grandfather (36) hunger (37) severe stomachache (38) boils and the like skin troubles (39) revoking the
orders of arrest and (42) the association of Sudra.
6. FATA:
ax chaatstafiaaaa fa ay afiuhteq TWITTA WIsITa Gtsaawh Bald |
din ar fafaer aa @ gfear avar ay star aay
Ze UifeRar Gar eqeiy ar IAIN Aa N81
SECTION 6 —The Dasas and their effects.

Planets in a Rasi can be found in one of the following nine
Avastthas or conditions:-
Sloka-1 (1) Deepta - blazing : When the planet
is in his exaltation
(2) Stimita - Peaceful : when he occupies
his own house
(3) Mudita - happy : when he is ina
dear friend’s house
(4) Santa - Calm : When he is in a
friend’s house
(5) Heena - deficient : whenis ina neutral’s
house
(6) Dukhha - dejected : when he is in an enemy’s house
(7) Vikala - failing : when he conjoins a
malefic
(8) Khala - base : When he is defeated
in war
(9) Kopa- - angry : when he is eclipsed
by the rays of the
Sun
gry CGY WITETA at alfa WAT
atalsa ¢ Sara fe cargearfefagiaa |
TURAL ATAAIT Ze WaT MATS
74 Tigheafaacnie ga mga =| 8
Sloka-2 The fruits of the past Karmas of a native due to
his virtuous or vicious actions are denoted by the Dasas and
Bhuktis of planets (in his birth chart). Therefore, the Dasas of
the planets should be sub-divided and the results taking place
during their course should be known so that he may obtain the
desired happiness by performing necessary Shantis to get over
the evil if there be any.

ahs aa atsaaAfagarawar: BAA
qehRuangaoaard AACA ABN |
ara ata aarrs tqty ageaezTy afgurmadaaefsarateasaiay fF eae = 2 A
Sloka-3 The Sun, the Moon, Mars, Rahu, Japiter, Saturn, Mercury, Ketu and Venus are in their order the lords of the
Dasa-periods of years denoted by the numbers 6, 10, 7, 18, 16,
19, 17, 7 and 20 respectively in years. The particular Dasa with
which the native has to start at birth is obtained in the following
manner: count from Krittika till the natal star (occupied by the
Moon at the moment of birth) inclusive and divide the number
by 9. The remainder will represent the lord of the Dasa at birth
counted from the Sun onwards.
aauinnaean faaaraaematear
mer: Ween gat faaitarassaukyaag |
aaatuaaeer faateaftaiar aac:
aa aieafitia: weaftfiars arneq 8
Sloka-4 Note the number of Ghatikas, etc. still to pass
of the asterism at birth; divide the same by the total Ghatikas
taken by the Moon to pass through that star. Multiply this portion
by the relevant Dasa-period referred to in the last sloka. The
quotient will be the number of years yet to pass in that Dasa.
The remainder if multiplied by 12 and 30 will give the Dasaperiod in months and days required.
qaeaecaica feat aan: gagxRa—
wararsfaany fafa aaa ea fe saga: |
azalmea fedtgar Higa aaeaatieat
aera Rea faazagal Aa fear aaq tl & I
aqgaeacaeash aaa faaasfa az
Tara ateateechte aralsa) aster arg |

Sloka 5-5 % Multiply the Dasa-years of a planet by the
Dasa-years of the other planet whose Bhukti or sub-period is
desired. The product will be in 2 or 3 digits. The number
denoted by the first two digits, in the case under study, will be
the number of months contained in the Bhukti, and the last digit
multiplied by 3 will give the required days etc. The periods of
all the Bhuktis in the several Dasas should be prepared in this
mannér. Convert the Bhukti period into days and multiply the
same by the number denoting the Dasa-years of a planet. Take
a moiety of the product. This will indicate the Vidasa or Antara
of the Planet in terms of Ghatikas etc. and when this is divided
by 60 it will denote the period in days. The Sukshamadasa
should also be similarly calculated, and the peculiarity is that
the numbers each below the other in their order will signify the
Sub-period in days, Ghatikas and Vighatikas.
Example: Jupiter’s Bhukti period in the Dasa of Venus is obtained by multiplying-16 x 20 . The product is 320 and this
means 32 months and nil days.
Similarly calculate ‘the sub-period of the Moon in the
above Jupiter’s Bhukti in the following manner.
Convert the 32 months into days, thus: 32 x 30 or 960
days. Multiply it by 10, the Dasa period of the Moon, and take
into consideration only a half of the product ie., 960 x 10 x 1/
2 = 4800. This will denote the number of Ghatikas of the Moon’s
Antar. When this is converted into days, it will be; 4800 + 60
or 80 days
aaipecat safe aadtasifeankaa—
qaaanfadkeweamianiage 1 & Il
ata: Waeaaefataalnderaaa—
Tiftalanhaniaanherfearne aay
Sloka 5-64 When the Sun is auspiciously posited in a nativity, during his Dasa period, the man concerned will have
sons, intelligence, wisdom, status and powers, knowledge, wealth,
fame, valour, happiness and divine blessings. Should this Sun

be in an inauspicious position the native will pass through great
hardships, making all his efforts useless, causing waste of money
and loss of position. Both the disease and enemy will trouble
him, he will incur royal displeasure, ill-health to father and
many other similar misfortunes will take place during this period.
AAHLTAM Fla Aadiyaaziatfan:
Aqitaveagaachaaaraeay = 9: I
geal: WIA AelAH IMMA AAIAg
TMAAT TAR sacl afaaiasatry |
Sloka 6 %7 % Should the Moon be auspicious, the mother’s
prosperity and the building of tanks and the like may be expected. The native will get lands, gardens, houses, the blessings of good Brahmins, wealth, prosperity and joy-rides or
palanquins. When this Moon is unfavorable, the man concerned
will suffer from the want of food, will lead a miserable life,
devoid of pleasure and wealth, suffer from diseases; will be
lacking in wisdom and will be loathed; suffer the loss of his
mother, will lose temper and develop fevers like typhoid.
aMpecat BU aguanfeaearaa—
AMATI AAW HATA aay ell
ARTE Ree AaraaraAT—
fadinfgadiedicasamafetaaay |
Sloka 7 %8 % The Dasa of Mars, if auspicious, will give
‘he native lands, wished for things, knowledge, a clear mind.
prowess, wealth, destruction of enemies and advent of brothers. Should this Mars be unfavourable there will be distress to
brothers, misunderstandings, quarrels, troubles through lands,
danger from fire, wounds, weakening of eyesight and the like,
trouble from Government, misunderstandings with good people
sword cuts and ailments.
aleakeszal aaa aaaraaaaaega—
Wa: aleagemagfaaradicvanagy = 8

Tea Weal Aamaplaaa-yaa—
aqtelaafthsaaaeeeeatsargiia: |
Sloka 8 %9 % When in a nativity Mercury is auspicious,
the native will get, during his Dasa, garments, limitless wealth,
com, position, prosperity, happiness, mansion relations, success and fulfilment of wished for things and objects. If he is
malefic, the man concemed will go to a foreign country, be
short-tempered, suffer the loss of relations, intellectual diminution, get trouble from the trading class, have disputes, suffer
the loss of land and money and many more calamities
fakeeca aaa fagemaanceaafataraqaranfuatarara fe Ragaay ll Qo Ul
Fear Wagar ydlgranerhagasgar
qaqa fasaegagaagalg
Sloka 9 %-10 % When Jupiter is auspicious he makes the
man concerned the headman of the village, blesses him with
children, wealth and prosperity. He will possess all the virtues
on earth, will have many dependents, horses, joyrides and other
comforts. Should this Jupiter be inauspicious , he will get royal
displeasure, mental agony, sickness, loss of courage, want of
com and money; displeasure of Brahmins, that of his own father, trouble for want of proper meals and consumption.
alat ageat Hof gaalan, saree) feat
Sates eaaauarataraa, = Bet
ata Wea FarAasaastathset—
Braraqaaaagedaa UUs |
Sloka 10 %11 % A favourable Venus will usher in happiness, prosperity, high status, joyrides or palanquins, the eight
kinds of wealth, anxious to be virtuous in a very high degree,
have gold, garden, horses, music and festivities. Should this
Venus be malefic, it will cause trouble to the wife. The native

will be inclined to do all wicked deeds, suffer the loss of wealth
and there will be a big theft in his house. He will commit blunders; remain sick from the incureable diseases for a long time
due to his intrigues with women folk. |
Ha T BOA ArquarieasfesAAMAGUMATHAEAITMGHY tt VU
ard waRasamaageaadgiens
TaAlaegaa fart MUTANT |
Sloka 11 %-12 % When Saturn is posited in a nativity in a
very auspicious position his Dasa will prove prosperous, will
grant him intelligence; he will make many sacrifices (yagyas).
He will possess lands and become the headman of the village or
a small town. He will rise to be a big merchant or clever in
multifarious activities and will be very enthusiastic. If this Saturn
is malefic there will be poisoning, loss of wealth, trouble in
body, etc. and state displeasure. He will indulge in forbidden
acts, cripple himself and suffer from diseases etc. causing great
hindrances.
URETM BOG aHaTATAIsTH
Salginagaddasanawaagad = 23
Ue: Wasa: aatetraufsBAIA frtrargaqaeifaatieiear, |
Slokka 12 %13 4% When, in any nativity, Rahu’s Dasa
proves auspicious he will bestow on the man concemed all
round prosperity, a high position of authority, all sorts of virtues and wealth. The native will visit the holy shrines, will
acquire sacred knowledge and power. Should this Rahu be
untoward, the native will have to face danger from reptiles,
poison, disease and ailments all over the body, danger from
missiles and fire, opposition from the mean, a fall from the tree
and suffering at the hands of the enemies.

aqeegar wife faxagePaarataeoeMaaasqapasqaMAyATNT «1 LV Il
Sal: Trazarshae rere
<parlusatartafgaaasmtaareat |
Sloka 13 4-14 4% During the Dasa of Ketu, when he is auspicious, success will be assured in all directions; there will be
acquisition of wealth through bloody acts, favourable fortune
through a foreign king, efforis for poetical compositions and
the destruction of the enemy. When Ketu is adverse he will
bring in miseries in the life of the native, he will make fruitless
efforts; will do unprofitable things; suffer loss of position;
rheumatism or sharp pain in the heart, tuberculosis, trembling
all over the body, misunderstanding with the Brahmin folk and
will commit worst of the follies.
saranda a AaAcaenaaTeat aA:
wat daadifaat Razaaie fF aegaal | 4 I
Aamanal faaloafageeed aarqeact
aziaaramusaan seg aaa sa |
Sloka 14 %15 % Note the following :(1) Should Rahu or
Ketu be in a Trikona -Sth or 9th from the Lagna- and be associated with or aspected by the lord of the 2nd or the 7th, they
cause death during their Dasa; (2) when they occupy the 7th or
the 2nd house in association with or aspected by the lord of the
Sth or the 9th, they bless the native with wealth and longevity.
Again, when Rahu or Ketu are in the 2nd or the 7th (3) any
malefic planet be associating with the planet owning the 2nd
or the 7th house, his Dasa will cause death to the native.
eat safarzeaal Bagh tefaanat—
Tal a acta afe aal: qasaqeisaaay 12 & I
aaa emaqieqacatiaa salar
AMAIESIAY A AAadi ATA |

Sloka 15 %-16 % (1) When Rahu and Ketu are posited in
dual Rasis and the lords of those Rasis or Rahu and Ketu are
associated with the lords of Kendras or Konas, the man concerned during the Dasa period of Rahu and Ketu will get wealth,
power, etc.(2) and if they be associated with or aspected by the
lord of the 6th, 8th or the 12th there will not be much gain to the
native, besides this Dasa will become instrumental for the demise
of the native’s mother or that of any other near dear relation on
the mother’s side.
aaa furaaaaaal texfaaronfay—
TRAIAN FT? PAYS A AlrAEaVag? 120i
qqamanigal fanacl sfaag: aleaat
al gt wqaatmal aagal eat aarawal |
Sloka 16 4-17 4 (1) The same two planets (Rahu and Ketu)
when occupying a fixed or a movable Rasi and associated with
planets owning a Kendra or a Trikona Bhava will endow with
good fortune during the Dasa of one of the two occupying a
benefic place (2) should they be posited in an inauspicious
house, they will not bring about any good result; some Astrologers opine that they will bring happiness. When they happen to
be in inauspicious houses, associating with benefics, they become
responsible for the demise of the native.
fi: misifigefual acfisaafaal feaat
lat aadgzat acfageiaa Beqnay ec I
IFAT a eradafasam ahacaleaat
VaanzaagaRay geaarazazy |
Sloka 17 4-18 4% When Rahu or Ketu occupy the 6th, 8th or
the 12th house and are associated with or aspected by any of
the lords of these houses, they start harming the native during
‘ their Dasas, When they associate with Marakas or with the
lords of the Dussthanas, they cause the demise of the native.
Should they conjoin the lords of Kendras and Konas and oc-

cupy the Dussthanas, they cause some happiness and then bring
on death through diseases, wounds, misery, sword-cuts, drowning or suicide.
mantras afefiatnaeetadt
agcaleaaagrsaahtnl salkaci=sea ULSI
aaa wzta af a aBrarfat
aeat zeqant ar aaadt arat agar
Sloka 18 2-19 % (1) When the (afore) said two planets associate with strong Yogakaraka planets and occupy the Ist,
3rd, 4th, 7th or the 10th house, they bless the native with prosperity, happiness, children, wealth, power and superior vehicles.
(2) The same, if associate with the lords of the 7th and the 2nd
Bhavas or aspected by them, will bring about the entire loss of
wealth to the native and be responsible for his death.
a& azaqua afar eff ensieacaae
quiseiigaige a val qefaaionfay i) xo 1
faz: sazey za) frguel ale ant Ray
sHqqeagz aysfeaas agifeat at afe |
Sloka 19 %20 % Rahu and Ketu are exalted in Vrishabha
and Vrischika Rasis respectively. Their Swakshetra Rasis are
Kumbha and Vrischika. Their Mooltrikona Rasis are Mithuna
and Kanya, Simha and Kataka are their inimical Rasis. Tula
and Makara are their friendly Rasis. Mesha and the two Rasis
belonging to Jupiter are the neutral ones. These two planets are
said to possess their highest power when they are in their exaltation
houses. In other houses, their strength will correspond with
the nature of their relation with the houses they occupy.
Tagan wiaaeat snag frdaeail
«tea feaatsa tafeal Berlaredata <2
at gt ter a% Quer aaaegtadaraay
yaarafes uqaTs MATAIELA.

Sloka 20 %21% When these two planets in their full strength
occupy any Bhava or have any one of the 3 kinds of Sambandha
with the lord of any house they bring about during their Dasaperiod good or bad effects, overlooking the effects, if any, that
may arise due to the other planets. They possess the strength of
the lord of the house they occupy and the benefic or malefic effects which may be due to the Bhava they occupy should be
declared according to the strength of the lord of that Bhava.
TAVUAYES HY Fag AMA YR Atmay afazag Tauseiale=a MAI: |! Vz II
arava afeagaaagefrantes, area
4al at faa gmaafedt daigaraeg |
Sloka 21 %22'% Note the Dasa of the planet who is muling at the moment, reckon the house occupied by that planet as
the lagna, and find out the house counted from this Lagna that
the Bhuktinath is occupying. Also assess the strength of these
two planets obtained through their association with or aspect
by other planets. If these two planets do not mutually be in
quincunx aspect, the resulting effect be happy. Otherwise evil
effect will emanate according to the strength of the planet.
Hrardtarnaaacaiacacan: Aan
UAKIA FAASAAIAUM AI TA? 2z i
WUCSIAAAAIET AL? HE ATA: AAT
Aaeraties at a azaacgafag |
Sloka 22 %23% The Dasa-periods and the sub-periods
of the planets owning Kendras and konas will prove auspicious, while those of the planets owning the 2nd, 3rd and the
11th houses will be of a medium character. The Dasas, etc., of
planets owning the 6th, the 8th and the 12th Bhavas will always
prove adverse to the native. These results should be declared in
the respective Dasas and Bhuktis of planets after an examination of the lord of the Dasa and the Bhava occupied by him.

qearataraaghaa de fanaaz:
aBsINAMs SPA MAMA FIR ll Vv Il
ang al Tay anfaaguesmaneal Req
aeRmifataaia wa: Teams F |
Sloka 23 %24% Should the Bhuktinath occupy the 12th,
6th or the 8th place from that of the lord of the Dasa, he then
becomes hostile to the Dasa-lord. The planet in the 11th, the
2nd, 3rd, 4th, Sth, 9th or the 10th house from the Dasa-nath is
said to be greatly beneficial to the native. The planet occupying the 7th place from the Dasanath and the one associating
with him are also found to be favourable.
WHItA Balsa: DIAN: WG aa: aay
fy aracalngizafa ants Gang ue il
aw aq fs at aniadea ad ay
meat afaa oF Buea saa |
Sloka 24'%25'% When the Dasanath is inauspicious and
the Bhuktinath is auspicious and is not associated with the same,
the result will be adverse. When the Bhuktinath is a benefic
and is associated with the Dasanath, the result will be mixed.
The Bhuktinath, even if he be a Yogakaraka planet will become more hostile and distressing, should he not be associating
with the Dasanath. When the Dasanath is powerful enough to
cause both Yoga and death, he will give the effects of the Yoga
first in his own Bhukti.
UCHATHITA BHAA FAl BS! WEI
MEDAN WeWVAAA =i RE I
AAT TAT: Yaranes Farle al aaa
miassahe arash fe cat ar Reaeeqhat |
Sloka 25%26% When the entire period over which the
aforesaid Yogakaraka rules be completely auspicious and the
Bhuktis of the various malefic planets be accordingly favour-

able, the Yogakaraka planet. puts off the causing of death to
the man concerned. Such a Dasanath will never give mixed
results; when he does so, the Dasa will only prove entirely
fruitless. This is what the wise say.
Asay BTR Ba: |rge at Afeaad Waa
qaqa BAAN) Taal BAzaaifaal |i =o It
Tia Beaharsaa aaa aigaalteaifaay
agifemqzcedicaaageaaared: |
Sloka 26 %27% Jupiter and Venus in their mutual Dasa
and Bhuktis bestow upon the native kingship or the position of
a minister, much wealth and happiness through wife and children. The man concerned will devote his energies in the performance of sacrifices, birth of children, marriage celebrations
and other similar auspicious functions provided these two planets
are strong and occupy good houses and are also associated with
and aspected by auspicious planets.
aaaeafigeaqieanal agaeel gat
aRACATa Bsanga aratfadtaiar ze I
auigafaraal 4 aaafeaeglagaal
aldaanfaal sraaaetanel |
Sloka 27 %28% The same two planets when occupy
Bhavas which are quincunx to each other or are mutually placed
in the 2nd and the 12th; or if they two be aspected by or associated with the lords of these houses; or if they themselves be
the owners of these houses and be at the same time aspected by
or in association with malefics, and are weak in Bhava position, etc., they will, during their Dasa period cause separation
from wife and sons, displeasure of a high Brahmin chief, trouble
through intrigues with females, royal displeasure and fear of
epileptic attacks.
gat af aga ayaa antaart fuat
aedt ainazat aaa afeal ab aGagh cat 1 290

quay qaaralsh aaa fraraay Rere:
azata att qreq feaeadlaarealne:
Sloka 28 %29'% When Venus and Saturn occupy their
exaltation, Swakshetra or Vargottamamsa and are strong and
equally powerful to cause Yoga, they will, in their mutual Dasas
and Bhuktis make the man concerned a beggar seeking alms
and a powerless being, even though he be born a king or a
Kubera. If, however, one of the two be strong and the other
weak, the stronger one will cause the Yoga.
at samaal sqareftgnt agay) asta aq
TRlaagal aat Basal ateagel Het |i Re |
va: Apaaharag ag eae
MIAT qariclafeaar at Ausratsaat |
Sloka 29 '%30'% Should both of them be weak and be so
mutually placed that one occupies the 12th, the 8th or the 6th
from the other or happens to own such places; or be associated
with the lords of these houses, they tend to be auspicious and
grant wealth and happiness to the man concerned. When one
of them is the lord of an auspicious Bhava and the other of an
unfavourable one, eventhen, both of them will produce good
results. Should they both be malefics they will prove extremely
favourable to the native.
aaa Ranaxanakaaaatash a1
det sloqaeareagent agiaaraaydy =! 32
Bat g aaa: ar wash a orate
TRA ga 4a a Aaa ab Fae aed |
Sloka 30 %31% Should Satum and the Sun occupy their
own or exalted Rasis or be in the corresponding Navamsa or
Kendra or Kona positions or be owners of these houses, they
will bestow upon the native royal favour, wealth and the like in
the Sun’s Bhukti of Saturn’s Dasa; and happiness, wealth and
victory in Saturn’s Bhukti of the Sun’s Dasa. Should these two

planets be (both) malefic they become productive of distress
for the native.
atasmali aes aaadt genadd aifact
qel a TAAAaagdel Usaaal =H AR
aaaifaamaal gaat facggaxt
saleaaraata Varay Biewalg |
Sloka 31 %32 % When Mars and Jupiter are, in the same
manner, strong and occupy favourable Bhavas and possess the
aspect or company of a strong benefic planet, they cause Rajayoga to the man concerned, they become instrumental in bringing
joy, all kinds of enjoyments and pleasure, sons living longlife,
marriage and other pleasant ceremonies. If otherwise, they will
exhibit contrary results.
aast-zaql dua afl acanhearga
aitsafes feasace diosaleafeaq 123i
aARAle asfesqahal aggisud ga—
dinar fang) ifagal asomentecg |
‘Soka 32 %33'% Jupiter and Mercury, when similarly
strong, will enable the native for good actions, grant great learning,
he will be clever in trading and possessed of wife, children and
happiness. Venus and Mercury, Jupiter and the Moon, the Moon
and Venus, Jupiter and the Sun, the Sun and Mars, the Sun and
Mercury, each of these pairs will promote effects akin to those
indicated for Jupiter and Mercury.
FARM RAY Vel tHerfan enfafh: ara
aueafehe simaqqary maa a5 faq 12!
Sea ayRandqats leks aladwagieareyaceucag Rens ezT!

Sloka 334 344 Note the exact position of the Sun in a
birth chart, if there is any required year after birth, compute the
day, hour, etc, the Sun in his periodical course shall be in that
exact position. That day is called the solar year day of the
native. Record the Lagna for that moment and also note down
the positions of planets, and the several Bhavaspalso arrive at
the Saptavargaja bala of the planets. These findings will reveal
the nature of the effects for that year to the man concerned.
Find the number of the Nakshatra occupied by the Moon at the
time when counted from the natal star and divide it by 9. The
remainder will indicate the order of the Dasa counted from the
Sun.
ee1acaaAl Talfeagal Maaelea
ciecq feamifearahtia estaqaiiga: = ll 34 Il
WES: Grarvaartd Taal: Bareqasaeaa:
qeamiigaa: ThA asRAMNaA By:
HE TAVITA AT TONGA:
UpRCAGSS: HOAMT As Tad | 3
TMUALEMGS WINGS TaaIeIAMeaI—
glare faiderad 4 aes Ta VA ASYAy |
Sloka 344% 36% Find out the exact position of the Moon at
the time, compute how many more Ghatikas the Moon has yet
to traverse in the star occupied by her. Multiply this by the
Dasa days referred to below of the planet concemed and divide
it by the total Ghatikas taken by the Moon to travel through the
complete asterism. It will reveal the number of days, Ghtikas,
etc, of the (first) starting Dasa still remaining at the beginning
numbers in their order denoting the Dasa period in the day in a

year of 365 days for the Sun, the Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus, Saturn, Rahu and the Lagna respectively. The second and the succeeding Dasas during the year have to be counted
in this order alone. The results - auspicious or inauspicious -
for any of the Dasas should be pronounced after a careful examination of the strength- positional etc.- of the planet concemed, the Lagna at the entry of the year, the Bhava occupied
by the planet and the several aspects on the same planet.
TATE GaKelleaesaaaartat aqaaraaddarea: TEMG
a a .
vara TH Ta Tees
qYsSUragarad (Heat Fa Ge qlaayq |
Sloka 36 %37% In this connection, necessary consideration should also be given to the effects which may arise due to
the transit of the planets durimg their course through the several houses counted from the Jamma Rasi- Radix Moon- and the
combined effects alone should be pronounced. Now, I am going
to describe in a clear and easy manner the exact effects of the
several Dasas during a year.
dua Raaa® wraa Yueat aa
fata afeagafgah afenga ety =| ci
dala afdtqaahea Reta ata
fala figaietrrasates Reras:.1
Sloka 371438 % When in a nativity the Sun is strong,
there will be accumulation of wealth, acquisition of ornaments
and wearing of new garments. Should this Sun be weak, the
native will become more sinful and have many more enemies,
hesides the loss of wealth and many new troubles. Strong Moon
will bestow upon the native royal favour, non-stop flow in of
the money and a respectable position. Should this Moon be
weak, more enemies will turn up. The native will suffer from
sickness, have change of place, misery and misunderstanding
with one’s own people.

Ysa Ward Taahass: aga
dala qoiifagaasediachaas: TELA
ara Gules ca Qualeahiesa sysq
dala aemfzargrara areag esa |
Sloka 38. %39 % Mars in power in a birth chagt will endow
the native with royal favour, success in life and domestic
happiness. Should this Mars be weak, displeasure of the sovereign, dispute with one’s own sons, enmity with one’s own wife
and loss of wealth will be in store.
Powerful Mercury will make the native very energetic.
There will be more of happiness and more of gain. A weak
Mercury will cause misunderstandings with one’s brothers, etc.
He will take to the evil path and will do mischief to the Brahmin folk.
ANS Gees careaaac: earcafeafzras
fala aaa aagaaht erenigagdt = vol
TH Tas qarrarg: gesiraeiga
da argaaaa Raya PaEaTT: |
Sloka 39 440% When Jupiter possesses full strength the
native will have good vehicles and houses. He will be generous, wise and very wealthy. Should this Jupiter be weak, there
will be change of place and also loss of wealth. He will fall into
bad ways and evil company. Venus, possessed of great strength
will bestow upon the man concerned wealth, name and fame.
He will have good white robes to wear and females around him
for Sukha (pleasure). if this Venus is weak, loss of wealth,
danger from enemies, diseases from female contact and bad
name will be the miseries of life.
yey quae gaf{taesfseirares az -
ama fraat: where TastTHfaHs uve

Tel PIgedsrqapearslgerat
TRA At TyA ReasitaeNEAa |
Sloka 40 441% When Satur is possessed of full strength
the native will acquire a mansion, be happy and will lead some
tribe. A weak Saturn will cause destruction of wealth, emaciation of the body, sickness and bad name. A strong Rahu in a
birth chart will make the native virtuous and good, bring him
good income and a rise in his official status. When he is adverse, the effects accordingly will be bad; may be the demise
of his father occur, moreover the native will develop intimacy
with the low-caste and associate himself with his enemies.
Sa WIHHSA JARS AT F HE AAT
aeRnfrad waraahandeaised =— 8
a aes TAHA Mata oye fee
qeaeIaTary ges gia |
Sloka 41 442 % During the Lagna Dasa, the effect will
be good, medium or bad depending upon the nature of the Drekkana
occupied and the Sambandha, Yogas, etc, formed by that lord.
Thus have been detailed in an elegant and precise manner the
effects of the several Dasas in a year. The wise should predict
the nature of the effects with special reference to the strength
or otherwise of the planets concerned denoted by their association with benefics, etc.
7, Weta:
aa SAMI: Hes aa aeatae
wal 8ea serrate aT MAMEMTEeT |
Tay AaeIeT Ca a aPReisaat fea
a ad deals Geaatacia Fomtg It
Section 7- On Queries.
Sloka-1. In the-case of a nativity all the predictions should
thus be made through the positions of the several planets and

the Lagna at the moment of birth. If the birth chart is not available, the results should be divined through the Lagna Rising at
the time of query. The effects arrived at will be similar whether
they are obtained through the horoscope at birth or through the
time of query. Should the day be clouded at the time gf query
and the exact Ghatikas that have passed since Sunrise can not
be easily known the several Rasis and Navamsas should be
determined by further queries as explained in the succeeding 3
Slokas.
TA KIATMTAT Haass
IIMA AAS eTAA CT aad |
aya wah TaN ase ates alae
qufecamena gage We aes aq Rk
Sloka-2. A querist should approach the Astrologer with
gifts of fruits and Dakshina and when asked should speak a
number within 108. This said number should be made the basis
for prediction- good or bad- regarding the past, present and
future, after salutations to the feet of his Gum.
qin ag Bit: WRengea frarnay
FORA MAA WHAT: KAA |
KASIM UTIAA AS! WA A WA
MRAITATHTEMMTIEKdat 1 3
Sloka-3. The aforesaid basic number should be divided
by 9; the quotient represents the number of Rasis from Mesha
(Aries) that have elapsed, and the remainder represents the
number of Navamsas which have elapsed in the Lagna at the
time of query. The planets and the Bhavas at the moment of
query should be arrived at and their effects - good or bad - be
predicted as before through the strongest of the following: the
Karakas, the Bhavas and the lords of the Bhavas at the time.
aa feaeAge TIAA! HEAT VANEE -
TaTteaay fafa: que: BKogaaag |
Tay Maem daa ay gA-

TANITA AAAI AAT: |v Il
Sloka-4. The number of flowers and money units that
were given to the Astrologer by the querist should be multiplied by the basic number and the product be divided by 12.
The remainder will denote the Rasi counted from Mesha which
the Jupiter may be supposed to occupy in the querist’s nativity.
Through the position of Jupiter at the time of query, the Astrologer can easily guess the age of the querist from his looks
and the probable number of cycles made by Jupiter since his
birth time (of the querist). The months, days, etc. that have
elapsed since the last birth-day, will be denoted by the portion
of the Rasi traversed by Jupiter in the Rasi occupied by him at
the time of query. The total period thus arrived at is to be taken
away from the present position of the Sun to get the year, month,
etc. of the birth in question.
may aaAga aafe acatera aranfez
4a aq MaeTATARAash weal TTET |
eq Wieaaesaatae aeq ta Aa
4 Haargidfafaa anfaarat gz Ou KU
Ul sft agmanfafa: aaa: |
Sloka-5. The month,the week day, the Ghatikas, etc.
clapsed on the day, will be solar. From this, the Moon’s position, the lunar years, months, Tithi, etc., and hence the entire
horoscope can be cast. Thus has been described briefly the
secret of erecting a lost horoscope. The method to get at a
horoscope has thus been detailed here for the pleasure of those
interested in the science. This brings to the end of the method
of casting lost- horoscope.
Tait Hs SIHAYNESIsaT sfag—
my afte qeafta Vga aaq |
wi cea Tt a waa: anaes at
wal Bate waaagha: aahen atk

Sloka-6. Multiply the basic number by 2 and divide the
product by 3. When the remainder be 1, the query is about a
living being; if it be 2, it relates to some mineral. If it be zero,
it relates to a plant. When the Lagna at query is Mesha, the
matter relates to bipeds; if it be Vrishabha, it relates to quadrupeds; when the Lagna be Mithuna, it is about pregnancy. When
Karkataka is rising the subject relates to a legal dispute. When
the lagna is Simha, the matter relates to Government.
Barat g Wigal ITE afters shay
aa gear aah ai ae afeany |
ea ag Pra ahha araea faear aaa4 haaneeaeaenagaeraa: = I
Sloka-7. Should Kanya be the Lagna, the query will be
about an intrigue with a woman other than one’s wife. When
Tula will be rising the querist would like to know about trading. Should Vrishhika be rising, there will be fear from the
wicked. If the Dhanus Rasi is rising the query will relate to the
wealth lost. Some sinful deed will be the subject when the Rasi
Makara be the Lagna. Should Kumbha be rising, the question
will be about some religious rites. When Meena is the Lagna it
will be in connection with position and residence. Thus advise
the sages to declare through the stronger of the two} Rasi and
Navamsa rising at the time.
Bass Wusafyaaag Vz ararcay
AA afeanliifigga aftsreca: |
AX Aargzuea saat ateays waz
ae maid fuse aazaisacfe =< I
Sloka-8. Should the Sun, at the time of query, be posited
in his own Rasi or Namavsa, whichever be stronger, then the
query will be about the Sovereign and Kingdom. When the
Moon is similarly situated, it will relate to tanks and the like.
If it be Mars, the question is about fire and danger from the
king or enemies.When Mercury is in a similar situation it will

relate to trade and agriculture. Jupiter will refer to friends,
kings and the like. Venus will indicate to more happiness; whereas,
Satur in a like position will denote to a human being or immovable
property.
wa qiand at featha aa a UT Te
fasdsgita te saafa are az daa: |
alasanat amt agent aasiatalfasra
ATHTHAATIaITEAA AAA Ok
Sloka-9. Also, when a planet is in his exaltation the result
will be doubled; should it be in its debilitation, the effect will
be nil. If the planet is in a friend’s house, the effect will be half;
in that of a neutral’s house, it will be very low. When two
planets are in their exaltation, or be in their Swakshetra Rasis,
the query should be answered by a wise man after taking into
account the stronger of the two and the corresponding Karaka
and the Bhava occupied by each of them.
aes BA IRA Taeaiaag
my and Rar aex alaaeais=ra |
BY FATT SSANAI Ba Tal aR
VHA WEAAAIIA BATHGA — tl Lo Il
Sloka-10.When a planet is exalted at the time, the business will be accomplished in a very short time (almost immediately); should it be in his own house, the business will be
finished in a few days; if housed in a friendly Bhava, it will be
done in a few months. If in any other position, it will take some
years. When in association with or aspected by a malefic, failure of the desired end is certain. Should Saturn be exalted in
the Lagna, or when the lords of the Lagna and the Bhava conceming the query be associated with or aspected by strong
benefics, the querist may be informed that the business will be
accomplished immediately.
GIFSIWMATAMAG FAST IT SII AIq

aa eqqanigel aafaaaci fact goeat |
afta faaa ffeg a aazaae Fea:
TMM: RAG VM aftasarrgary ssaqne vi
Sloka-11.The horizon is a circle comprised of 360 degrees consisting of 12 spokes each of which is at an interval of
30 degrees. The 108 Navamsas are perpetually situated within
this circle. The four pairs of movable and immovable Rasis
Starting with Mesha denote the East and the other chief points
of the compass in order (South, West and North). The four dual
Rasis, viz., Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus and Meena represent respectively the four intermediate points viz., S.E., S.W., N.W.
and N.E. The Astrologer should place in the relevant Rasis and
Navamsas all the planets according to their longitudes at the
moment of query.
aa gsqpafarinaal aes afay a
fagy geafa aqae cafufta alg famecaq |
AMAA AMAT: Aq BA ASTA
TACAST RIGA AFA qt? Mt
Sloka-12. | When a person, carrying fruits and flowers in
his hand, approaches the Astrologer and takes his position to
put a query, the Rasi denoted by that place with respect to the
Astrologer as measure referred to in the previous Sloka is called
the Arudha Lagna at query. The Astrologer should pronounce
in all such queries the results - whether good or bad - through
the planets owning the Arudha Lagna and the house signifying
the nature of the query with special reference to the planets
associating with them or viewing them.
agn aaa after: aaicarenfak
mera aadigea wefag: seaealett wag |
qamayege Hazl aertd aaraay
Pa: eM sdiftar azuamig aatnaq 230

Sloka-13, Find out the Ghatikas that have elapsed from
Sun rise till the time of query. Multiply it by 9 and divide the
product by 20. The quotient in Ghatikas, etc., will signify the
exact position of the Moon at the time, which will be useful for
purposes of query. The position of the Moon at the time as
identified by the Ephemeries and the Moon above alluded to
are respectively known as Stthula and Sukshma. Their respective Navamsas should also be determined.
Ysa aTeegaleayeze sataa aa
wayhaaesaage faasee |
far Slaagtheay gaaz alga ast
arapaaaicanage salleAtaige ll Lv I
ama 4 aztae andar Aefazias
TRINA AIS KE CP Garaiyeng |
amfaaa RNAATe Tay aar alzat
aal Afa aha Tagaalsaeiag ofa ky I
Sloka-14-15. If the Stthula Moon is aspected by the Sukshma
Moon, Mercury and Jupiter, the query will be about an animal.
Should it be aspected by Mars, Rahu and Satum, it will be
about some mineral; When by Venus and the Sun, it will relate
to something of the vegetable kind. If the Stthula Moon is aspected by Jupiter, Venus and Rahu, the query will relate to
something of a mixed nature. Should the Stthula Moon occupy
Tula, Kanya or Mithuna Navamsa, the query will concern a
biped. If in a Navamsa, belonging to Karkataka, Vrishika or
Meena, it will relate to some creature with many legs. If the
Stthula Moon is placed in a Navamsa belonging to Dhanus or
Kumbha it will be about some creatures having no legs; when
in a Navamsa belonging to Mesha, Simha, Makara or Vrishabha, it will relate to quadruped. the ancient sages believe that
the 3 Avastthas of a planet-Bala, Yauvana or Vriddha - should
be arrived at from the planet’s position in the 1st, 2nd or 3rd
Drekkana respectively of the Rasi in which it is at the time of
query.

yaeaca fiat feaga walgar: eau:
ai <q: feaceraay faagar at: HalgsIaa: |
THatAalAa aaa arEfan aay
aa aa Age argent 12 eI
Sloka-16. The Rasis from Mesha onwards are respectively movable, immovable and dual. The movable Rasis are
also called Garbha; the immovable ones, Dwara and; the dual
Rasis are called Bahya. The Rasis denoted by the first two
classes (Garbha and Dwara) will signify a thing or object kept
in the right hand; whereas, a Rasi of the Bahya class will denote
the same in the left hand. This is how the things concealed in
the hand may be distinguished.
aq glenae aaa ee aIeradaies
UAMATU FATA AZURE: |
Ufsermeales GTI ATTA
WUBIN Ta agiaaaieeq ll Vo Il
Sloka-17. Thus it should be guessed all about the object
kept in the hand. Whether it is short or long should be divined
through the measure allotted to the Rasi under reference. The
shape, colour, etc., are to be deduced from the Navamsas. The
benefic or malefic nature of the object should be derived through
the nature of the planet - benefic or malefic - occupying the
Rasi; similarly, the place often visited by the object - whether
on the land, sky, water or mountains, and also whether it is
cruel, wild, tame or domestic etc.
Gate PIRIESATAASeTgAy wATASATACTAAAA ATs |
masa) Fae: aRATOaRlTafeAEa—
MaMeasaaaaa aay Haase tl Le Il
Sloka-18. The basic number already referred to should
be divided by 5. The remainder, if any one of the 1,2,3,4 or 0

will respectively indicate whether the thing referred to by the
querist will be accomplished within the Ghatikas, the Tithi, the
week-day, the month or the year. Add the quotient already
obtained to the basic number. Divide the sum so obtained by
60, 30, 7, 12 and 60 separately. The remainders will respectively indicate the number of Ghatikas, Tithis etc., in which the
desired object will be completed. This is the method which
should be followed in the case of all sorts of queries.
MAAK TAA aenant Aas
eel at ¢ earracnaaal ceafasirazay |
ara mragta @ BIHAT Ia TAT
qaimaa: Gs I waa aeaadtaarq | 29 I
Sloka-19. | Should the lords of the Lagna and that of the
Bhava representing the object of the query be benefic, posited
in good Bhavas and mutually aspect each other by any kind of
aspect as mentioned in the Drishtiphalakhanda [I-171/2-191,2,
The range of applying aspect being with in 12 degrees , the Astrologer may safely pronounce the successful fulfillment of the
object in proportion to the strength, auspiciousness, etc., of the
two planets referred to above, recognising the nature of the
aspect as best, medium or worst (IV-33 Supra). The strength of
the Karaka planet should also be simultaneously taken into account and results conveyed. Further, should there be any planet
occupying between the two lords alluded above, having an
applying aspect with either of the two within the range of 12
degrees, prediction may also be made through that planet regarding
the nature, functions, etc., attributed to the planet (V-221/75412 supra). The period of fulfillment may be divined as defined in SL. 18 infra.
g- faftanergal aaictave:
WAUAAAT FIDAE HATTA
teat aufiasahasareasy |

BAVA Aleagesaeraaiginal
feart-asara: afafea ergaegl aur tg ll
Section $8 Miscellaneous.
Sloka-1. The pleasure of impregnation is most auspiciously achieved when the Moon is in Rohini, Mrigasira, Purvaphalguni, Purvashadha, Purvabhadra, Ardra, Punarvasu,
Pushya, Hasta, Chittra, Swati, Visakha, Anuradha, Sravana,
Dhanishta, Satabhisha, Uttarphalguni, Uttarashadha and Uttarabhadra, in Dwiteeya, Saptami, Dwadasi, Panchami, Dasami,
Triteeya, Trayodasi; and in the week-days of Jupiter, Mercury,
Venus and the Moon and in an auspicious Lagna unoccupied by
any planet. The Tithis to be avoided are: Ashtami, Purnima and
Amavasya.
aigar: sagt Raa sfta: dala
aTHMARMia zara zarecqihe areaa fe |
CMA AGIs ATA AT AT
ie
aay aa Raa saa cit waa aaifenq ti x
Sloka-2. The first sexual union of a (married) man and a
woman soon after a bath after the 1st menses is called Nisheka.
A similar union after the ordinary monthly menses is known as
Garbhadhana. The Nisheka is considered most auspicious when
the Moon at the time is in Hasta, Swati, Anuradha, Moola,
Satabhisha, Sravana, Rohini, Uttarphalguni, Uttarashadha,
Uttarabhadra and Revati. The Lagna should be auspicious, etc.
and free from the occupation of any planet as mentioned earlier. This is also the view of the wise.
al ald] Gad: FAVAAIAUAG Saez TH
2a al ate aaa a feaa at aasaatig |
wy qrait fareatgal amifePayfiat
qaufetagemalengqaaeng, 31
Sloka-3. When a girl is in her 16th summer, with welldeveloped breasts and body and has not yet found to have at-

tained her maturity, she (with great affection) should be made
to sit on a decent and beautiful seat on an auspicious day, clad
in white robes and charmingly decked with golden ornaments.
Her Venus spot should be smeared with red saffron-powder
mixed with rose water and other scents.
Beau radiiaa fafead ster aay fea
lat at ataeata: We VR Ta Tag |
aa FePrradiagaaeanrcgftauft gfaut
dMmfastaisaneienied a fat el
Sloka-4. Considering her as one in her real menses for 3
days, she should be bathed on the 4th day. The husband should
approach her in an auspicious Lagna, as referred to earlier,
when the 5th house is not occupied by any planet. That done,
the girl will very soon attain her puberty and prove a happy
companion to her husband for propagation. She will also become very suitable for sexual intercourse and will possess the
right to partake with her husband in all the religious ceremonies of the family relating to the gods and Manes.
arg afeaaad aaafe aR: amead acne
Was WaNeUtasagiPe aed ya: |
tz HaAIaH a fAaay anvaya—
a gfaaaag fight oa ana wag 4 Il
Sloka-5. Should a birth take place when the Moon is in
Aslesha or Magha, the result will be as detailed here: When a
child is born in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or 4th Pada of Aslesha, there
will be (1) loss of wealth (2) loss of brother (3) demise of
mother or (4) death of father respectively. When the birth is
towards the very end of Aslesha, the child itself may meet his
death. To ward off these harm the native’s father should propitiate Gods Kala. Antaka, Mrityu according to the miles. When
the birth takes place in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd or the 4th Pada of
Magha, the result will be just the contrary to what has been
stated in the case of Aslesha above.

assamarfaqr: tataz qarfgalcasy
RAT AT BieaaifeagA aveiataifaar |
qt Qiafe aaRsata nwa: acai
AY Varad ATTSsE: =
Sloka-6. The results will be very much similar should
the birth happens when the Moon is in Jyestha and Moola or
Revati and Aswini. In the afore said three pairs, the last degrees of Aslesha, Jyestha and Revati and the 1st degrees of
Magha, Moola and Aswini are called Gandantarala and are
supposed to be most vulnerable points so that any birth occurring there in will soon cause the demise of the new born. If the
child, some how survives, he will be a king or ruler possessed
of amazing valour.
WSFA a waar afe wagserMIAMAL
areqasaararfareal Mal: Feet Gar |
NFA AAG aTA gTyeaeasal—
<SifFs TAR aAM_aEA agatha Il 9 Ul
Sloka-7. Should a girl attain maturity at such a juncture,
she will soon become a widow, devoid of children, wealth,
happiness and clothing. She will be a wicked woman and bring
a bad name to her father’s family. All this could be averted and
soon she could be made to bring happiness and luck; and bear
children too. But this will be possible only through proper
propitiation to Gods, Brahmins and the planets as initiated in
the Vedic rites by Japa, Homa and Archana.
aisaqail qagans aed talaeqal—-
MdH AAdleat Taal Arasy a=sle |
ey aranafaeiany ¢ 2a A ATsaq
aaa gay ate aqalafaara BA ll < Il
Sloka-8. When the birth of a girl or her maturity takes
place in a Tyajyakala comprising of 4 Ghatikas, the result will

be (1) death of the father (2) death of the mother (3) loss of
wealth or (4) one’s own destruction depending upon whether
the birth or maturity has occurred in the Ist, 2nd 3rd or the 4th
Ghatikas respectively of the Tyajyakala. To guard against the
evils emanating from these, one should perform (1) Worship of
God Rudra (2) Worship of God Yama (3) Worship of Fire or (4)
Worship of God Mrityu respectively. If the birth or maturity
takes place during a solar, or lunar eclipse either the father or
the mother will meet his/her end.
qe aeaaiearg ta feealea ofa
aa SaTIAART TWTAAEA ACT |
aibarefafzageat age As
HIT AAT AMe aNgegasfeankasa: 1%
Sloka-9. A precious and divine medicine if got prepared
or consumed when the Moon is in the Amnitaghatika or a star,
it will act like nectar and completely cure the disease the native
will be suffering from. Ailments arising due to the disturbance
of the three humours will also be completely cured. Prefect
health will be restored, vital energy will be developed and
longevity will be granted to the native. Bhagwan Dhanvantari,
born of the ocean, has thus spelled many ways of the medical
cures to remove the several diseases.
ame aezaaal af aa aweagaifafa—
Acenafa arRaqa afeaecy |
Racaaahs pfaaaasgizee aa
ateat aafay: aa wafea we a a}earaa | 2oll
Sloka-10. | When a native is sonless till the age of 60 or
his horoscope reveals that he will be short lived and that he has
not been blessed with a child; he should better arrange to adopt
a son in the year wished for by him. This child should be endowed with longevity, fame, issues, wisdom and prosperity.
The adoption ceremony should be observed on an auspicious
day when the Sun is Uttarayana and in a fore- noon.

aretazEaamigated 4 aramalza
eisaichafedsakmraaeraaatea |
a A. o oe
ZAIRAIAIAUA A Baar 24 Aisad
quagiatiead Jaangalad Wea = CL
Sloka-11. The several Kutas (20) Nadi, Yoni, etc., between
the native and the boy proposed to be adopted should agree and
the boy should be one of his own Gotra. The Moon at the time
should be in any one of the following Nakshatras: Swati,
Punarvasu, Pushya, Rohini, Anuradha, Hasta, Revati, Aswini,
Sravana, Dhanistha, Satabhisha, Uttara-phalguni, Uttarashadha
and Uttarabhadra. The Lagna and the Sth house should be devoid
of any malefic planet. The star and the Moon’s position on that
day should be agreeable to the natal star, and the Lagna should
be associated or aspected by benefics.
Saleiaaanfefay facd aut zay
WASHAIAMITAA QARAe! |
Wawa’ Gaara FAs 7A
aq azaaifes cat aagiasatefa: 1 22 Ul
Sloka-12. The preliminary work leading to a wedding
Should be got initiated by Sumangalis (ladies) when the Moon
is posited in Punarvasu, Pushya, Aswini, Anuradha, Hasta, Chittra,
Swati, Sravana, Dhanistha, Satabhisha; and on week days other
than those of Venus and Mars. The Sth and the 9th Bhava should
be devoid of planets and the Lagna at the time should be an
auspicious one. The various planets should also be propitiated
and the whole ceremony should be performed with music and
dancing and the like merriments.
TUeTAe ZA FG: DHA ale aa
amiifad saeafaaaa at face |
au fageuraifadgd ga a3 afee—
aiaatanae atfeated aigeaqa BNq tl 23 I

Sloka-13. The auspicious invitations should be got written
in a soft and appealing language on a day when the Moon is
full; on a day of Mercury, when he is free from any malefic
aspect or association; on the day of Jupiter or of Venus, in a
Bhadra, Purna, or Jaya Tithi and when the Moon occupies movable
Nakshatra (Swati, Punarvasu, Sravana, Dhanistha or Satabhisha)
and in the fast moving Nakshatras (Aswini, Hasta or Pushya),
in a Lagna aspected or occupied by Mercury, Jupiter and Venus;
and the Sth Bhava is void of planets.
azarrias fafa: ATO INASIZ, Ja
asa zeafa: gavaed Pe amedieca: |
Hlalsseagar ala adisagda: @ Azoon aifadt marnefas ea I We waaq Le
Sloka-14. Multiply the number of the Tithi, when a stick
or a post for the marriage pandal is erected, by 5. Add to this
product the number of the day’s Nakshatra reckoned from Krittika.
Again, 12 be superadded to this sum and this total be divided by
9. When the remainder will be 7,4 or 1, the tortoise King will
be in water, it is a good omen and the result will be gain. If the
said remainder be 8,2 or 5, the tortoise will be on land, and the
result of the same is loss or destruction. Should the remainder
in question be 3,9 6, he would be in the sky and the result
would be death.
Palit aaada: canal fara dieaq
AaeaMsasae AY Tes aTAterfea:
AOE aaegQaK WEI aay
Raat asaat afe affaa: ZA TaAA_ 124i
Sloka-15. When constructing a new building, make 3
vertical blocks. In each of them draw 4 horizontal lines. Beginning from the bottom on the left side, write out Aswini and the
other Nakshatras as shown in the figure (Ist four ascending +
Sth on top +next 4 descending):

Mriga Chittra
Rohini Ardra Hasta Swati
Krittika P. Vasu Uttara Vishaka
Bharni Pushya Purva Anuradha
Aswini Ashlesha Magha Jyeshta
Dhanishta
Shravana Satattarka
_ U. Ashadha P. Bhadra
P. Ashadha U. Bhadra
Mula Revati
The ascending Nakshatras and the three on the tops will
give good effects. But when a malefic planet is posited on any
star on the ascending side, it will indicate death. Should the
planet be good, the effect will be productive of good.
sarey TaNIgwMAfaas wTWSE—
waza fyreazz AAT ala galaT_ayq |
ATMA FH FT BAA TATA:
aaa aa Yaa aaepa sy oil Le
Sloka-16. At the time of making a new (for the Ist time)
entry to a house or town or initiating any new enterprise count
from the Nakshatra occupied by the Sun upto the Nakshatra
occupied by the Moon - including Abhijit also. When this

Nakshatra happens to be within the first 7 stars reckoned from
the Sun, ii signifies evil; in the next 3 the result will be again
bad and in the next 14 it will be good. This is called Vrishabha
Chakra. Similarly, if the star falls within the first 5 reckoned
from the one occupied by the Sun, it will be bad; if within the
next 8, it will be good. In the succeeding 8, it will be again bad,
but in the las. 6, it will be good again. This is known as Kalasa
Chakra. The good or bad effects of any new enterprise may
thus be easily foreseen.
qe Age fF Ae Nordea ga
are easy aaa Raed weealeay |
OE MTT aa: TAR tal Har'gaz
Aachen WAR Taf: u Vol
yauiaarae vata aaieaas fae
aaiamahe asfefa as az wiaey |
eldfiaiin ga za quate: saa 4 gfe: aa
aaey a ana atafiia watal iaveazar ici
ity aay weal Aafa Mefan WR
amaaanifeatata faalgee alsq Aer |
Sloka-17-18 44. The Dasa Chakra is of the form of a human
being, a male. Reckone from the natal star of the Dasa till that
of the master. When the number is within the first 3, it is supposed to be on the head, and the result be monetary gain; when
ii is within the next 3, it is on the face and denotes loss or
destruction; the succeeding 5 to the latter denote the chest and
promise much accumulation of wealth; should it be within the
next 6, it is on the feet and effect is poverty or insufficiency;
when any of the next 2, it in on the back and predicts danger to
life; the next 4 denote the abdomen (pelvis) and the result will
be good. The next 2 are assigned to the anus and the result is
fear. The last 2 belong respectively to the right and left hand
and their respective effects will be wealth and death. The Dasee

Chakra is very much akin to the aforesaid one,but it belongs to
the female sex. In this Chakra, the first 3 stars are on the head
and signify gain, the next 3 are on the face and signify loss; the
next 2 are on the two shoulders and denote the death of the
master. The next 5 are on the back and denote growth. The next
7 are on the chest and signify loss. The next 1 is on the private
parts and forebodes insult. The next 6 are on the two feet, 3 on
each, and the result will be loss of wealth.
atat afedinat qoacet aorarcay
Slay SATA AsMAagsa Aeaifasq 12S ll
Weiatay sanz a ay aan ahaa
TANG VAI Waa ara amfezyq |
Sloka-184%-19'% = When a cow or a she buffalo is to be
purchased or accepted as a gift, the result will be as follows:-
Count from Uttaraphalguni to the star ruling on the day of
buying or receiving, should this number be within the first 3, it
will promise gain; if within the next 2, it foretells loss, the next
8 indicate gain of money; the next 5, happiness; the next 8,
again gain and the last 1, great fear. The corresponding parts of
the body denoted by the said six groups are: (1) head (2) face
(3) the two feet (4) chest (5) the breasts and (6) the private part.
Bulls and other similar quadrupeds should be negotiated or
accepted as gifts after duely consulting this Chakra.
aa faaarada nog ey aT: TAY
feages feaq aaah stafea: qureqa? lize
qa § faa wacqanserasearaae
WR AMTHTASIA ef Bass aye |
Sloka-19 %20 % When going to ride a horse, count from
the star occupied by the Sun till the natal star of the native
(including Abhijit). Should the number be within the first 5, it
is on the back; if within the next 10, it is on the hind portion, the
next next 2 will be on the tail; the next 4, on the legs; the next

5, on the belly; and the last 2, on the face. Their effects in their
order are (1) prosperity (2) gain (3) loss of wife (4) obstacles
(5) destruction and (6) gain of money.
TAA aaaas HAT ISAAAT eI
AeA HAMS GS BL TBR RY il
eceatlag amarmenciornsy ef: a
ArT TAAAKA TAs J Ara |
Sloka-20%21% = When mounting an elephant count from
the Nakshatra occupied by the Sun to the natal star of the native. Should the number be within the first 2; the next 2; the
next 2; the next 2; the next 2; the next 4; the next 4; the next 4;
and the last 6, the limbs in their order with the corresponding
effects will be as under: ears-gain, head- gain, tusk-great pain,
tail-destruction, trunk-prosperity, back-wealth, chest-disease,
face-no change and feet-gain.
ae Ret Raacacney ATT
qaiafey a a acai aay RR
maa afaacat a Haat eafy Har. 27y
eer fandie aaa A124 Ife aay |
Sloka-214%22% Before mounting a palanquin, count from
the Nakshatra occupied by the Sun to the one occupied by the
Moon at the moment. Assign in the regular order 5 Nakshatras
for each of the four quarters of the palanquin beginning from
the East, the last 7 being reserved for the centre. The various
effects will be (1) health (2) much difficulty (3) emaciation (4)
disease (5) and prosperty. When a native mounts the palanquin
in an auspicious moment, it promises long life, growth and
happiness.
Sara men Raracfadisasttgy at a4
NPT FAI WA HA ARH BWA ATT |i RI

AMT AA I SH Taal HS FIUNGIE
qeaeadaal aargrat aasteas Rifaey |
srleq facqaa wR aH A Salata
detanay aafzaaraira wafssdq | Re
Sloka-224%-24. When holding a royal umbrella the followin Nakshatras are always auspicious: (1) Ardra (2) Uttarphalguni (3) Uttarashadha (4) Uttarbhadra (5) Rohini (6) Pushya
(7) Sravana (8) Dhanistha and (9) Satabhisha. Count from the
natal Nakshatra to the Nakshatra occupied by the Sun. Reserve
the first 3 Nakshatras for the bottom or handle of the umbrella,
and the next 7 for the stick or holder; the next 5 to the portion
of the stick protuding above; the next 8 to the inside of the
umbrella and the last 4 to its top. The several effects in their
order will be (1) destruction (2) loss of wealth (3) royal favour
(4) a great and noble king and (5) fame.
aaalfeTaraya nae Aah a
yeaa aaah aa way WHAT |
ny ag fafeachaa yoy May Aq
Hie agamag fanfta aerate 124!
Sloka-25. | Reckon from the Sun’s Nakshatra to the one
occupied by the Moon at the moment, 4 Nakshatras each for the
four legs of the cot are to be reserved and a Nakshatra each for
the four knobs of the four legs; and 7 for the centre of the cot.
The corresponding effects will be extreme happiness for the
centre, fear for the four corners, good offspring and prosperity
for the knobs. The Mancha Chakra has been described in this
manner.
VHAPAMSARSTTA WAI SIA: GT
at art aaatearacagiaafs: ated |
ave aigaa ad agfafe sari: waa
alfa: atiaia aaafea eat ameaas aay 2

Sloka-26. Count from the Nakshatra occupied by the
Sun till the natal Nakshatra of the native. Reserve 5 Nakshatras
for the arrow-blade and 5 for the arrow shaft; 5 for the junction
points of the arrow and the bend of the bow; 2 stars for the bowcane and 5 for each of the two ends of the bow. The respective
results will be: (1) gain (2) victory (3) becoming valourous (4)
discomfiture and (5) destruction. The wise have advised so.
This is known as Sasara or Chapa Chakra.
que TANG A VHA Beaay gi
aaalfareanratia: Afeatat ala:
HA TASHA QaAE Wa TATA AIg
ead: aaaagied SAAT tl Vo HN
Sloka-27. Reckon from the Sun’s Nakshatra till the
Natal Nakshatra of the native. Should the number fall within
(1) the first 3 (2) the next 6 (3) the next 3 (4) the next 6 (5) the
next 3 (6) the next 3 and (7) the last 3, they are supposed to
have link with the following portions of the car and their respective effects will be as noted against each of them :
(1) Danda or the central pole —-—————— _ Suceess.
(2) The Wheels ———————————— Fame.
(4) The bottom ———————— Happiness.
(5) The front portion of the car Gain of money.
(6) Yoke ———————_---- Failure or obstacle.
(7) All round————_——————-- Yielding happiness.
Rare fe Waa aa aR
aa eitagt fayiaaea ar aala aa: |
usiszafaqaeaiad ater HAAG |
quaaiag frateas aianfieearey Re
Sloka-28. Reckon from the Sun’s Nakshatra till the star
ruling on the day, should the number chance to fall in any one

of the following 9 groups of three each, the result will be : (1)
destruction (2) prosperity (3) freedom from disease (4) destruction (5) influx of wealth (6) trouble from Government (7)
poverty, insufficiency (8) causing death and (9) happiness
respectively. This is the speciality of the Ghurna Chakra or oil
mill that extracts oil from sesamum, cocoanut and the like.
qaaifaqaeaaa WMA AATTa
aaa grat: HarHsag eaakerry |
al BITa A tegaal fanfes y=a0
qaiaataz qagatea Vara aaaq =) RS, I
Sloka-29. Reckon from the Nakshatra ocupied by the
Sun to the Nakshatra occupied by the Moon. When the number
falls within (1) the first 4 (2) the next 2 (3) the next 2 (4) the
next 1 (5) the next 5 (6) the next 5 (7) the next 2 and (8) the next
6, the results in their ordgg will be (a) prosperity (b) destruction
(c) lots of gain (d) destruction (e) death (f) good (g) emaciation
of the body and (h) much wealth. This Ghuma Chakra will
guide the man as to when he should begin to extract the sugarcane juice.
aqitaigaas caraanag fasataaionaay
qiqafahaaa garages iad) Baad |
He RAY Saleafas BH a WA
AHaUTAR TM ASW HA DA AMAT ~—il- Ze Il
Sloka-30. Reckon from the Nakshatra occupied by the
Sun till the star of the day in the question. Should the number
be within the first 3, it will be bad; if between 4 and 6, it will
be good; if between 7 and 9, it will be bad; if within the next 5,
ie, between 10 and 14, it will be auspicious; if within 15 and 17,
it will be bad; if between 18 and 22, it will be good, in the next
3, ie., between 23 and 25, it will be bad. In the last, it will be
auspicious. These are the rules to be observed in Hala Chakra
while sowing the seeds or launching agricultural operations
afresh.

aearemneratiiha aa 3 aut Te
Wa Ay Weal tala Hs {Tay |
qilaraafeag f afea ataraRaina—
eeicafaad faraguat faareracenfahrg 3 211
Sloka-31. Count from the Nakshatra occupied by the
Sun (including Abhijit), place the first 6 above the boat, 3 on
the top of the prop or support, 3 on the bottom of the same, one
on the back, 6 on both the sides at 3 each and 3 on Sukkanakahelm of the ship-and 6 inside the boat. This is a Chakra to be
applied when building a new boat or plying the same. The 6
stars over the boat and a like number inside are declared to be
propitious, while the rest denote evil.
Tasaleaaras FE aANy TM ga SAAT
HS FTAA SAT TAGAREY as TTA |
TIT USTHT: Rarhefae Bearer tq
AH TaAIAIAAfaay TIT WAT = «FR Il
Sloka-32. Reckon from Krittika till the star ruling on the day,
reserve 5 for the face, 9 for the neck, 8 for the centre and 5 for the post.
The respective effects of these 4 groups will be: (1) honour (2) gain (3)
the death of the master and (4) kingship. This Deepika Chakra is to be
applied when a lamp is to be newly used to gain prosperity.
aniafafanrg faa 7 Afeease qaifes
aaa daithashtataass afass aeang |
ftirnaaanfrargaaeaedtateaa
Hey aifsyarens wala GHIA AAA AT 13311
Sloka-33. Reserve 3 Nakshatras from Rohini for the centre.
The rest of the 24 Nakshatras in sets of 3 each should be assigned in
their order to the 8 quarters or direction commencing from the East.
‘When a well or a tank is dug while the Moon is in any one of these
groups, it will show the possibility of obtaining water or absence of it

in that area in the following way: (1) water will be found very soon (2)
there will be no water (3) medium (4) no water (5) plenty of water (6)
-very sweet water (7) saltish water (8) full of water and (9) medium
supply.
Ry Ta Bhi Aq AQl ued AT: AI
TAS aA aTTIatiaaifea aay |
Wea Wiedenw
renqara afiaat auftaty eq a8 I
Sloka-34. While constructing a house or digging a well
or reservoir or opening a pleasure garden, the erection of a
pillar or column should be done at a time when the effect is
declared as good or auspicious out of the following results:
count from the Nakshatra occupied by the Sun till the one Moon
is posited in, should the star at the time falls within the first 6,
it signifies death; if within the next 20, the result will be fame
and prosperity; if it falls in the last 2, loss of wealth. Then only
the work will bring fame, happiness and prosperity to the family
aitley aaaed feale aziss aaaaa
sq BNAESA aaa Daas Wear: |
werehryea aeazt wed cag FAA
zig tauren aeetieng = ll 34 I
Sloka-35. Count from the Nakshtra occupied by the Sun
till the star of the day. Mark 4 stars for the upper portion of the .
door frame, 3 for the centre, 8 for the 4 corners at 2 each, 8 for
the top hinges at 4 for each and the last 4 for the bottom of the
frame. The respective result will be : (1) kingship (2) kingship
again (3) banishment (4) 8 kinds of wealth and (5) death. This
Dwara Chakra is profitable to find out the auspicious Nakshatra for raising the door frame.
aat ava fake: sacar Washes ge
wqasafarra thas fea |

RIMM RETTTVAN: AYR
Tysanasipnmeraneaiadaa =i: BE
Sloka-36. Note the Tithi ruling at the time; add to it the
number denoting the week day and one more. Divide the sum
so obtained by 4. When the remainder is 3 or 0, it promises
happiness. Should it be 1 or 2, it indicates loss of money. Reckon
from the Sun’s Nakshatra till that of the Moon.’ Divide the
number into 9 groups of 3 each and assign them to the several
planets in the following order : Sun, Mercury, Venus, Saturn,
Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Rahu and Ketu.. Should the Nakshatra
belong to a benefic planet, it will denote prosperity; if to a
malefic planet, it forebodes evil. This Chakra is to be used
whenever a new oven or furnace is to be used or a new fire is
suggested for the purpose of adoration of planets or idolation.
darrefasienhihakiaa an: Ty
aad ¢ aaTaaa: Ee Bate |
araaaaIgyaaMs Maqea 4
aq wlraigaafes, eas gee} egaal AGS |i 29
Sloka-37. Multiply the length of a box by its breadth in
terms of inches and yavas. Divide this product by 9. The remainders thereof , viz., 1, 2, 3, etc. will respectively correspond to the 9 planets from the Sun onwards. The good or bad
effects will be correspondingly identical with the planet denoted by the remainder. Where it is more than 2 yavas it is a
mark. An inch = 8 yavas.
aH aad acatafad aiees azar
egied Preical qras TATA TAY |
erat qaat tar ale calfied fay: geM:
moaaaa fa aeaT aa J TI SAG NRA
qet aa faa feaza Be aizian aT
Wea agomegae anfaaa Ha |

afafganisam aaqz ard Aq1=saT:
adicaangy fate gaalg:faaargaiq «380
Sloka-38-39. When a man is eager to settle down in a new
town or country he should find out the most opportune time for
the purpose. This he can learn in the-following manner so that
he may be blessed with children, wealth and prosperity. The
Chakra for the purpose is in the shape of a man. Count from the
star of the town or country till the natal Nakshatra of the native.
Should the number be within the first 5, it will be on the head,
and the effect will be accumulation of wealth. When it is within
the next 3, it will be on the face denoting destruction ; if within
the next 5, it will be on the chest ensuring wealth; if within the
next 6, it will be on the 2 feet at 3 per each foot foreboding loss
of wealth; if it is the next star, it will be on the back denoting
danger to life if within the next 4, it will be on the pelvis and
signify prosperity. The next 2 stars will be on the anus and
forebode trouble and fear. The last 2 will relate to the two
hands - night and left - at one each promising much gain and
poverty respectively.
aAgigoias fF ANI J azaTsal
aig: gfaa ga zaIa Arad aq |
ara figa aoe wealtet ea wa
ae ufgat gaaenaiel atiaa wheaq = llvell
Sloka-40. Count the natal asterism of the boy whose
sacred thread (Yaguopaveet) ceremony is to be held, till the
Nakshatra occupied by Jupiter. Reserve the first 5 for the head,
the next 3 for the face, the next star for the chest, the 8 for the
2 feet, 2 stars for the boy’s Palasa (staff) and the next 8 for the
deer skin worn. The respective results will be : (1) happiness
(2) swerving from one’s religious duties (3) a slanderer (4)
afflicted with disease (5) lustrous and (6) learned.
Taina Waa atsatecara Hata aq
agi Wats Raleg aH I Meaea7 |

fazaua agian agihar tar feacarfaiag
aifsahags9 fefaacsag aaear ol 88
FAA WASH ait af qraeneatt
natty amas ofafeuaifaceaat aa: |
AST AAR UTS TAMIL FI
qreraaiushagensifaraeas: wer
Tawa Raat wassagreanae7 Fsrdiaiay wa amaad: afar aranfea |
TeaeIfggarea qerzenfasad
AAARaattardnasaa Val fay 1 V2 Il
Ha aH) asisa aeRfsat
aaez Rryaal q aaaet STATI |
Sloka-41-43'%. In order to guess whether there is a hidden
treasure, underground, of jewels, money, bones, etc. in a house
or at a site, and to be sure about the truth or otherwise of its existence by verification, the Nidhi Chakra is most appropriate.
Draw five horizontal lines crossed by 8 vertical lines, thus
making 28 squares. Post in them all the 28 Nakshatras inclusive of Abhijit thus : Let the 7 squares in the top horizontal
lines be occupied by the Nakshatras Revati, Aswini, Bharni,
Krittika, Magha, P.phalguni and Uttaraphalguni respectively.
In the next horizontal line, the order of the Nakshatra will be :
Uttarabhadra, Purvabhadra, Satabhisha, Rohini, Aslesha, Pushya
and Hasta. The 3rd horizontal line will comprise of the Nakshatras: Abhijit, Sravana, Dhanishta, Mrigasira, Ardra, Punarvasu
and Chitra. The last line will consist of the Nakshatras Uttarashadha, Purvashadha, Moola, Jyeshta, Anuradha, Visaka
and Swati. The Moon is the lord of the 14 stars : Bharani,
Krittika, Aswini, Ardra, Punarvasu, Pushya, Magha, Aslesha,
Abhijit, Revati, Sravana, Uttarashadha, Purvashadha and
Purvabhadra. The Sun is the lord of the remaining 14 Naksha-

tras. The Sun and the Moon at the time of query will guide
about the kind of the treasure concealed (SL-46,47 infra). Table
showing the Nakshatra positions.
Revati | Aswini Krittika] Magha |P. U.
’ Phalguni| Phalgun
U. r. Sata- Aslesha Pushya
Bhadra | Bhadra | bhisha
Abhijit | Sravana | Dhani- | Mriga- | Ardra |P.Vasu | Chitra
shta sira
U. P. Jyestha| Anu- | Visakha
Ashadha} Ashadha radha
aad ifare zita sia aracaqafea—
yea attafaagagmeaeey GA_ lve Ul
A=BUgien aAniafagal waigaey fF 4
TMla ay adataand aenlfoatsal AIT |
aene-zftataeaicar: aatfahat: waeaeal sealyeleaa afear: VV faster: BAIANS
Sloka-43 4-45. The time taken in Ghatikas by the Sun to
traverse a complete Nakshatra from its beginning to the end is
called the ‘divisor’. Note the interval in Ghatikas taken by the
Sun from the time of his entry into that Nakshatra till the desired moment and multiply the same by 60 and use the divisor
referred to above. The remainder should be multiplied by 27
and the product be divided by 60. It will give the number of
Stars counted from Aswini that have been traversed by the Sun
at the time. Similarly find out the interval taken by the Moon in
the Nakshatra she is posited in to travel the Ishta Ghati or
required time. Multiply this by 27 and divide the product by 60.
- The quotient will reveal the number of Nakshatras counted
from Aswini passed by the Moon. The remainder in Ghatikas
and Vighatikas will denote her position at the time.

aemlerefiaeez se Aga a at aa
aa Nase qanqy aaa = ale 7: |
aid alt Bats qagihest agqa SSearle a difaa: safe aetaia ata Rat ee
Sloka-46. | Compute the position of the Moon at the time
as recommended in the last Sloka. Should she be aspected by
planets from the Sun onwards, the treasure concealed will consist
of (1) golden articles (2) silver (3) copper (4) brass (5) gold (6)
bell metal (7) iron (8) tin and (9) lead. When she is aspected by
many planets full of strength, the treasure will be of many sorts
of metals. If she does not get the aspect of any of the planets,
there will not be any hidden treasure at all.
wi WMA I qErMS wHeaae
aaa af zag waa yea fq |
yea af ana Tage teats HAR
Us WhIS I TH? awlen aTA «tt Vo It
Sloka-47. Should all the planets aspect this Moon at the
time, the native will get the valuable treasure contained in a
very big vessel. Should this Moon be in (Leo) Simha, the treasure will be concealed in a golden vessel; if in the Bhava belonging to the Stthula Moon (VII-13 supra) it will be in a silver
vessel; if in the Bhava of Mars, it will be in a copper vessel; if
in that of Mercury, it will be in a vessel made out of a precious
stone; if in Jupiter’s house, it will be in a stone-vessel; if in the
house of Venus, it will be in an earthen pot; if it is in Satum’s,
it will be in a vessel made of iron.
Y aaa: feat afar Fafa wa a
seq oftadaa a anaicas fe Raa |
qa Btanifead afe al @ al sRaram
Nea TAT MIA: a FTG WIG ve I
Sloka-48. Should the Sun and the Moon be together in
a star ruled by the Moon at the time (SL-45 supra) it will indi-

cate the presence of treasure. When two planets are in a Nakshatra
ruled by the Sun, the treasure will consist of bones. If the Sun
and the Moon be in each other’s place, nothing will be found.
Should this Moon associate with malefics, the native will not
get the treasure, if it is associated with benefics, he will get it.
The depth of the hidden treasure should be guessed in units of
a hand’s length, by the number of degrees passed by the Moon
in the Nakshatra.
tanqegaar sia aza feaenaray UAGs Wnasseaeaaraay |
wy ginaaeieg Afeaq aif Fong AM 4
rreafuanerfanfac any al cecdt Leu
UUIEY IHACATA Taal aay
ary soaI TEOMeITh fea afte |
qayseoites Fee as WTA
aa aHsertatgataa Mahe afta — hell
Sloka-49-50. Draw four vertical lines crossed by four horizontal lines so as to make 9 squares. Counting from the Nakshatra occupied by the Sun at the moment, assign 3 Nakshatrs for
the centre, the 8 other groups of 3 stars each being reserved for
East
All kinds prosperity
of prosperity
Loss of
the couple
Debt
and
Disease

the 8 directions beginning from the East. The position of the
Moon on the day of the marriage will be denoted in any one of
them. The several results of these beginning from the central
square are (1) loss of the couple (2) prosperity (3) destruction
of the entire family (4) widowhood (5) countinuance of the
family (6) large debt and disease (7) the girl concerned going
astray (8) wealth and com and (9) all sorts of prosperity. This
is how all the groups of Chakra have been described by Lord
Shiva to Sn Nandin.
This brings to the end of the first Kanda of
Uttarkalamriia composed by Kali Das.
Ul SaVaTSTAT I
ll fetaaeoe:
KANDAGTII
saat farasechaaaaaaal aai—
Rleqaaafeqecaaayaiiererat aay |
Rafesats aracheat goanaifear
naaatat aalaaaaaeeat geadiq 8
Sloka-1. A person, who has observed Brahma-Charya
flawlessly and has studied the sacred texts with devotion as
recommended for his vocation, should marry a charming girl,
possessing good physical features, appeals to his heart, unmarried, much younger in age, devoid of Sapindta (done nothing so
bad within the group of relations so as to deserve funeral libation), free from diseases, should not belong to the same Gotra
and Pravara, free from contagious diseases like leprosy, should
be below 10 years of age and is attractive both to the eyes and
the heart.

Srizig aay aafe Raa Roeifza:
AAI Age BazamMe aieaAE se |
aaa aie fara 3a Za: Baer
eirialiaraages MARAT Wee ti
Sloka-2. Three generations of the father, grand-father
and great-grand-father, are entitled to the funeral offering of
Pinda and three others preceding to them have the privilege to
the Pindalepa (application of ghee, etc., to the Pinda). The
native in succession happens to be the 7th. This is called single
Sapindya in a family. Mark the generation at which the family
becomes different with respect to the bride and the bride-groom.
This difference of the family must be counted as far back as the
7th and the Sth removed from the father and the mother respectively of the two-bride and the bridegroom.
Note: Blood-relations to any of the six generations become mutually Sapindas.
Gal a Fig aeaaa JaAaeaT FAA
qiMea ANS WAARAAAAAA Taq |
qareg Gag fFzeazea aa
qizeag Rafatagaginzasgaai fara: ui
Sloka-3. With respect to the children of a man or woman,
or that of the bride and bridegroom, the Sapinda relationship
should be taken into account as far back as the 7th removed
from the father of the native and the Sth removed from the
mother, and within that group, if there is any marital alliance,
it should be rejected. Beyond that there should be no objection
to it. When Sapindya breaks at any stage for one party, it does
so for the other party too. Observe this rule while making any
marital alliance between two parties.
Note: Kullukabhatta has observed that the mother’s father though connected with Pinda is not Sapinda since his Gotra
is different.

Tas aaa aPaaAaeIRAA
qivaawarat afar sata Acar ar |
adia fafaesegiaea: eral a arfra:
aeat at aragqenfata aifastaaza: el
Sloka-4. Some people believe that the fourth from the
mother-forbidding three generations only-should be acceptable
for marriage, i.e., from the fourth onwards; there should be no
objection, but those girls should be avoided who stand in the
relationship of sisters, mothers and daughters. There are others
who maintain that marital alliance may be entered into between the six generation in one line and the fifth in the other;
and between the Sth generations, provided the girl does not
come under the relationship of a sister to the boy. In Orissa and
Tamil states, marriage between parties of the 3rd generation is
allowed, but this does not hold good for all places. Should the
bride happen to belong to the sixth or eighth generation in the
line of the bride-groom the prohibition disappears absolutely.
azaifeqaagcntaraal altvararara(f)R—
(HRA: FAAVIABARI MARA BAT |
ararqafaa-qaiga atlqeer g qzalfane
fos) Ae sete areqaTE UIgdfadias: = 4 I
Sloka-5. Always start counting from the common forefathers of the parties and the Sapindya-rule should not be ignored. Similarly, avoid the violation of the standards of the
particular families and countries. Also investigate thoroughly
the relationship with the other family. The word Sapinda means
one who has equal relationship with the Pinda or body of the
common fore-father. The body is composed of six sheaths, bones,
muscles and marrow obtained from the father and skin, flesh
and blood from the mother. If in any particular case this common relationship is not very much binding upon the two parties
or the question of inheritance of property does not arise, the
marriage may be allowed.

THIAAT UA GTA ASNT Tat AI
ant oy aalehawaqaaraqaisaar |
Aa A AneTAIMNZM elagad aal
eat at anafzaey factaraal at wry UR
Sloka-6. When a woman separates from her husband and
decides to live with somebody else, the husband may marry her
own sister, if he desires progeny. This may be agreed as an
exception to the rule that the daughters should not be married
to the same family or sons of the same parents. But in the case
of twin sisters, if they marry twin brothers it will be in the
regular order.
aaa ate (aed taaasrareeaqata act
— atftoga aaa Hraeran ay daar |
ATM AAT TAI I TAA PAAT
AAA AMAA af at a ANsazeT | v I
Sloka-7. When a man is blessed with children through
his second wife, then the son of the first wife has Sapindya relationship with her for three generations to come. Suppose,
that woman is issueless, the daughter of their paternal uncle
will not at all stand in the relationship of a mother to the son
referred to above,:i,e., he can marry her, though apparently she
is a mother to him, being, the cousin of his step-mother. The
step-mother’s sister’s daughters too will not be a sister to him.
Therefore, he may have marital alliance with her.
a Alaa aa aaa caeAaAeaTAA
at BeQYGa=VA FT Ze AeqeyA BST: waAATE |
feat oar a Sega? Alar sacral
fat af after aa cafe earadarnaa: lel
Sloka-8. When they marry girls who happen to be their
sisters owning to their father and mother belonging to the 7th
and Sth generations respectively, they are reduced to the posi-

tion of Sudras in this very life. Even if they are not fallen, they
reduce their parents and other relations to a lower status. Since
one does not fall down even by marrying a forbidden girl on
account of their having no contamination.
avers Rawaaty garahdiear
alswn 3% yana(a)aaa easiest faz:
asa afqeannyaaqicicfan
AR oa fier ataed Faas ne 4
Sloka-9. After the departure of the Sapindya relationship, a man can marry a girl who may happen to be a relation
of a mother’s sister, or with a girl who may be the daughter in
the same manner. There is no hesitation on these grounds in the
states south of the Narmada. Even when the Sapindya is concealed, marriage is allowed in those states between families
belonging to generations within five and three with respect to
father and mother respectively.
questa Fam Tame AAA
fozeqr's aviaal afX wacaAaeataaT |
aaa feat fe atasaat amtazetaa—
Qs: qafta @ mlazaae facafaary =! Yo Il
Sloka-10.It is against all sacred mandates or Dharma to
have marital alliance among the twice-born within five generations from the father as well as from the mother, or within five
generations with respecct to mother; and seven, to father. Should
it be within three generations, the native will be guilty of committing the murder of a Brahmin. Maternal uncle’s daughter
should be accepted as one of own Gotra (family) with respect
to debt, buying, woman’s asseembly or feeding. Marital alliance with her or with the daughters of one’s own father’s sister
is forbidden.
Sal adeawat aaadhat aqradat
adiat saa: figcasaat wacaa arerang |

guicfantas: waadttaeasl waa
HAN: BA AT aaaa: eareslgyNar? FIT Ue Lil
Sloka-11.Should a native marry his own maternal uncle’s
daughter or one belonging to the Gotra or Pravara of the mother,
or his own niece or the daughter of his father’s sister and sow
of his seed, he should better give her up and perform the expiatory rite called Chandrayana. In the South marriage with daughters of maternal uncles is popular. This is taking place mostly
amongst the young ladies who eat fish and are addicted to many
paramours and those who drink.
Note: Vyasa has advised the husbands to give up those
women:
(1) Who have illicit relations with a disciple;
(2) With the preceptor,
(3) Who hate their husbands; and
(4) Who is guilty of committing incest-with a low bred
bastard.
eae gadt #4 Aawaalarey TI: THe:
a ay faftal aor aaaefid}) nay fafaesad |
TaeraafRatafscaraay at x
tered a fates at tana sefamsafamy = 88
Sloka-12.A young woman who has become pure by bath
al the end of her monthly course may be fed, at a Sraddha, but
one who has married his maternal uncle’s daughter or a Brahmin who has marred a Sudra woman ought not: to be worshipped and fed. So too, there is a Vedic prohibition against
feeding a woman who happend to be a vagabond. Those who
are worshipped must say that they are satisfied (Tripta Huai).
We can not say that we have no faith in Truth, Fire and the Sun.
This is an example and not an authority or public opinion. But
in south India there is no such rule or tradition.
afioga wala faqeciae aruaralgar
4 *Pacgafsaaizahat sasha 2 wats |

Gal Ala Ta aaa aTwTaT Alaar
TAT TFSI AA TEU WMATA aMIaaq: = tsa
Sloka-13.The Sapindya relationship percolates for 3 generations only (in this part of the country) in the case of a girl
who is born of a woman belonging to the same caste as her
husband. But all those who are bom of the same father but of
mothers of differnet castes, become brothers mutually, and all
the wives of the father are mothers to all the children. Similarly, the brothers of those women are maternal uncles. For a
man given in adoption within the family cirlce itself, there is
Sapindya, for seven generations, but this period is reduced with
respect to Kshatriyas.
alata aaa aeaAtsaat
aga 3 ate geo Aca ara: |
AUNT BAA AVE AA_
aaa fafaratafaa a waaag = ll 2e
Sloka-14.No man should marry (1) the sister of his aunt
(father’s brother’s wife) (2) the sister of his mother’s co-wife,
the daughter of (1) and (2), (3)the sister of his brother’s wife
(4) one who stands in the relationship of a mother (5) his teacher’s
daugher (6) his son’s daughter (ie. the daughter of one who
stands in the relationship of a son). The difference of Pravara
(Vedic preceptorship handed down from ancient times) should
be taken into account only with respect to the father and not of
the mother.
arial feawararnagal a staazrast—
Te Blase afafaeqhea a) simat ara |
ay feng BAIT al Alea TA
alfemaan a aa wae almaga ase: i 24 Ul
Sloka-15.After the marriage of his daughter no father
should dine in her house believing in the opportunity to meet
friends. and relatives. Similarly, he should not displease his

son-in law, taking him to be the lord Narayana himself. No man
should worship under one roof two emblems of Lord Siva, two
Chakras of Lord Vishnu, two Sun-Gods, two Saligramas and
three Sakti weapons of Lord Subrahmanya, as they are neither
beneficial nor conducive to prosperity.
afemaata aa a fafa aa fear asaa
area feat aamafed feat sa: aaa |
farirBiAAAsAA MTA aaT TAA
ASTUSATS ANGRY aaeqer aaa: i 26 4
Sloka-16. Whenever there are two Saligrama emblems of
the Lord only one should be worshipped and not both. Even if
it is damaged, it should be worshipped so long as its Ring is not
spoiled; the emblem of Lord Shiva in similar circumstances
should be re-established and its sanctity should be restored
before worship. The latter emblem must have uniform height.
Its top should remain open. The circumference of the stand
should be thrice the height of the Emblem. While the dimensions of the water-course should be five times the height.
a: FaiRaaaag sfeaa sry a alae
al aa: fader faara fafeanenfecmraeaq |
Gada: a aaqeaafea Fgh UTITICS
aml gaficadsefa We Weaera cals igo
Sloka-17.He, who performs his father’s Sraddha on an
auspicious day, should also do it for his maternal grandfather
also. Otherwise, i.e., by leaving him, he would be committing
the sin of patricide. The annual ceremony that is ordained,
should be observed for the wives of the respective fore-fathers
also separately. In the three kinds of Sraddhas, viz., Vridhi,
Gaya and Ashtaka, it is the religious duty of the man concerned
to do the ceremony as well as the other religious functions relating to Gods. When the rite is performed at home, the native’s
wife should hand over the Pinda to him.
Note: Sraddha is the devout offering of food or food

material for the sake of Manes. It is mainly of two kinds : (1)
Parvana and (2) Ekoddishta. The funeral ceremony of the father, grandfather and the great-grand-father is called Parvana
while the one done for the one above is called Ekoddishta. This
again is of three types : (1) Nitya or daily (2) Naimittika or
casual and (3) Kamya or optional. This is further divided in to
5 varieties as (a) Aharahah (daily) (b) Parvana (c) VriddhiSraddha (d) Ekoddishta and (e) Sapindeekarana. The VriddhiSraddha is performed where there is the birth of a son at home.
The best time of a Sraddha is given by Yagya-Valakya.
seRsTEIATAT Raa WR ERAT
qe Taq Tafa ar a sag ecaead |
fasaga oftandiaay assdg ga ane
Siqoqidagiaa feaatay: eWATAMe: SUN
Sloka-18.Senionty of the twins is determined by the order
of the falling of the seed into the womb, but it is determined
otherwise. The child whose face the father beholds first ts called
the elder.
Avoid Tri-Jyeshtha, that is the marriage of the Jyeshta,
eldest son or daughter should not be performed in the month of
Jyeshta, if they are born in the Nakshatra Jyeshta. This remark
holds good for Upanayanam also. Similarly two Jyeshtas also,
i.e., marriage or any auspicious rite for the, Jyeshta, eldest son
in the month of Jyeshta are to be shunned.
When an auspicious cercmony is performed in the family,
allow two months to eplapse before another is observed for a
brother or sister. As regards others, the function may be observed after purification by a bath where there is pollution.
ealcal (x) feacgaraaaParaaza: aaa:
aidtaa gawast qaat ga: HaEfaa: |
areata agleqgaadl aarafag? wag
Gal RleT at caahaaea Mfg: satu 22 ti

Sloka-19. Sons are of 12 kinds, viz., (1) one’s own (womb)
son (2) daughter’s son (3) one born of one’s wife by another (4)
one born of an unmarried girl (5) one born of a woman that is ©
remarried (6) adopted son (7) bought from the parents (8) one
who is made a son on account of his good qualities (9) an
orphan or an abandoned child who gives himself away to another
as a son (10) the son of a woman who is pregnant at the time of
marriage (11) one born secretly of a man’s wife by another
who can not be determined exactly and (12) one who is abandoned by the parent or parents and brought up by another. Of
these 12 kinds of sons only two varieties i.e., (1) and (6) are
approved and the remaining are to be shunned in Kaliage.
Note: Manu has spoken of 12 kinds of sons in IX -
158-160, viz., Aurasa, Kshetraja, Datta, Kritrima, Gudhotpanna,
Apaviddha, Kaneena, Sahodha, Kreeta, Paunarbhava,
Swayamdatta and Saudra. The definition of kshetrajay son is:-
aes; wat eatae safeae ar aaa fia
a 9a: Rat: Bae Il
TAY AUT Haq Tass Tez—-
A aaa fdtagara Tala Terael |
gat omrelafe: agate waaay
dasa feaarata wegfa aeanetaaeq |! Xe Il
Sloka-20.The man who wants to, have a son by adoption
Should first offer a pair of ear-rings, clothes and such other
gifts to the boy; and accept with joy as a blessing from God,
when he is given away by his parents through a sacrifice. He
should pour cooked-rice on the sacrificial fire and chant the
mystic syllables and the Vedic Hymns beginning with Pratrabhaga
as well as the one commancing with Yastvahride after the precepts
of his Grihya Sutras and thereafter entertain with sumptuous
food a couple of Brahmins.
mMaANseaaeawaye Mat aA aeTz)
a Sag) faaar a aaa ararqacamarg |

Aas wat aazasagicg AeaaAUS IAaasakatea SA A AA AT UA
Sloka-21.A boy who deserves to be adopted should be
the son of a brother or the like. He must be soft spoken and
sincere in words and deeds and not one who may come out to
be troublesome, nor should he be older or senior in rank. A
widow is not permitted to give or take one in adoption. Though
the boy may be inferior in the matter of Pravara (The Vedic
lineage), the sacrifice must be observed according to such customs of the man who adopts him and with Mantras commencing With Bodhi. This adoption of a boy is permitted before the
tonsure ceremony and not after he has been invested with the
sacred thread. Similarly, adoption of a slave or that of a Sudra
should be shunned.
aes sat ake adaar aar a7
RZ PRES A SAG WFQ WAT: |
facssiftea 9 amar aigitarar |
calsal satel Hae alg a Fava 1221
Sloka-22.If Brahmins receive wealth from Sudra women,
promising them to serve like slaves, they indeed become Sudras
and get the fruit prescribed for them. So has opined the Sage
Parasara. He says a Sudra who causes a sacrifice to be performed in the house of a Brahmin will reap its full benefits. A
man who is given away in adoption himself should perform the
Sraddha of his father (who begot him) when the person supposed to do it is absent.
SARITA: ATAfafeal Wa FARA al
aiftesa q aReaeaga TAscaeagMel ya: |
gaazcaiiaa: afatiar aaa areneat— |
HM] F Aosay a aal Glt As ATT [esl
Sloka-23. Those sons who are taken in adoption and those
who are bought indeed get the Gotra of the family they join,

even if they come from a different Gotra, but remain bereft of
Sapindya relationship. So says the Sage Vasishtha. When an
adopted son originally belonged to a different Vedic Sakha
(branch) was invested with the sacred thread according to the
Sakha of the father adopting him, he certainly gets the Sakha,
etc., of his 2nd father. He has got the right for a share in his
father’s property. This inheritance will not then depend upon
the Sapindya relationship. As regards the pollution (Shauch
and Sootaka) also, he gets it just like his adoptive (2nd) father
and not otherwise.
ila fteaga waeis faazara arcana
feosismraaia Wegaraar tai | TT |
FU MAMA A VE Bal Gafaat Fea
a-arsta Ratvaa azay Rea at gaat vil
Sloka-24.A son given away in adoption will cease to have
any right over his father’s wealth, Gotra and funeral libations
and he gets them pertaining to his adoptive father. After adoption by another; a man cannot give funeral libations to his father
that has begotten him.
With regard to sacrifce and funeral offerings, the rule is
that the adopted person will follow the system of his new relative (father). When a person foresees the extinction of his family,
he gives his daughter in marriage with the idea of adopting her
son as his own, the grand son bom of that wedlock will be like
that of his own born, and the relationship is confirmed, provided there is no desire for double parentage, i.e., maintaing
relationship with both the families.
Salat GATARTHAT TAMA
aysafaate aw za afanfeas sata: |
ag Bifsacanieateael amas afe
araamanganaaatqaavd aq ky I
Sloka-25.Those who want to get married may marry the
younger sister of their sister’s husband or that of their elder

brother’s wife. A widower who is not keeping the marital fire
or whose wife is living far away, should get his father’s anniversary (Sraddha) performed by his brothers who are maintaining that fire and their wives living with them. It should not be
observed by others (the co-partners and the like).
The Anniversary ceremony should not be observed along
with the daily sacrificial fire, as after kindling it and keeping
it with oblations, it must be disposed of (rejected).
qint giafataa areaaay aeaal aesat
emia at afm mgal Azra: Brat | ary sat |
aRlyIaeehaeyN Gal. GARI
a aratafa sal aged mdsag Azafa Wei
Sloka-26. Getting the Homa or sacrifice performed by the
Brahmins who are fed is not proper. Doing so is only an inconsiderate act of the followers of the Rig-Veda school says Bhrigu,
the sage. Brother of the wife and husband of sister (provided
their wives are alive), the sister, brother, daughter and sonwhen these six perform the Sraddha of the man concerned it
ceases to be a real one (Sraddha).
frgaingea aatanad qavat yy
arg alfeazdia Gataaarneasy fanart
Tzmifeaqraaaaasieay Aq aa
aaa a fafsa fara one faaraifaar 120911
Sloka-27.To get a religious mendicant, a yogin or a philosopher for Sraddha feeding is almost impossible. So sincerely
try to satisfy such people completely. A Brahmin should not
accept the food offered to him at a Sraddha by a Sudra. Similarly a Brahmin should not give the consecrated food at a Sraddha
to a Sudra indicriminately. This is against the principle of distribution.
Manu is very clear on this subject in III 243-9.

TREU FS Ala VUflesa yzeaga
AATsgIeA THORYAY 4 BUA |
YINSAFH ARAM VATAGARAT—
cal a fRaenONfyatay AIT IATA U2<ll
Sloka-28.The benevolent ment that a man may experience from donating a house in charity is possible only when it
is given to a Brahmin along with some land. Even the Serpentking, Adisesha cannot spell the good effects of the gift made to
a Brahmin with wife and children. When a Brahmin indulges in
activities prescribed for people of other classes he stoops down
beyond pardon and will not get happiness in his life to come.
Similarly, a Sudra will not earn higher status or position in the
society by indulging in Brahmanic deeds. But according to Sage
Parasara it is otherwise.
aataagnaraea areal gait aa:
aT aSrlHasagrga) eafes a sea
AeAMSeTAMEA gar aA ea graa Ty
Tea aaaarachs fafafsarsh areas 29 1
Sloka-29. Those desirous of children should not bathe in
the sea on Saturdays, Tuesdays and Fridays, as also in Rahu
Kala or in a Lagna aspected by Rahu and during a Parvan, e.g.,
Full Moon, New Moon and Sankranti, etc., that is vitiated or
prohibited. if such a vitiated lunar day has to be adopted, according to some authorities for sea bath, it should be done after
an oil bath, sexual union, after a death, hair cutting and after a
pollution.
The vitiated lunar-days are 4th, 6th, 8th and 14th.
aatera qfafatiacmeransat wat
faaanaayst feraareasedy far: |
at tat fagarshi aegfafainen faataraa

Teal Tag am) af Herasta ala fay 0!
Sloka-30.For the purpose of charitable distribution, holy
baths, etc., the lunar day should be taken as the one that is prevailing at the time of Sun-rise. For a Bhikshu (religious mendicant) it is recommended that he should take his food in the last
1/8th portion of the day (i.e., within 3 hours of Sun-set) and
should not consume anything in the night. This also applies to
a widow also-no food at night. She should not even drink water
on the Parva Days. She may eat fruits, but not the cooked food
at night.
aay a saraha sfeay sracaatal aa—
favs Saha gafafay wea gatga: |
aeael a atsapafare aaraay
aaa AAKAfag: Bafa srisfa: | ReN
Sloka-31. There are two kinds of sons taken in adoption :
forever and temporarily. The daughter’s son will have double
parentage and should offer funeral libations and food in all
pious ceremonies to both the families. So has the Sage Vasista,
opined. But Katyayana does not consider it proper on the part
of the person concerned to do the Sraddha for both the families.
Vyasa has, however, expressed no objection, should the grandson perform the Sraddha of his maternal grand-father also.
Ga ate ueia sgarea eater a
CAM TABS Taal A crafeat aay |
aaa aves a guafka sareza—-
iia wad a Maeaalme fae satqradcfasacastat arate 22M
Sloka-32.In the same way Rishi Harita and the sage Hemadri say that a man should perform the Sraddha for his own
father as well as for his adoptive father. He should join in the
Pindas offered to both the fathers. He will also have a share in

the properties of both the fathers. In the matter of Sraddha he
must adopt the Gotra of his adoptive father, while at the time of
his marriage, he should adopt the Gotras of both the families.
Marriage within the mother’s family is not very much desirable, as his own mother and his maternal grand-mother are at
par with each, i.e., it is the same thing.
ardieaty faa xafa Seearfareantta:
mary facdta ayaa wg TATA |
Sea Aezaaara fF ofteatsy a Braz?
aaeg fat aata afe at alata alg ges 33M
Sloka-33. Even if the Nandi Function (initial propitiatory
rite performed at the beginning of every auspicious ceremony
to please the Manes) is performed, the Upanayana (the Sacred
Thread and Sacred Lore ceremonies) ought not to be initiated,
when there is a fall of Meteors, showers of fire or when the
mother is in her menses, But when these things take place after
the primary ceremonial meal of the Brahmachari, the Upanayana should not be postponed. The same rule should be observed
at the time of one’s daughter’s marriage, i.e., the father alone,
without the mother should not at all give the daughter in marriage. Should the mother be dead, the father should do the
Upanayana, provided he, the father, has no other disqualification in him such as of pollution.
nat alafuer Wane) alefaarenttr
eal Tq ated slafatyat Bt: Rratearaqaig |
BaAeIaIaaaa sleaharearas
aasaa aciedia fags: wet agehe = geil
Sloka-34.After the Nandi cermony at an operative
Mahurata, the Brahmachari should take his food only with his
mother and not alone. Similarly, the bridegroom should always
take his food with the bride after the marriage. The bride-groom
should get his hair cut and set in the manner which is popular
in the family. The sacred fire Kindled at Upanayana is inferior

to the Grihya fire. If the ordinary fire is combined with the
sacred fire, the wise should then worship it with the Mantra
beginning with the word ‘Pahi’ (Protect) and it should not be
adorned by other than the relations.
Mal Wanesashary PNCTA WET a—
Ba Beara Ue fafien warerngrahh: |
TaN fatea ae geqtTaansaH—
MAMA TAAHSAeHaA TABTEd: «Wl
Sloka-35. When the ordinary fire is followed by the Smarta,
house-hold fire (Grihya), sprinkle its ashes with the chanting
of the Mantra, Sanno Devi, and then offer oblations to the Fire
with the word, Pahi, etc. When the Grihya fire and the ordinary
fire are mixed together before the commencement of the worship of the marital fire and the Homa, the worship is to be
offered to it considering the importance attached to the fires.
> ~ Set
qaraa faasa qrafafaar (ledia Ba—
mSsT a WRAtaar fafaqaacdiad gaa: |
~ t n
aay acafraaaaaanfaeag ga:
NAA AAA AIAN Sai a aa Negi
Sloka-36. When the fires get mingled after the commencement of the aforesaid Homa, separate it into two parts; and with
one, complete The ‘Sthalipak’ after offering the final oblations. The wise say that the ghee should not be poured with
spoon (Smiva) when the sacrificial twigs tied to the spoon get
destroyed, it should be kept down and the fire should not be fed
by Ahutties with that spoon. Should the spoon be forgotten,
oblations must be offered to the divine Soma.
Salar afe scat a fay az: aa at WA:
qalersaaatrate Gat APSE Ta Ta: |
seasarfera’l a acta’ aa mera
ANNA TAHA ATG WHT: TWaRt = 112091

Sloka-37. When a native has lost his wife, he may marry
again, but that should be done in the odd years since his wife’s
death. It will prove beneficial; otherwise, remarriage in even
years will not be auspicious. When a girl attains poverty before
her marriage, her father and brothers, all will become great sinners. The husband, to be free from sin should not have union
with the wife before she attains maturity.
antfeafara taafear gia wqat qa:
HEME ariifadl anad aemaacar ff: |
agree arated aazal wWaaqsgat
aise aratqaaka azayraar ze
Sloka-38. The first lunar Tithi of the Year (Chaitra Sukla
Pratipada) should not have Vedha with the previous Tithi
(Amavasya), i.e., it should not be vitiated by or rise into the
Amavasya. When it so happens, it should be rejected. The birth
of Sri Rama took place at midday on the 9th lunar day and this
day is considered as most ominous and bestower of liberation.
The Navami which is afflicted (Vedhasahita) by the last portion of the Ashtami should be shunned by those who observe
the vow and keep fast on this day (It happens on certain days
that two Tithis rise in the 24 hours of the day) and worship Sri
Rama. Should it fall when the Nakshatra Punarvasu is rising, it
will prove very good for his worship.
aaferquascafeaa saeay ZA:
aidiat 4 fafaa Tamar wemET Tea. |
aga 3 Wa aT acether aadt yt
ara saat aafraaat aaigget Zar 1.31
Sloka-39.The auspicious day known as Tretadi or beginning of the Treta Yuga, or when the birth of Parasurama is celebrated is the 3rd lunar day in the month of Vaisakha (AprilMay)-Akshaya Tritiya. On this day the Tritiya Tithi mtst be at
mid-day and should not be crossed by the 2nd lunar day. For
the purpose of Sraddha, etc., the same Tithi should necessarily

run into the afternoon also. The best of the observances or the
celebrations of festivities in memorium of Narasimhavatara
should be done on a Tithi that extends up to the evening, should
it coincide with the Swati Nakshatra it will not be ominous.
aat efyq aaa fe az MeeTad aq
amiframeN sa at Haag a Te Fa: |
qaaa agfae: ANY gIaa EAT
EMAST | AMMAN agar aeqredt aeaq =| Voll
Sloka-40.In the Grihya Sutras it is recommended that the
Upakarama (Sacred Thread and Vedic Studies) for a new Brahmachari should be celebrated in the Sravana month (August);
but Brahmins should not perform it when there is a Sankranti
(The Sun transitting from one sign to another) or an eclipse of
Jupiter or Venus. Followers of Yajurveda observe it only on
the Purnamasi day; While the followers of Rigveda perform
this vow on a day in Sravana Nakshatra; but those believing in
Sama Veda do it even on a day when the Hasta Nakshatra is
there. Now I am going to speak about the Sacred Ashtami, the
8th lunar day, when the birth of lord Sri Krishna is celebrated.
MPIUAIALA ATAI: SUT Al Fay
afer afe qzastanact TEATHG are q |
qearqamatam af fafamaaasaty—
aeal af a Rata ag aga fag aM eet
Sloka-41.The 8th lunar day in the dark half of the Sravana month is the birth day of Lord Sri Krishna. when it coincides with the Rohini Nakshatra on a Wednesday, it proves to
be most auspicious and fruitful. The day should fulfil the condition,
viz., the Tithi should extend to the midnight and that it should
not be vitiated by the preceding Tithi (Saptami).
at ainfaaneqarag a8 Maat
ara at @ faaeaea eff at atarat at aa |

aa arfe fad atacfafas at aaraadl war
Al CUAFATFA WIA TSA AMT a J livali
Sloka-42. When the aforesaid Tithi-Ashtami runs beyond
three Yamas (one Yama = 3 hours) at night, the fast should be
broken at the end of either Tithi or the Nakshatra, as it is akin
to the holy Sivaratri. The 4th lunar day in the Bhadrapada,
during the bright half of the month, is the best day for the
worship of the Lord Ganesa. When the Tithi touches Panchami
and coincides with the Nakshatra Chitra, it is auspicious; but
not so praisworthy when it touches the third Tithi.
year carefigearsht agar A eae Bar
neae afe at ademfetsaay aa Tsay |
qa DaraIa Tena VAC ATM
aerRagiaa AeA AI GiasENg, | NNN
Sloka-43.The Rishi-Panchami will be very fruitful when
it runs with the Chaturthi, but not so good if it is connected with
the Shasti Tithi (6th day). Should the 14th Tithi run into the
noon (the bright half of Bhadrapada), Lord Anant should be
worshipped that day. As it is connected with the Pournima, this
day will prove most beneficial. The 14th day in the Dark fortnight of Aswini month known as Naraka Chturdasi will bring
about great religious merit in those who take an oil bath just
when the Moon-rises.
ara safe faa saafeaa ma: Tuftegfia:
ala axa canada |
aa @ftcaaes aca acre cae fata:
dfaeasafahacazesiant: Va ell
Sloka-44.An early morning bath on the 4th day of the
Bright Fortnight in Magha month is most pious and dear to
Adisesha, the lord of Serpents. Similarly, a holy bath on the
Ratha Saptami day coinciding with the Anuradha Nakshatra is
especially holy to the Sun-God. It is as auspicious and meritorious as the one taken on the occasion of a crore of Solar eclipses

or like the rising of a dozen Suns simultaneously. The sacred
Sivaratri running at midnight and taking place in the same month
will bring about the union with the Lord.
area ary aazan Paatata: ar arfa arfe fren
qeaea Rrarsfa: ret: sam salishraq |
ash eqiq fagedae aaah masKae aa:
aaa fe aia AR wey qa UU
Sloka-45.In the Magha (month), the 14th lunar Day (in
the Dark Fortnight) is known as Siva Tithi-sacred to Lord Siva
and also called Maha Sivaratri. Every month also, this 14th day
is dear to Lord Siva. Therefore, his devotees should offer their
adorations to Him as well as to the Divine Mother at dusk. This
will bing about glorious results. Similarly, every day, there is
a period of three Muhurtas ie., a period of 2 hours and 24
minutes, soon after the setting Sun touches the mountain peak
and it is sacred to Lord Siva. Pradosha is the time just when the
Sun sets. Lord Siva, therefore, should be worshipped daily at
that time. On the Sivaratri-day, a period of 2 Ghatika (48 minutes)
at midnight is called Mahanisa-Great night. Every night, a period
of 2 Ghatika at midnight is known as Maha-Nisa.
Cf. Pradoshstotrashtaka of Scandpuran.
qeIeRraA Fa ata az cleat at aq
Tl wR sat 3 aT said aT |
aq ata awa afta afe arcaqaizatizizalt
qaqa WAAC ale Racal glee daa VEL
Sloka-46. When Ekadasi does not fall on two days, the
Dwadasi should be observed on the very next day. But when it
falls on 2 days, ascetics and widows should observe it on the
2nd day. Although a dual Tithi does not exist on the 2nd day,
yet it is called one such, i.e., Ekadasi-cum Dwadasi. Hence
only the Ist day, viz., Ekadasi will predominate. Dwadasi is
considered best only when it is uncontaminated.

fagi Afesafeaea otal Anes aay
giezat agarea Haga TMI TITITT
uaanadad a Tasaaala TK
SSSA: Wash at BfEaat at aragTAT Ty y ll
Sloka-47. When Ekadasi is contaminated by Dwadasi, it
is deadly like poison; and only on the following day, Dwadasi
should be accepted for the fast, although strictly speaking it is
no Ekadasi. It is advisable to break the fast the day after that
(Dwadasi)-this view is held by the Vaishnavas. They believe
that Ekadasi should be free from Vedha (contamination) by
Dwadasi and the Ist meal of Dwadasi should be taken by the
wise after the Dwadasi is over.
ma wmraafa safe fe aat safeze afer
TK Teagatd UgMisd anise TAT |
wat aqzemifed fF faa ag aAsattar
qed dalaaiee WE Tal Fs aA TESTA MIC
Sloka-48. Should there be a Solar Eclipse on a certain
day, the Annual Sraddha ceremony should not be performed on
that day. On the contrary should the Moon be totally eclipsed,
the Sraddha may be observed on the same day, because the
eclipse and other rituals connecting with it take place at night,
so for as the Sraddha is concerned it is quite different, as it is
performed during day-time. Where the Shastras are doubtful,
the convention adopted by the majority be followed.
amg raaITGE set are a Zrarfahaaatae veaar Rafa dat fesrarenary |
ag Teather ae aeaRaT ATT
eadeahara: ¢ aada ara fA: esi
Sloka-49. Pollution i.e. Sutaka, will not affect the concerned Brahmins till the functions are completed, regarding
the marital mtuals and sacrificial mtes, once the Nandi-Sraddha

and the initiation ceremony respectively are performed. As
regard the Sraddha ceremony, there is no pollution once the
cooking is completed or is taken up. Similarly in a Sacrifice,
when a Brahmin is sprinkled with the holy water for initiation,
he will not be affected by the pollution. In fact the actual sacrifice commences only afterwards with the chanting of the Sacred
Texts.
Mal: amaafaar ae eta carearyaiaa F
aleiat afarcaay a fafea fear 4 eat Beat |
faaara faahaar fe (agar oerearat fe a
tal ara zelaaatgantcs fae 14 ll
Sloka-50.As given in the Scriptures, the lunar month
wherein there is no solar transition from one Rasi to another
(Sankranti) is called Mala Masa, the Adhika Masa or the extra
month. As such sacrificial and those rites which are connected
with the Manes (Sraddha) are forbidden in this month. During
this period only the regular and mandatory religious duties
should be observed by the wise. 60 days go to make this month
only the monthly Sraddha may be performed but not the annual
ones or the sacrifices and such other rites concerning the Deities.
aaea 7 Tla: Tease: Ta
fadq Nea Wasa wa: gai: qu: tae |
qa NSA A AIHA: TARTAT: Gaz
Gal NEI Bae: Garay gooey Herfeaz eri
Sloka-51.Ten Ghatikas before and ten after the Sankranti
are auspicious in the Mesha month; sixteen Ghaikas before the
Sankranti, in the Vrishabha month; sixteen Ghatikas after the
Sankranti, in Mithuna; Thirty Ghatikas before the Sankranti in
Kataka; sixteen Ghatikas before the Sankranti in Simbha; sixteen Ghatikas after the Sankranti in Kanya; ten Ghatikas before and after the Sankranti in Tula; sixteen Ghatikas before
the Sankranti in Vrischika; sixteen Ghatikas after that in Dhanus;
forty Ghatikas after the Sankranti in Makara; sixteen Ghatikas
before that in Kumbha and sixteen Ghatikas after the Sankranti
in Meena.

Note: Madhava believes it to be 20 Ghatikas after the
Sankranti in Makara.
Cf. Narada; also the Nimayasindhu..
vee fagag afig agi al at saaaat
freavaferani faa ah a ARR fate: |
Riaifay 0a aaa ataeataena
MZ Wadena aaea w] 4
Sloka-52.Only one salutation should be offered to the
Gods; While two salutations to each of the sages and three to
each of the Manes. Single salutation should be offered to a
woman (as per rule). To the mother and to all other women of
her rank three salutations should be offered. As a general rule
it should be observed in Sraddha. For Vaiswadeva Homa, separate cooking should be arranged.
qa sentgaiaaiea ws a datathy
guiasaateqqaa ay ian |
AAS ALAA AT BATT
faniza a 7 aa ate Vole yssazaqlly 31
Sloka-53.The funeral libation of water must not be offered on the bare ground or into an iron or bronze vessel. The
thumb and the fore-finger are to be combined to beckon the
Manes. The remaining fingers should be used piously to offer
the rice or food on the ground. The same rule is applied while
offering known as Chitra which is observed when one begins to
eat. This should not be consumed on any account by himself or
by any body else.
aigg ag aetaafaaacaiats aafa—
graft 3 shatshad aaleetfhEay
TU TAY A Alaa aralfacactaha @
Sacatae aise aout Safad haf—e yell

Sloka-54. When offering food to the deities who mule over
the five vital Airs (Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana)
before one begins to take his food, the particles of food should
be taken (1) with the thumb, middle and fore-fingers for Prana
Ahuti (offering to the first vital Air); (2) with the thumb, middle
and ring fingers for Apana Ahuti; (3) with the thumb, ring and
little fingers for Vyana Ahuti; (4) with the thumb, little and the
forefingers for Udana Ahuti and (5) with all the fingers for
Samana Ahuti. Thereafter one should eat the meal silently. On
the wedding day, both the bride and the bridegroom should
keep fast at night.
UMGIZIZ A STAled at Maararas
ardvaigaa aetanfatastafaaal aq |
aeql at Bagratfageasal a afay zasaglelgad arataaaaa ara sa ate 44
Sloka-55. A person whose father is alive while performing the Nandi-Sraddha should not mention the names of the
fore-bears with their particulars and should not offer sesamum
seeds, but he should mention his Gotra; or he himself may
perform the Nandi for his paternal grand-father and others.
When the mother has to stay out due to her menses, the auspicious rite of marriage should not be proceeded with even if the
Nandi is performed.
tifa sazaat fara aeat aearizda aq
AATSYUA TGA ATS TET PIT |
cal at a waafrate ate a daft
CTMSAEAMCAATAA: A ATA ATA =U
Sloka-56. When there is Sraddha, the Stthalepaka Homa
must be observed thus: Divide the duration of the night (Ratnmana) into 30 parts and leave off the last two. The aforesaid
Homa should be performed within the first 28 parts, provided
there is no Amavasya that night. Should the day happen to be
Amavasya and the girl is still issueless, the Darsa Homa should

be performed and sacrifice should be offered on Sankramana
also.
qaalegaraa: qafaaereaceat
afacarangrarants a1 gata gfaeag |
wal Tanesa gata aed aaairay
aigfaaaaaya Heyes Gaed at: = LI4yo
Sloka-57. When the wife of a native is pregnant he should
not perform the Chaula or tonsure ceremony of his son, nor
should he have his own hair cut. He should also not build pillars or lay foundation, or start construction of houses. The pregnant
lady should not take a sea bath, nor go on a long journey. On the
occasion of a child birth; on Amavasya day; all soul’s day; on
the occasion of a death in the family; on the first day; fourth
amid the last days of the month, a wise man should perform his
daily Vaiswadeva Homa as recommended by the experts in the
four Vedas.
za ute aca yztsd VaPAAE I
aifiwen ae cat ae (1a: Wa Fars Ve |
ayseaiay easiest aaa Taq |
Roem) Het sy aq AraM asaifa agit lhc
Sloka-58.The offering of Tilodaka (sesamum) water is of
primary importance in Amavasya, thereafter comes the Mahalaya in the order of importance. There after, it should be offered on the day of death. If the Sapindakarana, i.e., bringing
together the pind of one with those of the predecessors, has
already been effected then the Amavasya offering and the one
in the Pitrapaksha should both be performed in the very first
year itself.
The wise should avoid the following seven things when
they are bathing in holy waters or visiting the shrines. (1) Arghya
or offering holy water; (2) the rule regarding the use of fingers
while consuming food (3) the difference in Vedic Sakhas (4)
the query about the satisfaction of Manes (5) Scattering food to

the unknown dead (6) invocation of the dead souls (7) offering
oblations into the Sradha fire. This applies to Sankalpa Sraddha
also.
aMmeaa 3 aemaqfany ety a aa =
Wigqawmaa: Aaeaaha qraragranaty |
ME MIM astra wWeaas
aTeMSHY Ba: aa ag aa: Bat F alate
Sloka-59. A man should perform Sraddha for the wives of
his father as he will do for his father. Similarly, he should do
it for his own wives, elder brothers, paternal uncles and maternal grandfather (i.e. the father of all the wives of his father).
Oblations should be given to Aupasagni or the marital fire and
those of the Sraddha, to the ordinary or lokika fire. Even the
son of a co-wife is a son and he is entitled to perform the
Sraddha of a wife belonging to another caste and so the husband should not perform it.
ae: Fay a DAsaet aasfy a gfan:
grmdfighaar af agi aa adt aeags |
feaen a a gfroft aagar ale afiediaa:
Bly Maas Ge hagas ear ot arfeqsy Ge
Sloka-60. Should one of the own brothers have got sons,
all of them should be considered to have children as far as the
question of Shraddha is concerned. Should one of them alone
be married, that wife stands in the position of a wife. with respect to all of them for the purpose of Sraddha but it will not be
so with respect to her own sons, brothers and father. If a woman
whose husband is alive but has no sons, if dies, or if a widow
dies, according to some, the function of uniting her with the
Manes is to be done soon after the Sapnidakarana ceremony;
whereas, others believe that it should be done on the occasior
of the first death anniversary.

casaifag fiveqrasaaasal ¢ ders
WE Taaaratate frags feossh (ya: a8 |
sfse a WRuaafaadsfaa ara
aafaass fearing aciefgagay 1 Gt Ml
Sloka-61.In the annual Sraddha for the mother when ghee
is applied to the Pinda of the mother, should at that time father’s Pinda break away the Sraddha should be performed over
again. the left over food and the portion on which the holy
water has been sprinkled by the priest, should not be discarded,
but be consumed or be buried in the ground for the first twr
years and thereafter it should be burnt.
alfyetsaqetaat ¢ eftat at ardaHsle
aa gf a oa argaafa ard a a faraa |
mat RAG aRvTTHATA YN val—
Tt GHATS GATAE TAS fA: 1 KR Il
Sloka-62.A man who does not unite with his wife who
has bathed after her menses and who is full of sexual desire,
inspite of lying with her, is guilty of destroying a child in the
womb. On the contrary, if a woman, after her menses, does not
unite with her loving husband, she will repeatedly be born among
hogs, dogs, wolves and jackals. As such the couple must have
sexual pleasure leading to the birth of a noble son who will in
the end take them across the ocean of this mundane life.
UMATAICACA SA FeAGA Ta:
aint Hea ca cralaaa waraesztafy
mM aieraearaagear ae afeega
MIMeIeAAATAe wack aA aaa «GQ
Sloka-63. There are four factors responsible for the menstruation in women, viz., (1) great passion; (2) disease; (3) age
and (4) food or some medicine taken. Of all these causes the
one based upon age is most important. The menses last tll the

age of 50 years. They generally start by the age of 18 years and
continue for 3 days every month. If in any one month they
reappear before the lapse of 18 days, they are not considered
dangerous or polluted.
BAIT TSA? WqaeaHafaqieng
Tifabaats aaa Radsahatzaadteah |
aa Taal VaUeaa yal aa sag
Sasa F-way Blradt Tle ay algaqne vii
Sloka-64.Some people believe that when menses reappear before 15 days they do not cause any pollution; but when
they appear in the 3rd weak (15 to 21 days) care should be
taken for 2 days. On the first day of her menses, the woman is
like a Pariah woman; on the second, a hater of Brahmins: on the
3rd, like a washerwoman and on the 4th day, she is pure for her
personal affairs; but on the Sth day, she is perfectly clean and
pure and has full freedom for sexual act, provided there is no
other physical ailment.
gai aa a (&) fist sqaMalnga HAIG
gat a(qaafaa)eaaa @ aafead mg a aT
aqseaMea AIGA HY fawanag
MAMAN ATTA ATA AAT aTA fe Wey tl
Sloka-65.A newly wedded man, having a charming wife,
who has at the same time a sacrifice to perform or observe his
birth-day, or a Sraddha or a Parva day, such as, Amavasya,
Sankranti, etc., he should not have sex with his wife on such
occasions. If he has, he should immediately take his bath with
his clothes on, and should apply sesamum seeds to clean his
body. On such occasion he should also avoid the sight of dead
bodies, climbing high mountains, going to holy rivers and wormep
of gods.
MUMAANATAT ey Anwgg—
410 spend Terrsfeohas dase |

aaah 4 gea afafea froenata eq
Meat ada Talenfes aes i EE I
Sloka-66. Avoid performing the Upanayanam ceremony
twice within a period of six months, i.e., if there are two children for whom the sacred thread ceremony is to be observed it
should be done either simultaneously or after a lapse of six
months. Also avoid old and broken pots, repairing or thatching
the roof, sweeping the floor, eic., in the house, hair cut for
himself and the Brahmachan. But on the day of death, he can
observe the Sraddha where Pindas are offered; he may also
perform the Kripa Sraddha for the foresaken dead. But he must
not go to Gaya for the Sraddha of his father, etc., for it will
bring him sin.
Ya cigaanentat as-cdia faxe
ST TSIMATKAT RAT Viahs
cal atau ca foraieg qar ra acer
az Teaanaggeraaafam il ko I
Sloka-67.A Brahmin should fix the Sacred Thread to the
right ear, when attending the first call of nature. During the day
time, he should go to the edge of a tank or river and wash the
genital organ, at night, he should pour water over or wet it. The
genitals and the nght hand (after the 2nd call of nature) should
be cleaned with mud, while the left hand with thrice as much
earth as before, then again both the hands should be washed
with double the quantity of mud thereafter, the anus with five
times the quantity of mud, the other three limbs again, with
double that quantity.
frfae temas Ta ca eqeaIRy
Wh URIBE: SAS Berd WEI: |
T Hear 71 5 hye we g Cia
qe ences Farnsnwafy i ee it
Sloka-68. After the inter-course or urination, etc., a man
should wash the various private parts as follows:

(1) the genital organs should be cleaned, thrice
(2) the anus should be cleaned, six times
(3) each of the hands, ten times
(4) again the anus, once
(5) the palms, the back of the hands, twice or thrice
(6) the thighs and the loins, twice or thrice
(7) when there is mere loss of vitality it should be washed,
twice.
These rules should be observed regarding washing after
urination during the day time alone. During night the above
should be halved; and if it is during a journey, it should be
reduced to a quarter.
e x
Walaaa waza:
wl Tq qayMaS Ty ada |
AAMAS raat Mpa:
eae a afsasiga ag caeitaeem Fae 1! §8 I
Sloka-69. This washing process for a Brahmchari should
be double of that of a house holder, it is three times as much for
the Vanaprasthas (those living in the forest) and four times for
ascetics. By a holy bath only the ointment, sandal paste, etc.,
should be cleaned in the case of women, those Sudras that are
observing some vow, Brahmachans, urchins and un-educated
ignorant rustics. The body should not be abandoned in water,
as there are crores of Tirthas or holy rivers or lakes in it.
Rat af free a feat aetsa qeaete
AMSG HAI FS Ata Tey Ae: |
TUATHA F Teed ARS AAS
Rare oatea f-<a & ard FRG gar tivo!
Sloka-70.The Gods drink the offerings with their heads;
the manes through their mouths, the yaksha with their bellies
or waists; those who have narrow lower lips and other little
creajures, with their bellies or lower parts of their bodies. The
water offered on the left side is as good as blood, while that on

the right side is as holy as that of the Ganges. The washing of
the hair with water alone is a useless exercise.
aa qagdsaa get diasegahegha:
qe ait aataafyasa ata arg |
fat Hats TY aKa aa! TAT EMY aMaaafai aewaaragqgargata — ths Ril
Sloka-71. After taking food and passing water, excreta
and vitality, a person should gargle his mouth with water 108
times. In the months of Mithuna, Karkata and Simbha, all the
rivers are said to be impure as a woman in menses. Therefore,
a bath in these months should be avoided. Should one have it,
he must purify himself with a bath in the sea (at the mouth of
a river).
area aaa Taagraia WaT BT
da aeaatretaty cat wea a ad-aie |
are aa SAA faa 23 a fA az:
ara waft Fa araaeaeTy BY AT «— p92
Sloka-72.On religious occasions connected with Gods a
Pavitra-Symbol of purity-made of Darbha grass, copper, silver
or gold should be worn in the hand. One made of gold should
be worn in the ring finger. All these are good for the worship
of Gods and not that of Manes. Also it should not be used by a
man whose father or elder brother is living.
Taal TALIA gia Acq 9219s9 AI
saeara aafaata: afzaa aeeaeaaat |
ae aqq fagay afaaeas Ta
GHA SY Ty IF sa Mle TAAETH 103:
Sloka-73.On the day the Sraddha of the father or mother
falls, a man should say the Gayatri Mantra at least 10 times at
dusk as well as during the fortnightly and other holidays 28
times; on an auspicious day, a thousand times, or 500, 300 or-

128 times at least. On Sankranti, etc., when the annual ceremony of Sraddha also falls, first, the Pitru Tarpana or waterofferings should be made and then alone, the annual Sraddha.
Mle AATIAISITAAa Mesa
Gita Ts| wage ATA |
Wa | Qtral aadiate J A at
TG: ATU: weaaragerenks waratg |v
Sloka-74, During all kinds of Sradhas, viz., Tirtha, Sradha,
Gaya Sraddha, the Mahalaya or Ashtaka Sraddha and the annual
Sradha, a man should give Tarpana with secsamum sccds in the aficrnoon when the Tithi is longer. This holds good in case of monthly
Sraddhas also or even if there is some Vriddhi or child birth at home,
the monthly Tarpana with sesamum seeds should be given.. A man
whose father is alive but who is performing the Sraddha of his mother,
i.e., the funeral rites of his mother, should not give the Tarpana or
libation. As a rule one should bathe in the morning and being pure,
offer the Tarpana according to the rule and there after only do his daily
sandhya, worship, etc.
sauce saheaantieagasa q—
waaraqeteda ARaereass fra: |
sale aadlsaia a facdiares ace fs:
WA | TAT aa Vat geaara FAA: thoy
Sloka-75. After performing the annual Sraddha, a Brahmin should offer the daily Tarpana, do his usual Vaiswadeva
Homa with rice specially cooked for that purpose and then
perform the daily Brahma Yajna. At a marriage, Upanayana, or
Chaula, the annual Sraddha should not be performed with sesamum seeds. In the Pretasraddha, as well as the Gaya Sraddha,
if darkness sets in, it should be believed that the two luminaries are together present.
agrat tart aay at Haifaserwe,
Te MGIIING gaarant aaNails |

MeEqIAARATsy at ZY SAR al et
aa Mecfata atafeafa wadat araeq loki
Sloka-76.A man should offer Tarpana or libation with
sesamum at home to the luminaries when a Sunday concides
with the 7th lunar day and his own birthday. He who wishes for
prosperity should not take the bath with earth and offer Pindas
and sesamum on Sundays, Fridays and Tuesdays when conicide with the Star Magha or with the fifth or ninth (Nanda
Tithis 1, 6 and 11) lunar days or with Aswini, Bharni, Krittika
or Mrigasiras and when the two Ayanas start.
Aart wy AfSer cz Vey aa AaeAa
VAT gIeA TTA aNAA Aoeay asa: |
qaeay faeacagarqenafh: sfsary
mTaeeHAT Fe Klas garg sat ga: Noll
Sloka-77.Write down Om, the sacred Syllable denoting
the Goddess Saraswati and draw under it ten vertical lines crossed

by ten horizontal lines, the squares so formed by the even (2nd,
4th, 6th and 8th) columns and similar sets of rows (ignoring the
four such squares round the central one) are the 12. in number.
They signify the 12 Rasis from Mesha onwards. Now onwards
I shall deal with the functions of the twelve Bhavas reckoned
from the Lagna onwards for the wise to evaluate their several
effects.
te: 4 Asa: Fa Bak sar aarg: far
HAA SAT FAHY WAI HA Fel: AAAT |
TeUIT F AAT TTS SAAT To Az
Ta facIaARIadceafeharsa: ll ec |
Sloka-78.The 12 Bhavas denote (1) body (2) wealth (3)
brother (4) happiness (5) son (6) foe (7) wife (8) longevity (9)
father (10) profession (11) income and (12) loss. All the planets aspect the 7th with a full glance; whereas, Saturn, Jupiter
and Mars are peculiar in that they also aspect the 3rd and 10th,
the Sth and 9th and the 4th and 8th respectively with a full
glance. (SL-11-17 1/2, 18 1/2 supra)
aq aqanthealnraaeeagiaes OAT:
alta: Hexafa: aa a feaia wasga Peavy |
Sale zizaheadl aeatia-aay J waa
Att TSAARATARY APA eAAWATAT: 1! 9% Il
Sloka-79. All the benefics, when they own the Trikona
Bhavas, prove auspicious if they occupy the 3rd, 2nd, 11th and
Kendra houses. A benefic owning a Kendra will not give favourable results. On the contrary, a malefic owning a Kendra
will not prove inauspicious. The lords of the 8th and 12th Bhavas
counted from the Lagna, if in association or mutually occuping
each other's houses, produce effects as detailed below: The
lord of the 8th gives good results, and the lord of the 12th
augurs fortune.
asa Jaga: Dar weed) FzTatt aaah}
oma aTHaaa Tle mat Baga arat |

qeaeH a agi aya sage cana egal
yas safrarnafearanaay Tar awa: ll co tt
Sloka-80. When one of the two planets stated above, Le.,
owning the 8th or the 12th, happens to own the Lagna also, he
will prove auspicious. Jupiter and Venus whey they happen to
own the Kendras become malefic and if they be also occupying
the Maraka (2nd and 7th) places, they become Marakas or killers.
Mercury, if similarly situated, will as much prove fatal. The
Moon and the Sun, when they occupy or own the 8th, will not
prove Marakas. Mars who is also known as AR if happens to
own the 4th as well as the %h (Simha Lagna) or Sth and 10th
will prove auspicious and this will not be applicable if he owns
only one of the said two Bhavas.
Note: Consider the natives born with Kumbha, Tula or
Mesha Lagna. Even when Saturn, Venus and Mars respectively
own the 8th or the 12th (Dussthanas), they prove auspicious to
the man concerned.
Consider Mars as owner of the 10th Bhava in Mesha Lagna
Chart and that of Veaus in the 7th for Tula Lagna. Here the
lords of the respective Lagnas occupy the Kendra position and
cast full glance on the Ascendant. Mars occupying Makara in |
Mesha Lagna cuts the longevity of the native, though he is
occupying the most powerful of the kendras with full Digbala
yet is in a disadvantageous position to the 8th house. This becomes worst when Mars and Saturn are devoid of any benefic
aspect. In this position Mars is creating a very strong Alpayuryoga-vide III 8, rule 1, supra.
Similarly, for the Tula Lagna natives Venus is most malefic, for longevity, Venus like Mars, when devoid of a benefic
aspect, becomes a strong case for Alpayuryoga. The reason
being (1) Venus’s position in the 7th singly and (2) Venus
aspecting the Lagna as lord of the 8th-vide I[-8, rule 1, supra.
Remember, the two luminaries when owning the 8th do not prove
fatal cf IV-25 supra.
qaqa afaaeaat aaa
Gat aenaatal eeqat Fzfaarerac: |

aq a cafe sameftaaeere & gat:
at zeraid Qita: Jaa warqqiag ay. ce i
Sloka-81.Rahu and Ketu (Dark Planets) when possessed
of strength are as effective as the planets owning an inauspicious Bhava and in whose house they are posited or with whom
they are associated. The lords of the Kendras and Konas, if not
associated with the two nodes, produce good results. The result
will be contrary, if they be otherwise. These two nodes in spite
of their malevolent character become auspicious by virtue of
their position in certain Bhavas or conjuction with certain planets.
at aq af& aif fafaagt saenaan at feat
ant at seafearrafaar Ish ateane: |
aed Irmpacaat ytaagat saat
array Miasgagat BRITA Ara tl 2 Mt
Sloka-82. When one of the two, Rahu and Ketu, and the
lord of a Trikona occupy the 9th or the 10th, or if one of them
be in the 9th and the other in the 10th or vice versa, the yoga
will cause prosperity to the man concerned. Even the association of either of these with the lord of a Kona will prove auspicious. In such a situation, the Dasas of these two Dark Planets
as well as of those associated with them will prove auspicious.
When an inauspicious planet associates with either of the Nodes
having some sort of Sambandha, the Bhukti of the Yoga Karaka planet will prove adverse.
gstat q aalqel Datel A ae tsa
Tata gal alntfaa Ser iarsa ar tl
qazaaidt a aad aaa aT
Int aa ava arenas aa azarga: = <3
Sloka-83.Rahu and Ketu, the two dark planets, become
auspicious when they are posited in a Trikona or Kendra position, or when they are associated with the lord of that particular
Kendra or Kona Bhava they are occupying. They prove also

beneficial when they associate with the lords of any Kendra or
Kona Bhava. When the lord of the 9th owns the 8th or 12th as
well, or if the lord of the 9th and 10th in the above position
were to assssociate with the lords of the 8th or the 12th, then
the merit of the Yoga is destroyed. The 8th Bhava is known as
the house of longevity.
THREATS ATA IE Hida
TAA FT AM: QUST |
MUTA AA TT ATATANI: AIA
KAgHraamMeaag: ages at tl ce Il
Sloka-84. The 8th Bhava counted from the 8th house also
denotes longevity, the 12th place reckoned from each of these,
i.c., the 2nd and the 7th from Ascendant are the Maraka houses.
The planet occupying the 2nd house from its lord is a malefic.
During the Dasa of such a malefic planet or in the Dasa of the
planet owning the 12th house itself will the native suffer the
greatest crisis of his life.
ATTN VSM F Tula:
TMA F TMG aHga wa) eraacryz |
can ada Ayfery qt Ty? Fay ACT
4 at aa aufing altar zg: aul Gay cull
Sloka-85. Of all the planets Saturn alone has the power to
kill the native, even in the Bhukti of a benefic or in his own
Bhukti during the Dasas of malefics, provided he is associated
with the lord of the 8th or the 12th house or is associated with
a Maraka (death inflicting planet). All planets show in their
own Bhuktis effects which are natural to them or to those plan-.
ets with which they are associated.
aaa q caQarahamarggqea aq
Be Pawey ghey cat weraeeky aT |
aut rat: ya a ya varqnty GWA:
grat aneeare ae qalne ata ce

Sloka-86. The results of the Bhukties of other planets who
may be inimical to the Dasa lords, will have to be computed according to the nature of those planets (Bhukti-lords). Even in
the Dasa of the lord of a Kona the Bhukti of the lord of a
Kendra need not be auspicious; but it will be auspicious when
the said lord of the Kendra has Sambandha with the benefics.
But in the Bhukti of a Maraka planet the result will have to be
assessed from the planet or planets with whom he is associated.
gfe: qoanca aerqata cat a aaraae
waezeaag garafe a FH Apa: aga: |
Bel Paps: Yara arat aefert
agama awa dearnst wy tl ce ll
Sloka-87.The Bhukti of a malefic planet may prove auspicious due to his Sambandha with the aforesaid planet. Being
good equally both the Yogakarakas and the planets associated
with them give good effects in their Dasas and Bhuktis. A
Yogakaraka planet will have the strength of doing good in his
Dasa and during the Bhukti of another planet, though the later
may not be having any Sambandha with it. Rahu and Ketu prove
auspicious in their Bhuktis during the Dasas of benefics when
they conjoin with such planets.
aNeat q Jaa aa afgararcaeat qrfaay:
Wat aaast WARS AryMHal uleaan: |
a dasa: Ge acme ss
geal aft aarata a Rexdaragaal fae lic cil
Sloka-88. When Rahu and Ketu are associated with a benefic but be hemmed betwixt two inimicals, then the Bhukti of the .
malefics that are not associated with either of them (Rahu or
Ketu) will give auspicious results. Should the benefic conjoin
with Rahu or Ketu be a Yogakaraka, his Bhukti will give mixed
results. When not associated with, the result will be very injurious. When Rahu or Ketu be a Maraka, then he will cause the
demise of the native in the Bhukti of the benefic planet in ques-

tion or in that of his own (in the Dasa-Bhukti of these two mutually).
aril aranfyal sad saenaa: ca Ge
creat freq: sama agrees
aazardt Rafmaqat agra} |
oy ougaies aqaens aeasa Ria fas lca
Sloka-89. During Saturn's Dasa and his own Bhukti Saturn gives the effects of Mars and during the Bhukti of Mars he
gives his own effects. It is like wise in Kuja’s Dasa as well.
Should the lord of the lagna and that of Chandra Lagna were to
exchange places, they will bestow Rajayoga on the native.
Rajayoga will also arise when the lords of the 9th and 10th
interchange places or are associated with. For the benefit of
students, I shall now deal with, after a thorough investigation,
the effects of the several Lagnas and the planets’ relationship
with them.
qT TsSHTS Yat ga: aaisal aig
qt @ WNs Sasaes cary wae: |
eralar afe otfaa: mahi Ba fe ADR
Say antasfiay, aarqt aah tat rat igo
Sloka-90.For natives born in the Mesha Lagna Mercury
is malefic. Both Jupiter and the Sun become auspicious if they
are associated with each other, The association of Jupiter and
Satum is good (being lord of the 9th). Jupiter’s asssociation
with other planets is inimical. Venus is a Maraka (being owner
of the 2nd and 7th). Saturn and the remaining planets are in no
such position, however malefic they may be. Jupiter, Venus
and the Moon prove malefics whereas the Sun and Saturn become
_benefics for the people born under Vrishabha Lagna.
Hal UAasz: AZ a WRsrdq Pazar
afa exafe arvat gaat dbarfecical ficas |
Ma: [lata aea Tawas Peg a

Ua aN ATlaGe Wat Sasa gat ee
Sloka-91.Saturn alone is capable of doing good to the
native (being owner of the 9th and 10th). Jupiter and remaining
planets even if they prove Marakas will not be able to kill,
when they are alone.
For the natives born in Mithuna Lagna Mars, Jupiter and
Sun are inimical. Their association with the rest will result in
what has already been stated. The Moon alone can not bring
about the death, when the rest can do so.
Venus and Mercury are evil, while Mars and Jupiter are
good for people born in Karkata Lagna.
ant yfiga ca eatteet Rega
Ha gaeniat = yuces Ha Ty |
ann Fa ga: gesaftaatiesa dears:
aa fags: saeaafga: To: at ana: 192
Sloka-92.Mars by himself causes Yoga. The Sun does
not become a killer (by owning the 2nd). The rest if they have
that function/do it. These are the results of the planets for the
natives born’ in Karkata Lagna.
Mercury and Venus are benefics. Equally auspicious are
Mars and Jupiter. The association of Jupiter with Venus is not
at all beneficial. Mercury and others cause death. These are the
effects for the natives born with the Simha Lagna in their birth
charts.
Mars, Jupiter and the Moon are Asubha; Venus alone is
Subha.
afta vara trate. sat A Aart
vd gtaad qefeaagd Tu: ast BH
aq: Aa HVA altar waaay
aay aft a lasagna eal Telstra: 11931

Sloka-93. Venus and the Moon are the Yoga Karaka planets and more so when they conjoin, Venus is a Maraka and not
the others. These are the results for the people born in Kanya
Lagna. Jupiter, the Sun and Mars are malefics. Saturn and Mercury
are auspicious. The Moon in association with her son, Mercury, causes Rajayoga. Mars proves a maraka. Jupiter and the
Sun do not inflict death. People born in Tula Lagna experience
these effects.
aA
TN ateg reise gays: TH:
aalaanar frneal sta) a eat Bay |
HEM BZ awa af vyqs qs aya?
TAMAS: dwelt Aatyad WwW Sell
Sloka-94. Mercury, Mars and Venus-these three give
Asubha phala. The Moon is the only auspicious planet. The
Sun and the Moon give very good effects and equally so is their
conjunction. Jupiter alone will not become a Maraka; whereas,
Mercury and others, when they operate as Marakas will cause
the demise of the man concerned. These are the fmits for the
native born in Vrischika Lagna. Venus remains the lone planet
who is malevolent; whereas, the Sun and Mars are most auspicious.
UIT aeRaAAiaTaSs TN Fa WATE:
Tq WIA: SARA: MSI ATA: |
ga) gaat aa a Rad arc: areca
Hea Beater: aq Tyahrersasl Sa: 184!
Sloka-95.The conjunction of the Sun and Mercury is productive of good Yoga. Mercury becomes a Maraka. Venus and
the rest are not so. These are the results when a birth takes
place under Dhanus Lagna.
Mars, Jupiter and the Moon are inimical, while Venus and
Mercury are benefics. Saturn by himself does not kill. Mars
and others may do so. Venus is the Yogakarka. These are the
results experienced by natives born in Makara Lagna.

HATFM YAREM: DE TA Year
AMA a Telaeha SALTS AA At ae |
wa: Hea: Bal eafay wa} ada’ ae:
at st a ga Refta ager ala asa Il
Sloka-96. Jupiter, the Moon and Mars are malefics; Venus
is auspicious. The combination of Mercury and Mars cause
good Yoga. Jupiter does not kill. Mars, the Sun and the rest
become Marakas. These effects are felt by people born in Kumbha
Lagna. Saturn and Venus who is known as Kavi, are auspicious. Mars and the Moon are Asubha. The association of Jupiter and Mars will cause Rajayoga. Mercury kills; but not
Mars. Satur and the rest, if they prove Marakas, cause death.
aa aaa: Hae Qaaneaeafafecar
Azra azaaa: faramga Gs DART |
garenhgasrgea ear gard Gat
qa: alg cag yimy at aarht arg| J lel
Sloka-97.The aforesaid effects belong to the births in
Meena Lagna. The benefic or malefic results of any planet
should be arrived at through a study of the nature of the planet
and planets who are associated with the planet in question and
also of the position occupied by the planet. Planets when. they
prove auspicious grant the native: issue, wife, happiness to
father, gain and other meritorious incidents during their Dasas
pertaining to those Bhavas and in their Bhuktis under other
planets.
qa aandia a aan Fear aczaaré
at wait a alsit af Seranfa Fa? aa |
IAT AUICIA YABAMAY Ase g—
aided WW caeefaeat aia Zaraa a 8c ll
Sloka-98.The wise and good, even after they have studied and understood this science well, say: who has understood

this science? No one. Should there be any, he is the only man,
and he keeps it for himself. It is well known that even asses,
dogs and the like are born under similar Yogas, and they also
are subjected to the effects of these Yogas, during the respective Dasas of planets responsible for these Yogas. It may be
remembered that these yogas are also influenced by other forces.
qtat afe Seagiquaq’ FR anerat aa
auen afe ax seqhaadiareg wesfine: |
hex al afe aaa geaa satfead aaa
usta afe antarcamasl afa fafeaa 1 ee I
Sloka-99.Should there be malefics occupying their highest exaltation coupled with the duty as markas, the evil caused
by them will be incalculable. Satur bestows upon the native a
good amount of wealth and prosperity when he occupies the
Lagna indentical with Meena, Tula or Dhanus. If under the
aforesaid conditions, the 7th Kendra is not occupied or aspected by Jupiter or Mercury, the man concerned will be no
less a king. Inspite of it death should be proununced in the Dasa
and Bhukti of the lord of the 7th house.
Note: Jtthasi denotes Meena _ i
Cf. Scandhora: afanqigad dial aeaacafaftala |
Saturn is said to be capable of bestowing royalty when occupying Tula, Dhanus or Meena Ascendent charts.
Also BJ. XX - 9.
SARA Tet WGA TAT Arale:
maaiaamen afe ad wae fae: |
amaqiafe wey tagd qatage ate:
apqeaia aa RlsAG MeiFA aMeAT li Loo Ii
Sloka-100. Should Jupiter be in the 7th from the Lagna;
and Venus in the 7th from Jupiter; or if Jupiter were to ocupy
the 8th Bhava counted from the lord of the 8th and also be in the
12th from a malefic, the native will live only for 30 years.
Should Satum be in the 8th reckoned from the lord of the 9th

and be also occupying an odd Navamsa the native will not be
continuously prosperous. When the same planet be similarly
situated with respect to the lord of the 4th, he will be deprived
of his vehicles.
TH DTHINeaa aay Segfrantisaar
aeafafgarzata aeaaifeaat star |
mMamenaae rennet aseafa
wa dtagisey aafea sida Fazreafe: . roe
Sloka-101. When the Moon is associated with Venus and
the lord of the house occupied by the two planets be in a Kendra
or Kona, the man concerned will throughout his life command
good vehicles and be prosperous. When the lord of the 8th
house counted from the 3rd be occupying the 3rd, 6th, 7th,
llth or the Ist, loss of his brothers should be guessed. Should
the 8th house be occupied by a planet in his fall, and if it is not
associated with or aspected by Jupiter, the native will die shortly.
Tam Rofaaskrcae aivaieaieat
TR UIA FI kIgaa avgeqy PfFIq |
Us Wraey y aaqen ar daa
MAUI WUE Alay ferd.geaa: Uo W
Sloka-102, Should the lord of the 8th Bhava counted from
the 9th be aspceted by the Moon, the native will be short lived.
If Venus be associated with Rahu, there will be decline in the
native’s prosperity in the period commencing with Ketu’s. When
Venus occupies the 6th or the 8th in association with Ulka and
other comets, a fall in the longevity is signified. This may take
place when the planet owning a movable sign goes to its own
Bhava (from a dual one in its transit),
Note: Comet Ulka is supposed to be very injurious and his
place in the Zodiac is in the 10th Nakshatra from the one occupied by the Sun.

wad farpaaanawaiaarl Pard
da acrqncaitquedamt gt: |
wa fararmefetae Ft atraan:
VRYAGASAT HITE WH FT ava Wtogt
Sloka-103. The life of a native should be predicted long,
medium or short depending upon the lords of the Lagna and the
8th house occupying (a) fixed and dual Rasis (b) movable and
fixed Rasis and (c) movable and dual Rasis, respectively. In
the same way when both the lords occupy (1) movable, (2) dual
and (3) fixed signs respectively, the aforesaid rule should be
applied to know the longevity of the native.
Mars when occupies a Rasi belonging to Venus or vice-versa,
a Kulta is ushered into the world.
ma aaara tafe az eR ATA
Rreandy ay a garg aaa = Ro
Sloka-104. When a child is bor on any one of the three
week days-Sunday, Tuesday or Saturday synchronising with
any one of the three Tithis-Dwiteeya, Dwadase or Saptameeand any of the Nakshatras other than Chittra, should be declared to have bom as a result of the mother’s congress with a
person other than the husband
Two lines of this Sloka are missing.
feara igeaivg ops orueat aATAITTE |
gefeara quaqial grad afefanaitast eeu
Sloka-105. When malefics are posited in the 4th and 8th
Bhavas from Venus or Venus, the lord of the 7th occupying
betwixt malefics and be devoid of benefic aspect in the nativilies of a couple, the yoga is called Vahninipata- a malefic yoga.
This Sloka is in a different metre and does not seem to be
in the right place to End the Kanda.
Cf. Phaladeepika X-1 SP.
This brings to the End of the Second Kanda of Uttarakalamrita
written by Kali Das.
