READABLE DATASET
================================================================================
Original file: uttkalamrita_kalidas_ps_sastri.json
Dataset number: 405 of 455
Format: valid JSON
Structure: Object / structured dataset
Original size: 363,067 bytes
Top-level fields: 11
Title: Uttkalamrita-kalidas-ps-sastri
Creator: —
Date: —
Description: —

CONTENT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
METADATA AND OTHER FIELDS
  • title: Uttkalamrita-kalidas-ps-sastri
  • creator: —
  • date: —
  • description: —
  • subject: —
  • identifier: —
  • source_folder: Uttara Kalamrita XML
  • total_pages: 256
  • total_words: 66153
  • text_quality:
    • ocr_word_validity_score: 0.88
    • quality_tier: good
    • note: —

FULL TEXT
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
UTTARA KALAMRITA
By
Text with Translation, Notes and
Illustrations
By
Prof P. S. Sastri
M.A., M.Litt., Ph.D., D.Litt.
PREFACE
Sh. K. N. Rao
LA.A.S.
Retd. Director General
RANJAN PUBLICATIONS
16, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj,
NEW DELHI-110 002 (INDIA)

Introduction
Uttara Kalamrita 1s an important landmark in the
history of Indian Astrology. The text was first printed in the
Telugu script and it was attributed to Kalidasa. But he is
not the celebrated author of Raghu Vansa, Kumara
Sambhava, Shakuntalam and other works. The reference to
Andhra Bhasha (5.36), Urdu or Persian (5.53), Turushka
(5.49), Sukkani (8.31), Rahu Kala (Second Kanda 29) and
other things show that he came after the sixteenth century.
His use of the words Udyoga (6.42) for job, mud-cleaning
(Second Kanda 67-68), Smarta (Second Kanda 35), Nadi
and Vinadi, Sarasa-sallapa (a peculiar Telugu expression,
5.43), Tyajya Kala (8.8) and others prove that he is a South
Indian. His opposition to the marriage with the daughter of
the maternal uncle (Second Kanda, 10-11), references to
the usages in the South (12 in the Second) and the like
prove that he belonged to the borders of Andhra, Karnataka
and Tamil Nadu.
The Ratha Saptami day should have the Constellation |
Anuradha (Kanda 2.44) shows his bad acquaintance with
astronomy. His views on the direction of the well (8.33),
upanayana and other things contradict the earlier
Kalamrita.
The third Chapter is a little unacceptable as it violates
many accepted principles. There are many selfcontradictory ideas. These views have been examined in
our notes. At places the author appears to reject the
authority of Manu and Apastamba. Some of the problems
covered in the earlier Kalamrita appear in this work.
Evidently this author did not write that Kalamrita. These
and other factors convince us that the author belongs to a
time after the 16th or the 17th century.

There is a Shankara Vijaya attributed to Madhava
Vidyaranya. But the text clearly states that the author was
condensing the work of Vyasachala (17th century) and that
he was called Abhinava Kalidasa. Possibly the author of
Uttarakalamrita is the same onc or a person like him.
All this, however, does not belittle the value of the
present work. Some of the salient features may be noted:
(1) He gives a method of finding the past, present and
future births. This is different from the one given by
Varahamihira and others.
(2) There are special kinds of Raja Yogas and their
bhanga (destruction). Particular mention is to be made of
Viparila Raja Yoga.
(3) The annual solar return chart is interpreted and
examined in a manner that differs from the Tajika method.
This is very original. It is simple and interesting.
(4) There is an elaborate account of Rahu and Ketu.
(5) The way of interpreting retrograde planets in their
exaltation and debilitation is of much interest.
(6) The mutual periods of Shani and Shukra, Guru
and Shukra and the like are of much valuc.
(7) Muhurta and nimitta discusscd in the eighth
ehaptcr is worth studying.
(8) The first part of the second kanda deals with
religious and other rites. This part we have scparatcd into
one chapter.
(9) Guru and Shani are taken as co-workcrs. Owning
the last four signs these are the philosophical planets.
Though they rule happiness and misery, they must have a
benefic mutual relation.
(10) Jaimini’s system of astrology is simplificd.
{11) Horary astrology and the way of treating the lost
or unknown dates of birth are explained. These are rot
simple copyings from earlier works.

(ai;
In short, Uttara Kalamrita is a good compendium, a
standard text based on experience, and a treasure house,
We have given 116 charts to illustrate.
The author is a South Indian, and a devotee of the
great Mother Goddess, Para Shakti, Maha Tripura Sundari.
He belongs to late 17th or early 18th century.
M/s Ranjan Publications deserve our praise for
bringing out this text into English. The illustrative
examples given by us are only indications intended to
stimulate further research. The present translator and
commentator is deeply indebted to M/s Ranjan
Publications.
—P.S * Sastri

| Contents
= Kandal .
Chapter I
Shlokas
1. Obeissance to Ganapati
2. Obeissance to Para Shakti
3. Previous part of the text and the
purpose of the present part
4. Time of birth, planets and bhavag
6-6. Rectification of the time of birth
7. ‘osition of Mandi
8. Position of Gulika
10. Birth when the father is away.
Nature of the delivery
11. Details about the delivery room
Chapter II
1. Right side and left side. Functions
of the Sun and the Moon
2-3. Relations among the planets
3-4. Sapta Vargas
4-6. Exaltation signs and strength of the planets
6: Exaltation, debilitation and retrogression
7-8. Hora, Drekkana, Saptamsa
8-8. Navamsa, Dvadasamsa, Trimsamsa
9-10. Strength of the Saptavargas
10-11. Strength of Uchcha and Kendra
11-12. Strength of odd and even
signs and Drekkana
12-13. Directional strength

eam
OPNAAM Hm
Pakshabala, Diva-ratri bala and
Natonnata bala
Strength of the lords of the year,
month and day of birth
Ayana and Cheshta strength. TARSA War
Aspects
Strength of aspects
Natural Strength, Shadbala
Rectifled Shadbala, Strength and Weakness
of Planets, Nature of their major periods
Chapter HI (ywyoily
Amsa Ayurdaya
Various kinds of reductions
Longevity given by lagna in Amsa Ayurdaya
Knowledge of the good and bad in past,
present and future lives i
How to compute longevity in these
three births
Long. medium, short life, Effects of
Short life and no children
Very short life
Chapter IV adhe fowls autt Hoasto
A great person of fame
Yogas destroying the above
Special Raja yogas
Raja yogas from the lords of 9 and 10
Yogas continued
When is a Bhava destroyed?
Lord of the lagna in the three Drekkanas
Yogas caused by Chandra, Kuja and Shani
Guru, Shukra and Rahu
When is a Bhava worthless?
Lord of the Bhava promoting it
When is a Bhava destroyed

(tx)
Benefic nature of a planet to be determined
Association of a planet with
benefics and malefics
Bala, Vriddha, Astangata, Vijita states,
Special features
Where do benefics and malefics
prove auspicious
Gradations
Effects of Bhavas
Chhadaka planets
Chhadaka, Vedhaka, Bandhaka and
Pratibandhaka. Marakas for the Bhavas
Different Vedhas and Longevity
Viparita Rajayogas
Special yogas for supreme power
Chatushtaya, Kendra, Kantaka,
Panaphara, Apoklima, Kona,
Upachaya, Lagna and Janma
Sun and Moon, Three Gunas
Adhi Yoga
Owning wealth
Dhana Yogas
Planets in Kendras and Panapharas
Special Dhana Yogas
Moveable, fixed, and dual signs, and
their strength, Chhadaka and Vedhaka
When does the yoga fructify?
Moon in the above yogas
Arudhas and Padas
Results of eight Padas
Children—their sex and number
Childlessness and adoption
Number of wives
Wife
First and the subsequent wives

Brothers and Sisters
Adhikagraha
Planets with Adhikagraha
Effects of planets from this adhikagraha
Chapter V uM Houses auel Perak
Karakatvas of the first Bhava
Karakatvas of the Second Bhava
Karakatvas of the Third Bhava
Karakatvas of the Fourth Bhava
Karakatvas of the Fifth Bhava -
Karakatvas of the Sixth Bhava
Karakatvas of the Seventh Bhava
Karakatvas of the Eighth Bhava
Karakatvas of the Ninth Bhava
Karakatvas of the Tenth Bhava
Karakatvas of the Eleventh Bhava
Karakatvas of the Twelfth Bhava
Karakatvas of the Ravi
Karakatvas of the Chandra
Karakatvas of the Kuja
Karakatvas of the Budha
Karakatvas of the Guru
Karakatvas of the Shukra
Karakatvas of the Shani
Karakatvas of the Rahu
Karakatvas of the Ketu
Chapter VI Das ua aE
Nine avasthas of the planets
Need for using major and sub-periods
Vimshottari Dasa and its sequence
How to calculate the balance of
Dasa at birth
Calculation of sub-periods, Effects of
the Dasas of the Sun and the Moon

(xt)
Major period of Kuja 144
Major period of Budha 145
Major period of Guru 145
Major period of Shukra 145
Major perlod of Shani 146
Major period of Rahu 146
Major period of Ketu 147
Rahu and Ketu as marakas and as benefics 148
Rahu and Ketu in the four dual signs 149
Rahu and Ketu in other signs 149
Rahu and Ketu in 6, 8, 12 and
other matters 150
Rahu and Ketu with yoga karakas 151.
Exaltation, debilitation, mulatrikona
and own signs of Rahu and Ketu.
Their friends and others 151
Rahu and Ketu in relation to the
lord of signs they occupy 153
The results of a subperiod in a major perlod 154
Which major and minor periods
are benefic, average and bad 154
Malefic and benefic nature of the
lord of the subperiod defined 155
Effects of the sub-periods in relation
to the major period. Same dasa
giving Rajayoga and also death - 155
When does a Rajayoga planet
postpone death? 156
Guru and Shukra in their mutual periods 156
Mutual periods of Shukra and Shani 157-159
Mutual periods of Ravi and Shani 160
Mutual periods of Kuja and Guru 160
Mutual periods of Budha and Guru,
Budha and Shukra, Guru and the Moon,
Shukra and the Moon, Gum and
the Sun, Sun and Kuja, Ravi and Budha

34-38. Annual solar return—Varsha Phala 161-165
38-43. Results of the periods during
the year of the solar return 165-167
Chapter VII hau Plea
Lost horoscopes or u ilable
dates and times of births 168
Method to find out the exact lagna 168-169
Position of Jupiter at the time of birth 169
Nashta Jataka and its assessment 170
Dhatu, Mula, Jiva 170
Lagna at the time of Query 171
Subject of the Query 171
Results to be predicted 171
When will the answer be fulfilled? 172
Division of the Zodiac and
how to answer the queries 172-173
Sthula and Sukshma moon
at the time of the question E 173
14-15. Subject of the question ; 174
16. Terms chara, sthira, dvisvabhava,
garbha, dvara and bahya defined.
In which hand is the thing? .175
17. Is the thing long or short?
What is its colour? 175
18. Time of fructification 175
19. Effects of the time of question 176
Chapter VIII
‘ -Garbhadhana , 178
2. Nis adhana 178
3-4. How to see that a girl of advanced
age having no menses, fit 179
Aslesha and Magha. Shantis to be performed 179
Jyeshtha and Mula, Revati and Ashvini 180
eSenoa
Puberty at 181
yajyakala, Effects of eclipses 182

Amrita ghatikas for medicine 182
Adoption . 184-185
Preliminaries for marriage 185
Marriage Invitations 186
. Kurma Chakra for inaugurating a new house 187
_ Auspicious time for constructing a new house 187
Vrishabha and Kalasa Chakras
for entering a new house 188
Dasa-dasi chakra for engaging
a new servant or a servant maid 189
Cattle to be given or purchased 190
Asva Chakra for mounting a horse 190
Gaja chakra for mounting an elephant 191
Shibika Rohana getting into a palanquin 191
Chhatra Chakra—Royal Umbrella 192
Khatwa Chakra for mounting a cot 192
Chapa Dhanush Chakra 193
Ratha Chakra 193
Ghurna Chakra 193
Sugar Cane 194
Ploughing 194
New Boat 195
New lamp 195
New Well or tank 196
New Pillar 196
Door 197
New Oven 197
New Box 198
Where to settle in a town or country 198
Upanayana 200
Nidhi Chakra 201
Hidden Treasure 202
What Kind of a Treasure is it? 202
The Kind of Vessel 203
Is there any treasure? 203
Vivaha Chakra 204

8. Same continued -209
9. - Brotherless girls’ marriage 209
10. Five bad customs south of the Narmada 210
11. Bad customs in the East 210
12. Marriage with the daughter of l
a maternal uncle 211
13. Children of the different wives of
the same father 212
14. Marriage prohibitions 212
15. Eating before and after marriage 213
16. Pancha Sutri l 213
17. Six Pindas in a Shraddha 213
18. Who is elder among the twins? 214
19. Twelve kinds of children 215
20-21. Adopted son l 216
22. Study of the Veda 217
23-24. Gotra and Pinda-pradana ,
for the adopted son 217-218
25. Shraddha 218
26. Pani Homa . 7 219
27. Shraddha and Bhikshus 219
28. Rites of other castes done by a Brahmana 220
29. Bath in the Sea 220
30. Restrictions regarding food
for widows and ascetics 221
31-32. Who can offer Pindas? - - 222
33-36. Upanayana 223-225
37. Marriage and Menstruation 225
, 38-41. Ten avataras of Vishnu 226-227
42. Janmashtami and Ganesha Chaturthi 228

Rishi Panchami, Ananta Chaturdasi,
Maraka Chaturdasi
Skanda puja, Ratha Saptami,
Shiva Ratri, Ekadashi and Dvadashi
Eclipses and Shraddha
Ashaucha ~
Intercalary month and Shraddha
Solar Ingress—Auspicious time
Tarpana and Vaisvadeva
Nandi Shraddha when father is alive
When the wile has conceived
Tarpana and Shraddha
Shraddha
Menstrual periods
Time to be dropped
Urination and excretion
Bath
When are the rivers in menstruation?
Fingers Da
Pradosha
Tarpanas in Shraddha
Chapter II
Zodiac
Planetary aspects.
Benefics in kendras and konas.
Lord of 8 and 12
Guru and Shukra as Marakas.
Luminaries owning the eighth house
Rahu and Ketu. Their benefic and
malefic results and their major or
minor periods. Houses 9, 10, 8
Maraka places. Who is a malefic?
Shani as a Maraka. Other
marakas and their periods

(xu)
Nature of the subperiods in the period
of a planet owning a kona. Kendra
lords, yoga karakas and death
Major period of a yoga karaka and
the subperiods in his own period
Subperiod of planets with the Nodes
Mutual periods of Shani and Kuja. Lords
of lagna and Chandra lagna. Raja yogas.
Benefics, malefics and marakas for persons
born in Mesha lagna and Vrishabha lagna
Vrishabha, Mithuna and Karka lagnas
Karka, Simha and Kanya lagnas
Kanya and Tula lagnas
Vrischika and Dhanur lagnas
Dhanush and Makara lagnas
Kumbha and Mina lagnas
Good and bad effects given by planets
Difficultics in interpretation
Malefics, marakas
Guru, Shukra and Shani
. Chandra and Shukra.
Lords of 3, 6, 7, 8 and 11
Chandra, Shukra, Rahu and meteors
Longevity
Day, Tithi and Nakshatra for
illegitimate children
Vanhi Pata Yoga

SAIC HITT A |
Uttarakalamrita
Ggaacnive:
First Kanda (Part I)
Chapter I
SARAAT:
Determination of the time
of Birth
: at:
qanaat wofiacage fare |
mmga ee Eee aa Hea 3
siuen ne ae TA 1 e
I bow to Ganesha, whose face is that of the best
elephant, whose feet are worshipped well at the beginning
of any activity by the four-faced Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva,
leader of the Heavens and other Gods, and in whose four
hands are thẹ shining noose and the like along with a sweet
cake, and who is desirous of protecting Sri Vikrama Surya.
Notes
Vikrama Surya can mean Vikramaditya. But when,
referring to a contemporary person, the ancients did not
use synonyms. As in all auspicious functions so here the
pS
in

18 Uttara Kalamrita
author begins his text with an invocation to Ganesha.
wren qarnrmbrerat wernfacretetat
Wee anna ward cetdart foray |
sinian wet ceranferary i 2 N
I bow to the Goddess Mahakali who is in the auspicious left part of Kamesa (Shiva). She fulfils all the desires
of her devotees. In her hands are the conch and the wheel
(chakra). The other two hands show the symbols of protection and granting of boons. She is seated on a lion. Her
beauty shines because of the crescent moon on the head of
Shiva. She is resplendant with three eyes. She is interested
in the protection of Vikrama Surya.
Notes
This verse makes it elear that the author is a follower
of the Shakta cult. In this cult Shiva is Kamesvara and the
Goddess is Kamesvari. Here she is called Mahakali. Ujjain
has Mahakalanatha and also Mahakali. The three eyes are
symbolically represented as the Sun, Moon and fire. The
king is again called Vikrama Surya. The author wants us to
beleve that he was the celebrated poet.
5 . pet infek f
Fa maagi qaqa wire wa wT 1
ere genet aare deaf afai
auga yaf aga aremyd FAT a H
In the first volume (Purva Kalamrita) everything has
been elaborately expressed regarding definitions and the
like. All these can be known from that volume. In this
volume (Uttara Kalamrita) | will explain clearly and in detail
for the delight of the wise the method of horoscopy/{Casting
and interpreting a horoscope. Then I will explain the horary
part of astrology. These reveal the results in the past,
present and future in the metre called Shardula. This
treatment in this Uttara Kalamrita given in detail brings

Determination of the time of Birth 19
wealth and also people under one’s control.
Notes
Purva Kalamrita has seven sections. It deals with
fixing up muhurtas for various activities including the
construction of houses and the digging of wells.
Shardula or Shardula Vikridita is one of the metres
employed by Sanskrit poets. The ganas (unit of three
letters) are represented by letters as ma, sa, ja, sa, ta, ta
cand a guru at the end. The hiatus or caesura is after the
twelfth letter.
Weare wale apeya ana: PEENES
masehi araaa: ege ararafa
Sein AE En uItKeRT GO
war, aaga [eq pra gafa: get: ww tt
With the help of Sanku and other instruments first
observe the Shadow at the time of birth. Determine the
nadis and vinadis that have elapsed from sunrise to the
moment of birth. Then note the duration of the day and of
the night op the day of birth. Take the position of the Sun
in the tropical Zodiac (Sayana) on the day of birth. From
this position calculate the position upto the nadis and
Vinadis that elapsed at the time of birth. Next ascertain the
exact positions of the various planets on the basis of drigganita and place them in the various signs. Then calculate
the bhavas (houses, not signs) and their junction points. All
this can be obtained by the kindness and blessings of the
teacher. The intelligent one has to determine all these with
a delightful and clear mind.
Notes
The tropical (sayana) position of the Sun is needed to
determine the lagna and the cusp of the tenth house.
Having obtained these, deduct the ayanamsa from these.
The distance from the tenth house to the lagna is to be
divided by three. Add this to the tenth to get the eleventh
house. Add the same to the eleventh and we get the twelfth.
Sixty degrees from the twelfth is the second house. One

20 a : Uttara Kalamrita
hundred twenty degrees from the eleventh gives the third.
From each of these houses, the opposité ones are 180
degrees away.
Before we illustrate this, a few observations are required. In the absence of watches and clocks, the ancients
measured the time by the shadow of the Sanku in day time,
and by the position of the star at midheaven in the night.
This is no longer needed now because time-pieces are
available; only the difference between the standard time
and the local time has to be applied to the time of birth. This
depends on the longitude of the place of birth.
Next he speaks of Drig-ganita. This is the observed
position of the planets. Any modern ephemeris offers this.
Only differences exist in the ayanamsa (precession of the
equinoxes) followed. For all practical purposes, we may
take the value as given by the Calendar Reform Committee.
Then the author refers to Nadis. This is a term popular
in South India, particularly in Tamil Nadu and Kerala. The
author evidently belongs to the South. Nadi is ghatika, and
vinadi is vighatika. The day has sixty ghatikas. Each
' ghatika has 24 minutes; the Vighatika is equal to 24
seconds. .
The distance between one bhava and the next is to be
halved. This added to the longitude of the concerned bhava
gives the point indicating where that Bhava ends.
For calculating the longitudes of lagna and the tenth
house, it is better to follow the tables of houses. The best
one- is Raphael's Tables of Houses which give the sayana or
tropical longitude. Deducting the ayanamsa from these we
get the nirayana positions.
A lady was born on December 5, 1932 at one Ghatika
and 51 Vighatikas after sun rise at 13°.41’N, and 80°.0'E.
Sun Rise was at local time 6.13.6.
The Ghatikas and Vighatikas multiplied by two and
divided by five give the local time of birth as 6.57.30 A.M.
The difference from the standard time shows 7.07.30 A.M.
UST). Calculate the Sidereal time of birth on this basis since
the tables of houses give the longitudes of lagna and the

Determination of the dme of Birth 21
tenth. Here the sidereal time comes to 11°.52'.5". The ayanamsa as per Lahini’s value is 22°.55'.22".
Raphael's Tables. of Houses gives the tropical longitudes. We take only the degrees of the tenth and the first
house. At 13° North we have the following:
Tenth House Lagna
Sid. Time Virgo Sagittarius
At 14° North we have —
At 13°.41', the birth place, we have —
By applying the rule of three for the required Sidereal
time, the tropical Lagna is Sagittarius 22°.40'.3" and the
Sidereal Lagna (Nirayana) is Vrischika 29°.44'.42". Similarly the tenth house cusp’s tropical Virgo 27°.50'.26" or
Nirayana Kanya 4°.55'.5",
Thé distance from the tenth house to the lagna is
84°.49'.37". One third of this is 28°.16'.33". Adding this to
the tenth we get the eleventh is Tula 3°.] 1'.37". Adding the
same to this we have the twelfth in Vrischika 1°.28'.9". Half
of 28°.16'.33". is 14°.8'.17". Adding this to the tenth we get
the junction of the bhava at 19°.3'.22" of Virgo. Similarly the
eleventh ends at 17°.19'.54’ of Tula. The twelfth ends at
Vrischika 15°.36'.25". Deducting this half from thirty
degree we get 15°.51'.43". Add this to the longitudes of
the first, second and third houses to get their junction
points. The planets at or near these points are said to be
weak.
Thé present editor has serious doubts about the whole
method. The longitude of the tenth house is said to be its
central point. The longitude of the ascendant, however, is
representing the moment of birth, and hence its starting

22 Uttara Kalamrita
Note the Ghatikas and Vighatikas that have elapsed
from sunrise to the moment of birth. Multiply them by four
and divide the total by nine. The remainder counted from
Asvini, Magha or Mula indicates the constellation at the
time of birth.
Another method is given. Convert the Ghatikas and
Vighatikas at the time of birth into Vighatikas. Divide this
by 225. Take the remainder. We get parts - 1 to 15, 16 to
45, 16 to 90, 19 to 150 and 151 to 225. Note in which part
the remainder falls.
The above five groups indicate respectively male, female, male, female, and male births.
Moreover, determine the portion of Mandi in Rasi and
Navamsa, and also of the Moon. The lagna at birth is the
sign occupied by the Moon or Mandi. Or it can be the
seventh, first, fifth, or ninth from either of the two signs
mentioned above. Of the navamsa signs occupied by the
Moon and Mandi find out which has greater strength than
the Rasis occupied by them in the main chart. The lagna
will be one of the houses counted from the stronger navamsa sign of the Moon or Mandi.
Notes
In the example given above the birth ghatikas are one
and Vighatikas 51. Multiply this by four we get 7.24. Dividing this by nine, we get the remainder 7.24. The constella-

Determination of the time of Birth . 23
tion at birth should be the eighth one from Asvini. It comes
to Pushyami, Anuradha or Uttarabhadra. It is one star
behind. The intention of the author ls to convert the time
into Vighatikas. Thus we get 111. Multiplied by four it is
444 and dividing it by nine, the remainder is three.
Another way of counting is from Dhanishtha,
Mrigasira or Chitra. Then this agrees with the birth
constellation which is Purvabhadra. Either method can be
applied.
The division by 225 has not worked in a large number
of cases. It can safely be ignored.
Multiply the vighatikas of birth by three and divide it
by seven. The remainder counted from Sunday or Friday,
should give the weakday of birth. In our example 111 x3 =
333. Dividing it by seven, the remainder is four. Counting
from Friday we get Monday which is the correct day of birth.
Readers may consult Bh. Satyanarayana’s Nadi
Rectification. Only in a few cases his tables have proved
correct.
Sign occupied by the Moon or Mandi in Rashi or
Navamsa; 1, 5, 7 or 9 from these two in Rasi or Amsa—these
are many alternatives intended to justify the lagna somehow, or to adjust it.
Mantresvara’s view is different and simpler. (3.16)
Find the Rasi occupied by Mandi at the time of birth and
also where the lord of the sign is situated. The lagna at birth
is 1,5, 9 from that lord, or 1, 5, 9 from the navamsa having
Gulika. When the Moon is stronger, take these from the
Moon sign, not from Mandi.
There is a lot of confusion about Mandi and Gulika.
Some texts use these two words as synonymous. Mandt's
position is determined thus: When the duration of the day
or night is thirty Ghatis, Mandi’s position is at the end of
26, 22, 18, 14, 10, 6 and 2 ghatis after sunrise in the
sequence of the weekdays from Sunday. During the night
the position of Mandi is at the end of 10, 6, 2, 26, 22, 18
and 14 ghatis from sunset in the sequence of the weekdays

24 f Uttara Kalamrita
from Sunday.
The position of Gulika is determined thus: Divide the
duration of the day by eight. Count from the lord of the
wéekday and Gulika's position is at the end of Saturn's
part. If the birth is on a Thursday, Gulika’s position is at the
end of the third part. For the night birth, divide the duration
by eight. From the fifth lord of the weekday, count where
Saturn's portion ends. If one is born in the night of Thursday, the count begins from Monday (Moon).
In our example the birth was. on a Monday in the day
time. Sun rise was at 6. 13.6 and sunset was at 5.27.27. The
duration of the day was 28 ghatikas, and 5.87 vighatikas.
If the duration of the day is 30 ghatikas, Mandi’s position
will be at the end of 22 ghatikas. By rule of three, on the day
of birth Mandi is at 20 ghatikas and 36,3 vighatikas.
Gulika’s position will be at the end of the sixth part which
is 21 ghatikas, 4.4 Vighatikas. Mandi and Gulika should not
be confused., The author of Uttara-Kalamrita appears to
equate the two.
ars: anit rer wet we a A GTN
mme: wererafegraosyany àRRNA Aaa AAT, AET: i 9 Hl
The duration of the day in Ghatikas and Vighatikas
multiplied by 26, 22, 18, 14, 10, 6 and 2 (respectively from
Sunday onwards) and divided by 30 shows the exact position of Mandi in ghatikas on the day of birth. It is from
sunrise. The duration of the day or night is to be divided by
eight and counted from the day of birth to Saturday. In the
case of a night birth, the count Dene with the fifth day
from the day of birth.
; Notes i
He refers to Gulika alone. For a night birth the position
of Mandi has to be in the order given in the earlier notes.
-ai fe Prttgereq ia: eirag
mmm samia ard GaN way |

Determination of the time of Birth- 25
Sarin arqurafreentarenra gTioga: fies ua at Prereaerte wget ie tt
The eighth part has no lord. Gulika’s position comes
at the end of Saturn's. In the case of the night the first seven
parts are to be counted from the fifth day of the day of birth.
Here also Gulika’s position is at the end of Shani's. Sage
Mandavya declared that these two sons of Shani are fully
malefic. The house where they are posited brings harm to
that house.
Notes
The positions,of Mandi and Gulika are not the same.
For a day birth on Sunday, if the duration of the day is 30
Ghatikas, Mandi will be at 26 Ghatikas from Sunrise.
Gulika’'s position will be at 26 Ghatikas and 15. Vighatikas.
weimar wet sare antes:
fad ar netfa ar af waar ge cider |
ae irina E RA te
The delivery room will be in the eastern part of the
house if the rising sign at birth is Aries, Cancer, Libra,
Scorpio or Aquarius. It will be in the southern part if the
lagna is Simha or Makara. It is in the western part, if the
lagna be Vrishabha. It will be in the northern part if the
lagna is Mithuna, Kanya, Dhanus or Mina. Note whether
lagna or navamsa lagna is stronger. The place of birth will
correspond to this.
ert yine a ayaa at marat a fer
wa afka Adfa feed ung: waft: wary ti to t
The child's birth takes place when the father is away,
in another village, or in his own village, if the Moon does not
aspect the lagna. The three alternatives have to be taken

26 ae Uttara Kalamrita
when the Sun is in a movable, fixed or common sign
respectively. At the same time the Sun should be in the
eighth or in the ninth from lagna. If the Moon is in conjunction with a malefic, the delivery is after difficulty.
ath: yagana fatten: sary
Arenada et wearer: 1 ee ut
The number of planets between the lagna and the
Moon indicate the number of women attending on the
delivery of the child. The number of women outside the
delivery room are indicated by the number of planets outside this axis. the portion to be covered by the Moon in the
sign at the time of birth indicates the quantity of oil in the
lamp. The size of the wick is to be determined by the portion
of lagna left below the horizon. From the nature of the sign
occupied by the Sun, determine the nature of the lamp. The
wick is flickering, steady or both depending on the Sun
occupying a movable, fixed, or common sign.
Sun, Venus, Mars, Rahu, Saturn, Moon, Mercury and
Jupiter are respectively the lords of east, south-east, south,
south-west, west, north-west, north and north-east.
The planets in Kendras (1, 4, 7, 19) from lagna and
their strength determine the position of the door of the
delivery room. The strongest reveals the direction of the
door.
If there are no planets in the kendras, we have to
depend on the strength of the Kendras. This may be the
intention for the use of the word ‘Viryavat’.

Chapter II
AAAA S:
Determination of the
Strength
wa garana: agea ah TAuham a at: faat weai A 1
a yroma near aR
TAF ACHAT AAT tk It
All the twelve signs (Rasis) of the Zodiac rise one after
another in the east. The first six signs from lagna form the
right side of the native, while the other six represent the left
side. Houses 7 to 12 form the right side of the partner and
those from lagna to the sixth represent the left side of the
partner. 'The lagna is a symbol of life (prana), of the vital
force. The sign occupied by the Moon is the body of the
native. Everything about the vital force and the body should
be predicted’ from these two: lagna and the Moon. The
results of the several Bhavas are to be explained on the
basis of the strength of the Bhavas, their lords, and the
. Significations of the concerned Bhavas.
vet at Rta rientra wa: un
RETTER RAFE arent: Feee: |

28 Uttara Kalamrita
Moon, Mars and Jupiter are the Sun's friends. Moon’s
friends are the Sun and Mercury. Sun, Moon and Jupiter
are the friends of Mars. Sun and Venus are the friends of
Mercury. Sun, Moon and Mars are the friends of Jupiter.
The friends of Venus are Mercury and Saturn. The friends
of Saturn are Mercury and Venus. Saturn and Venus are
the enemies of the Sun. The Moon has no enemies. The
enemy of Mars is Mercury and that of Mercury is the Moon.
Jupiter's enemies are Mercury and Venus. The foes of
Venus are the Sun and Moon. Saturn's enemies are the
Sun, Moon and Mars. The remaining ones in each case are
neutrals. Relating these relationships to the temporary
relationships appearing in a given chart, one has to find out
those who are exceedingly friendly (adhi mitra) and those
that are exceedingly inimical (adhi Satru).
Notes
Planets in 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12 from a planet are the
temporary friends of the given planet. We have to relate this
to the natural relationship.
ete: qran: arie .
mA: war: Renan: enar EA n a
ain wer aei fimti duarorfira fat
water vere anfani enter: |
The lords of the twelve signs from Mesha onwards are
Mars, Venus, Mercury, Moon, Sun, Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and Jupiter. The vargas or divisions of any chart are to be noted. The first is the griha or
house or sign. A sign has two horas of equal duration. One
third of a sign is called a decanate (drekkana). Other subdivisions are saptamsa, navamsa, dvadasamsa and
trimsamsa. These are the major seven vargas.
Notes
In an odd sign the first hora is that of the Sun and the
second that of the Moon. In an even sign, these are the
Moon and the Sun. Each sign has three equal decanates
ruled respectively by its lord, the lord of the fifth from it, and,

Determination of the Strength 29
the lord of the ninth from it. Saptamsa is the division of a
sign into seven equal parts, each having 4°.17'.88". In odd
signs these are governed by the lords of the first seven Rasis
from that sign; and in even rasis the lords are from the
seventh of that sign. Navamsa is the ninth part of a sign,
each having 3°.20'. For the signs Aries, Leo and Sagittarius
these are counted from Aries; for Taurus, Virgo, and Capricorn, the count is from Capricorn; for Libra, Aquarius and
Gemini, the counting is from Libra; and for Cancer, Scorpio
and Pisces, the Counting is from Cancer, Dvadasamsa is
one-twelfth part, each having 2°.30'. The count is from the
sign concerned. Trimsamsa is one-thirtieth part. These are
grouped into five, In odd signs the trimsamsas are in Aries
(0° to 5°), Aquarius (5° to 10°), Sagittarius (10° to 18°),
Gemini (18° to 25°) and Libra (25° to 30°). In even signs these
fall in Taurys (0° to 5°), Virgo (5° to 12°), Pisces (12° to 20°),
Capricorn (20° to 25°) and Scorpio (25° to 30°}. These are the
Sapta Vargas.
iiaae gafara:
gara Wasi wa: raad aR: Uv tt
Aae a qenveadt az fied Gat
dtd waft wat fravon qefiretet e, I
mAg waft oe weggaeravafterd aedufirsraracaigt: at i a
Simha is the mulatrikona of the Sun; Vrishabha for
the Moon, Mesha for Kuja, Kanya for Budha, Dhanus for
‘Guru, Tula for Shukra and Kumbha for Shani are the
mulatrikonas. Sun in Mesha, Moon in Vrishabha, Kuja in
Makara, Budha in Kanya, Guru in Karkataka, Shukra in
Mina and Shani in Tula are exalted. When a planet is
exalied, he gets full one rupa of strength. In his mulatrikona the planet has three fourths of a rupa as his
strength. In his own house the strength is half a rupa. In
a friend's house it is one-fourth, and in the house of great
friend {adhi mitra) it is threc-fourths. In an enemy's house
it is one-sixteenth; and in a bitter enemy's (adhi-Shatru)
house it is 1/32. In the house of a neutral it is one-eighth.

30 Uttara Kalamrita
Notes
The combination of natural (naisargika) and
temporary (tatkalika) relationships have to be noted. The
following table is to be noted. Temporary friends are those
situated in houses 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12 from the planet
concerned.
Temporary friend Natura! friend Adhi mitra
Temporary friend Natural enemy Neutral
Natural neutral Friend
Temporary friend +
Temporary enemy + Natural enemy Adhi Satru
Temporary enemy + Natural friend Neutral
Temporary enemy + Natural neutral Enemy
The degrees of deepest exaltation are—Sun 10°, Moon
3°, Kuja 28°, Budha 15°, Guru 5°, Shukra 27° and Shani 20°.
The Mula trikona degrees are Sun 0° to 20°, Moon 4°
to 20°, Kuja 0° to 12°, Budha 16° to 20°, Guru 0° to 10°,
Shukra 0° to 15°, and Shani 0° to 20°.
et tear: RARA wet Bet TEU
wont rere: Seay a FESTA |
Tae gisa Vira g yi act
fat: maah: ast gaiis aref wen et
When a planet is retrograde, his strength is equal to
that of exaltation. A planet in conjunction with a retrograde
one has the strength of half a Rupa. A planet exalted in the
Rasi while retrograde is similar to a debilitated one and it
` has no strength. A retrograde planet in his debilitation has
the strength of exaltation. A planet in conjunction with a
planet in exaltation has the strength of halfa Rupa. When
it is conjoined with a planet in debilitation has no strength.
A planet in conjunction with malefics who are his friends,
or with benefics that are his enemies, has a strength of half
a Rupa.
Notes
Rupa is a unit of measurement to calculate the

Determination of the Strength 31
strength. It is the numeral one. The views regarding retrograde planet in exaltation or in debilitation are found to be
inaccurate in actual experience. Any retrogression gives
strength to the planet and increases its Cheshta Bala.
Consider the first
Ravi Shukra
Budha
house, the house of Children. Mars is aspecting it
as lord of one and 6. This
malefic aspects the sixth
also. The fifth lord who is
also the significator of children is in the twelfth from
lagna which is the eighth
from the fifth. Both are in
the houses of their enemies. Guru is stronger by being
retrograde. The native has two sons and a daughter because of this Guru and because Kuja is the lord of lagna.
Moreover, from Chandra laaee See
a Rahu Kuja
In chart 2 Shani is
Chart. Look at the fifth
Shani
Chandra
Rahu
retrograde in his delibitation
and is aspected by a bencfic.
Shani as the lord of the
fourth gave him plenty of
lands, It is the chart of a general.
In chart 3 that of Mr.
Morarji Desai two exalted
planets are retrograde. One
is the lord of the tenth aspecting it. The other is the
lord of the ninth aspecting
Guru. This explains why he
was driven out of power frequently. Kuja’s aspect on
Guru also is responsible for
this.
Shukra 14.38
Kuja 6.14 Ketu 10.59
Shani R

aspecting houses 1, 7 and
ae w 10. Budha is retrograde in
cn rise to fame of Mr. Ashok
Ketu Ravi Kumar. He has become
‘i Guru Budha R| wealthy and famous.
32 , Uttara Kalamrita
Ra In Chart 4 Shani is
hu :
Shani R | Kuja | Chandelretrograde in debilitation
exaltation, as lord 6 and 9.
Shani’s position explains the
In chart 5 Budha as lord
' of 5 and 8 is exalted and
health he had in recent
years; the major period of
Budha starts in October
1990. We have to watch the
career of this filmstar from
that time onwards.
The principles laid down by the author are working
in actual practice. It is to emphasise this point that we
have given five charts as illustrative examples with
comments.
amaren sora: qalerareannsomia erat aif wer dtd fart cry 1
The highest exaltation degrees of the planets are—Sun
10, Moon 3, Kuja 28, Budha 15, Guru 5, Shukra 27, Shani
20. Their degrees of delibitation are the same but at a
distance of 180 degrees. This is the strength derived from
the Rasi. l
Notes
This strength is not to be based on the Navamsa
position of a planet.

Determination of the Strength > 33
In an odd sign the first hora of 15 degrees is ruled by
the Sun, and the second hora of the last 15 degrees is ruled:
by the Moon. In an even sign the first hora is ruled by the
Moon and the second by the Sun. The drekkanas (ten
degrees each) are ruled by the lords of the first, fifth, and
ninth lords from it, if it is a movable sign; by the lords of the
ninth, first and the fifth houses from it, if it is a fixed sign;
and by the lord of the fifth, ninth, and first houses from it,
if it is a dual sign.
Saptamsa is the seventh part of a sign. In the case of
an odd sign these are to be counted from the lord of lagna;
and in the case of an even sign the counting is from the lord
of the seventh.
Next, we speak of Navamsa.,
Notes
The widely accepted view about the lords of the three
drekkanas is that each drekkana is ruled by. the owners of
the first, fifth, and ninth signs from it. The author offers a
second view. A very ancient view advocated by Yavanesvara
is that the lords of the drekkanas are the owners of the first,
twelfth, and eleventh houses from it. The first view is
acceptable.
About Saptamsa this author wants us to count from
the lord of the first or the seventh. The placement of the lord
of the house is not relevant. It is the house proper from
which we have to count.
Be fees egaa enneairr aniraa aA amea ie tt
aere fmt fkg:
YA a Ta aA EAT, |
Navamsa is the ninth part of a sign, each having 3°.20

Pi
34 l i ' Uttara Kalamrita
The navamsas of Mesha, Simha and Dhanus have to be
counted from Mesha. In this way the last navamsa of the
last sign end in Mina. Dvadasamasa is the twelfth part of a
sign covering 2°.30'. These have to be counted from the,
concerned sign. In an odd sign the Trimsamsas are ruled by
Kuja, Shani, Guru, Budha and Shukra respectively. They
rule 5,5, 8, 7 and 5 degrees in a sequence. In an even sign
the sequence is of 5, 7, 8, 5 and 5 degrees ruled by Shukra,
Budha, Guru, Shani and Kuja.
eure wetted pa yrratkfersarer Tquinfreatt wag araframraterendtataeg n g
aa aea nange
ware fia dR Ag maea |
Place against the sign the strength in terms of Rupas.
Then note the strength of each planet in the seven Vargas.
The strength will be less than that of the Rasi. Total these
for each planet. This is the Saptavarga strength. This process has to be followed for all the seven planets.
Notes
A planet in exaltation has the strength of one Rupa or
unit, in its mulatrikona .75, in its own house .5, in an Adhi
mitra house .375, in a friend's house .25, in a neutral's
house .125, in an enemy’s house .0625, and in an Adhi
Shatru’s house .03125. The strength of a mulatrikona
house is limited only to the position in Rasi.
zt aeons of
mutual relationships of the
Pi ae
eat 24
18.24 Katu
planet and the Saptavargas
ME R | Shukra
are given below. Ravi and
Kuja have exchanged signs.
Shani and Shukra are in
their own houses. Shukra
is in his mujatrikona, Kuja
is Vargottama and shifts to
the ninth bhava, while

Q
Determination of the Strength 3
Shukra is in the eleventh Bhava.
Sapta Vargas
Rasi Hora Drekk. Sapta. Navam Dvadas Trims
` Ravi Kuja Ravi Guru Budha Guru Budha Guru
Chandra Shani Chandra Shukra Chandra Kuja Shukra Budha
Kuja Ravi Chandra Guru Kuja Ravi Shani Guru
Budha Kuja Ravi Quru Budha Guru Budha Guru
Quru Ravi Chandra Kuja Shani Quru Chandra Shukra
Shukra Shukra Chandra Shani Shani Quru Xuja Guru
Shani Shani Chandra Shani Ravi Guru Kuja Budha
Relationships
Rasi Hora Drekk Sapta. Navam Dvadas Trims
Ravi Adhi M Sva AM. Satru AM. Satru A.M.
Chandra Mitra Sva Satru Sva Satru Satru AM.
Kuja A.M. Sama Sama Sva A.M. Satru Sama
Budha Mita Sama Mitra Sva Mitra Sva Mitra
‘Guru A.M. Sama Sama Satru Sva Sama Sama
Shukra MulaT AdhiS AM. A.M. Mitra Mitra Sva
Shani Sva Sama Sva Sama Satru AdhiS. A.M.
Sapt Varga Strerigty
Ravi 1 Kuja __ Budha Guru _ _ Shukra Shani
The strongest is Shukra, followed by Ravi and Budha.
Next come in order Chandra, Shani and Kuja. The weakest

36 Uttara Kalamrita
is Guru in Sapta Varga strength. |
wtranyeraraqeacadt aiar
maA amigi: uftgar wares Taney 11 go II
MN Y Ata afi Westy àdrei wreeiget afe art ag Prefa 1
qaae: fraragis sat: ord wef araaAi gers yor fe aÀ 11-98
ara mai aa nA wareeret
qaaa ana: wafad mei free INA, |
In its deep exaltation a planet has one Rupa of ©
strength. In its debilitation it has nothing. The number of
degrees from its debilitation divided by 180° degrees gives
its exaltation strength.
Notes
In, our example horoscope the exaltation strength of
the planets is—Sun .2213, Moon .605, Kuja .103, Budha
.645, Guru .7024, Shukra .11]1, and Shani .565,
ah coord faman at east
A erat q fevered vrei Ag ery ee 1
werent art fanfa tayaran
angriwe eg warengitad ara |
Now the author deals with digbala—directional
strength. Budha and Guru are strong in lagna, and their
strength is nil in the seventh. Chandra and Shukra get one
Rupa in the fourth and nil in the tenth. Sun and Mars are
strongest in the tenth, while Saturn is very strong in the
seventh. The directional strength of a planet elsewhere is to
be calculated by the rule of three. The effects of the pli&ets
are in proportion to their directional strength.
Notes
From the position where the planet has no strength

Determination of the Strength 37
take its distance. Divide it by 180 to get its strength. In
our example the Sun is away from the tenth by
74°.54'. From its weakest it is at 105.6. Divide it by 180
and we get .588. Similarly we get the following—Moon .926,
Kuja .899, Budha .934, Guru .494, Shukra .233 and
Shani .214.
yA aah Aaaa: PAST |
My for aeaa Weare ware R 1
weg tata arerane ut Pryce:
mA anamin yt Pret GA: |
F: Wa: Wad welt goera
Weare epi wat TERA wa 1 ew 1
auga VAT AA
qiamat atataanvaraw |
In the bright half of the lunar month, the Paksha
(fortnight) bala of a planet is proportionate to the elapsed
lunar days (tithis). The fortnightly strength of a malefic is
proportionate to the lunar days yet to elapse. In the case of
a birth in the dark fortnight this is reversed. The paksha
bala of the Moon is to be doubled. When a birth is in the
second portion of the day, the Sun has the strength of one
Rupa. If the birth is in the last third part of the day, Saturn
has one Rupa. Birth in the first one-third of the night gives
the Moon one Rupa of strength. In the second part of the
night Venus is strong, and in the third Mars. In the first
one-third of the day Mercury is strong. Jupiter is strong
always. This is Aho-ratra-bala.
Multiply the nata in Ghatikas by two and divide it
by sixty. This indicates the Natabala in the form of a
Rupa. Subtract this from one to get the unnatabala.
Moon, Mars and Saturn have nata bala, and the others
unnatabala.
Notes
Some kinds of strength are given here. Kala-bala has

38 . Uttara Kalamrita
nine sub-divisions. These are nata, paksha, tribhaga,
abda, masa, varsha, hora, ayana and yuddha forms of
strength.
1. Let us begin with the last, natonnata bala. Moon,
Mars and Saturn are strong at midnight and powerless at
noon. Ravi, Shukra and Guru are strong at noon, and
powerless at midnight. Budha is always powerful. It is
enough if we take 12.00 hours as noon and zero hours as
midnight.
Find the time elapsed after midnight or noon from the
time of birth. It is easier to take the hours. Divide it by
twelve. In our example the birth was at 7.7.30 A.M. Dividing
this by twelve we get .594. This would be the nata bala of
Ravi, Shukra and Guru. Deducting this from one we get
.406 Rupa as the natabala of Chandra, Kuja and Shani.
Budha has one Rupa.
2. Pakshabala is to be considered. Ravi, Kuja, Shani,
waning Moon, badly associated Mereury, and Rahu are
malefics. Guru, Shukra and the waxing Moon (from the
eighth lunar day of the bright fortnight to the eighth of the
dark fortnight) are benefics. When Budha is not with any
malefic, he is a benefic.
Deduct the longitude of the Sun from that of the Moon
and divide it by 180. This gives the pakshabala of benefics.
Deduct this from one to get the fortnightly strength of
malefies. The Moon's strength is to be doubled.
_ In our example the birth was on the eighth lunar
Dividing it by 180 we get .51 Rupa. This is the strength
of Guru and Shukra. Chandra has 1.02, Budha is with
a malefic. The malefics have a strength of .49
Rupa.
3. Ahoratra Bala depends on the duration of day and
of night. This is to be divided by three to determine the part.
In our example the birth was in the day and the duration
of the day is 11 hours and 14.35 minutes. The birth is in
the first part. Hence Budha and Guru get each one Rupa of

Determination of the Strength 39
strength.
wea: eiaa aaar a
mahea freed wah AT 1 ty I
PETA ATA I RNA RTEA
aed mananf a nei aÀ ae Ta, |
The interval between midday and the time of birth is
called nata. The interval between the time of birth and
midnight is called Unnata. The interval in ghatikas divided
by thirty gives the natonnata bala of planets in the form of
a Rupa. This is one of the parts of Kalabala. The instruments needed to find the time have been explained in the
sixth section of Purva Kalamrita.
adsa a arent Rafaren yat
O T E n
Perm ufeen: afea miaren
mma Ragion ata:
The lords of the year, month, day of birth and hora
have a strength respectively of .25, .5, .75, and one Rupa.
This increases Kalabala.
Hora is determined thus: Multiply the birth ghatikas
from sunrise by two and divide them by five. The quotient
gives the number of elapsed horas. The lord of the first hora
on any day is the lord of that week day. From that lord we
have to calculate the horas in the sequence of Ravi, Shukra,
Budha, Chandra, Shani, Guru and Kuja.
Notes
Four more subdivisions of Kalabala are given here. The
first tithi (Lunar bright fortnight) of Chaitra is the beginning
of the lunar year. The tithi must be at sunrise. Similarly the
first tithi of the lunar month (bright half) must be at
sunrise. In our example the lunar year began on a Wednesday giving Budha .25 Rupa. The month Margasira began on
Tuesday, and Kuja gets .5. The week day was Monday
giving the Moon .75 Rupa.

40 ' Uttara Kalamrita
The hora starts with the lord of the day of birth. Each
hora is for one hour. From the lord of the weekday of birth,
the sixth weekday lord rules the second hora, In this way
we have to take every sixth day. The second hora on a
Monday is that of Shani. Shani in our example gets one
Rupa.
mA wart qacq aad srry where
Eldan ARE ak T
Budha is always strong. Chandra and Shani are
strong in the south, and the rest in the north. This strength
is called ayana bala.
The planets Kuja, Budha, Guru, Shukra and Shani are
strong when they are retrograde. Their Cheshta-balas are
calculated from their mean positions and Sheeghra
Kendras which are explained by others.
When two planets are in the same house and within
one degree they are at war (graha yuddha). The planet
which is north of the second is the winner. It acquires the
strength of the Vanquished.
Notes
Here the remaining two parts of Kalabala are described.
1. The first is ayanabala. The planets are found to the
north or the south of the celestial equator. This is the
source of strength known as ayana bala. Here we have to
note the Kranti or declination of the planet. Modern
Ephemeris give the declinations and it is enough to take
them for the day of birth. Otherwise one may calculate
these with the help of Dr. B. V. Raman’s A Manual of Hindu
Astrology, and Graha and Bhava Balas.
In our example chart the declinations are as follows:
Sun 22.20 South, Chandra 5.28 South; Kuja 10.10
North; Budha 20.46 South; Guru 4.26 North; Shukra 12.34

Determination of the Strength 41
South; and Shani 20.23 South.
Add to the declination 23°.27', multiply by five and
divide it by 4. The result is ayanabala. In the case of Ravi,
Kuja, Guru and Shukra the northern declinations are to be
added to 23°.27'. Their southern declinations are to be
subtracted. The southern declinations of Shani and
Chandra are to be added, while the northern ones are to be
subtracted. Budha’s declination is always to be added.
In our example chart the ayana bala is as follows:
Ravi .04125; Chandra .65; Kuja .7; Budha .921; Guru
.58; Shukra .23; Shani .915.
2. The next is Graha yuddha, When two planets are
within one degree there is graha yuddha. Only Ravi and
Chandra do not enter into war. Add Sthanabala, Digbala
and Kalabala (upto Horabala) for each planet involved in
this war. Note the difference between the two, subtracting
the lesser one. Divide the difference by the diameters of the
discs. The resulting quotient must be added to the Kalabala
of the victorious planet and deducted from that of the
defected one. The diameters are Kuja 9".4, Budha 6".6,
Guru 190".4, Shukra 16".6 and Shani 158".0.
In our example no two planets are in Graha yuddha.
We thus get the Saptavarga Bala, Digbala, and Kala Bala of
the planets thus:
Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha Guru Shukra Shani
The fourth source of strength is the Cheshtabala.

42 l f Uttara Kalamrita
Cheshta refers to retrogression. The author asks us to
follow the earlier authorities who have elaborately explained this. It involves many astronomical calculations.
These can be had from the texts of Kesava, Sripati and
others.
We-have to calculate the mean position of the planets
Kuja, Guru and Shani. The mean longitude of the Sun is
their Seeghrochcha. The mean position of the Sun is taken
for Budha and Shukra also. The Seeghrochcha of Budha
and Shukra (their apogee) has to be calculated. Add the
mean longitude to the true longitude of a planet and divide
it by two to arrive at its cheshtakendra. This divided by 180
gives the Cheshta Bala of the planet. These calculations are
explained in Sripati Paddhati and in Dr. B. V. Raman’s
Graha and Bhava Balas.
The Cheshta Bala of the planets in our example Chart
are as follows:
Ravi Chandra Kuja Budha Guru Shukra Shani
Balas
The Sun and Moon have no Cheshta Bala as they do
not have retrograde movements.
qf ura raar Aaga
Wat as afat ayagi ng 1
aà maang wala nAi
argain a a: Wetter: |
Shani has full aspect on the third and the tenth
houses from himself. The other planets aspect their third
and tenth houses with one-fourth glance. Jupiter has a full
aspect on the fifth and ninth houses from himself. The
“other planets have only a half aspect on these houses from
themselves. Mars has a full aspect on the fourth and eighth
houses from himself. Others have a three-fourths aspect on

Determination of the Strength 43
these houses from themselves. All planets aspect fully the
seventh from themselves. No planet aspects the second,
sixth, eleventh and twelfth houses from itself.
Notes
The aspect on the fifth and the ninth is the trine
(120°, 240°) aspect; that on the fourth and the eighth is
a square (90°, 270°) aspect; that on the third is a sextile
(60°) aspect. The last should include the aspect on the
eleventh (300°), though the author denies it. The aspect
on the eighth (210°) is quincunx; and ‘this can include
the aspect On the sixth (150°), inspite of the author's
denial. The aspect on the seventh is called opposition
(180°) aspect. According to Parasara, Rahu aspects 5, 7,
9 and 12 fully, 2 and 10 by half, and 3 and 6 by a quarter.
Western astrologers speak of semi-square (45°, 315°),
sesquiquadrate (135°), Quintile (72°), Biquintile (144°),
Tredecile (108°), Decile (36°), and Vigintile (18°) aspects
also. Ka :
Tag fe gag gagag Taree PA, N
Deduct the longitude of the aspecting planet from that
of the aspected planet. The result is the range of the aspect.
By the rule of three we can arrive at the aspect-strength
from these degrees. We may have to add or subtract the
proportionate difference between the strength fixed for that
sign and that fixed for the next one. The resulting drigbala
is malefic or benefic according to the aspecting planet being
malefic or benefic. We have to enter these in terms of Rupas
under two heads. The total will give the exact aspectstrength received by a planet.
Notes
The calculation of drishtibala is not as simple as it _

44 ‘Uttara Kalamrita
appears from these lines. It needs much calculation. The
deduction of the longitude of the aspecting planet from that
of the aspected one gives drishtikendra, aspect angle, Then
there are the special aspects of Guru (120° to 150°, and 240°
to 270°), Shani (60° to 90°, and 270° to 300°) and Kuja (90°
to 120°, and 210° to 240°). Where these special aspects fall
we have to add .5 to Guru, .75 to Shani and .25 to Kuja.
Malefic aspects are those of the Sun, waning Moon, badly
associated Budha, Kuja and Shani. Benefic aspects are
those of Guru, Shukra, waxing Moon, and isolated or wellassociated Budha.
The method of calculating Drishti values is well explained in Sripatt Paddhati and in Dr. B. V. Raman's book
referred to above.
On the basis of these calculations, our example chart
gives the following aspect-strengths:
Ravi + .2236; Chandra - .333;
Guru + .066; Shukra - .0123;
Shani + .25.
From the total the drishti strengths of Chandra, Kuja,
Budha and Shukra have to be subtracted. The others have
to be added.
This is the fifth source of strength.
sehargrahranguyeyitrew: SrnA Baan wales Aafite ear 1 Ro i
PATTERN ae Sear |
The naisargika or natural strength of the Sun is one
Rupa. The natural strength of Chandra is less than this by
a seventh. From each preceeding one the succeeding one is
less by a seventh in the sequence of Shukra, Guru, Budha,
Kuja, and Shani. The six sources of strength—Sapta Varga,

Determination of the Strength ` 45
Dik) Kala, Cheshta, Drishti and Naisargika have to be
added for each planet. This gives the Shadbala of the planet
concerned.
aanraai THY epea Weer ahs wag 11 2 N
Wa trata fatter woremenera
aati fe wet wat apiitarearsncad ager |
: It is the rectified drigbala that should be taken into
consideration. If a planet is victorious in Graha Yuddha, it
gets a strength of one Rupa. The vanquished one loses one
. Rupa. The total of these six balas (as rectified) is the
: planet’s Shadbala in Rupas. A planet having less than five
Rupas is weak. It has the normal strength if its strength is
-between five and ten Rupas.
In our example chart we get the following:
Rai Chandra Kuja Budha Guru Shuka Shanti
vious Balas ;
Bala
Bala
The strongest is Budha. All have above five Rupas.
warang gyti agaiftrs: caraqu:
Dzaa amada ypa eniT 11 22 1
w eaan aans AA
Úm eea aa AAA Ges ar 1 22 2/2 1
The planet having more than ten Rupas will be
fully strong. Such a planet is beneficial. His major period
produces highly favourable results. The native will have in
that period all that he aspires for. His desires will be
fulfilled.

46 ae Uttara Kalamrita
When a planet is proceeding fro. his debilitation to
his exaltation, and if it has average strength, his period also
will bring happiness. But if the planet is moving towards
his delibitation, his period is unfavourable.
The period of a planet having less than five Rupas
brings misery and unhappiness.
ANCIENT WORK
BRIHAT PARASARA
HORA SASTRA
T.e greatest work by the father of
Hindu Astrology
Maharshi PARASARA
(With 4000 Sanskrit Slokas, English
Translation and Exhaustive notes, over
1000 Pages)
(2 Vol. Set)
Ask for your copy:
RANJAN PUBLICATIONS
16, Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.

Chapter III
amgaang:
Determination of Longevity
The author now describes how to calculate Amsa
Ayurdaya. This is to be taken as final when lagna is stronger than the Sun and the Moon,
Count the number of constellations from Asvini that
have elapsed with reference to the position of a planet in the
chart. Dividing this by three, take the remalnder and multiply it by four. Add the number of padas covered by the
planet in the constellation. This gives the number of navamsas from the beginning of Mesha. This is the number of
years contributed by that planet in the Amsa Ayurdaya
method. From the quarter (pada) in which the planet is,
calculate the months and days by the rule of three. The
years, months and days contributed by the two luminaries,
five planets, and lagna have to be added.
Notes
Longevity can be calculated in eight possible ways. It
is the strongest among the eight that determines the lon-.
gevity which is applicable to a given chart. The strongest is
found after calculating the Shadbala of the planets and
Bhava Bala. The author has not touched upon Bhava Bala.
This is arrived at by adding three factors. These are the

48 Uttara Kalamrita
strength of the lord of the concerned Bhava, the direction
(dik) of that bhava, and the aspect strength on the same.
The various types of longevity that depend on the
strongest factor—this is mentioned within brackets—are
the following:
Amsa (Lagna), Pinda (Sun), Naisargika (Moon), Bhinna
Ashtakavarga (Kuja), Rasmi (Budha), Kakshatra (Guru),
Kala Chakra (Shukra), and Sarmday Ashtaka varga (Shani).
The first three are explained elaborately and with
utmost scientific accuracy in Sripatt Paddhati. Nearly
eighty per cent of the charts show that we have to apply
Amsa or Pinda Ayurdaya only. Amsa Ayurdaya is applicable
to a larger number of the charts. Hence the author explains
it.
Note how many navamsas have been traversed by a
planet. Each navamsa constitutes one quarter of a constellation. The example chart will be the basis for our study.
The navamsas have to be counted from the beginning of
Mesha.
The elapsed navamsas
in our example are given
along with the decimal
ae et how many of the
navamsas are traversed.
Lagna 71.925; Ravi
EF es 68.95; Chandra 96.5; Kuja
Guru 44.57; Shukra
Ravi 10.49
L 29.45 Shukra 59.105; and Shani 83.5.
Shani
When the number of Sua Chandra
the navamsas exceeds
z7
Ketu 16.24
twelve, expunge multiples
of twelve. Thus we get LaNavamsa
Chandra 0.5; Kuja 4.965;
Budha 8.665; Guru 8.57;
Shukra 11.105; and Shani |$
11.5 ail

Determination of Longevity 49
The total comes to 66.18. This comes to 66 years, two
months and 5 days.
wary: Agana maA fewer
wa weg Ge ye ae ced mea, |
Aa wiser faar r
girti fe mà gaa enderngiereg R
Malefics occupying houses 7 to 12, lose a part of the
years they contribute. The loss is full in the 12th, half in the
11th, 1/3 in 10th, 1/4 in 9th, 1/5 in 8th, and 1/6 in 7th.
Benefics in these houses lose half of what the malefics lose.
That is, from the twelfth onwards they lose 1/2, 1/4, 1/6,
A malefic occupying lagna removes the years contributed by the Lagna.
A planet in delibitation loses half, a planet in an
enemy’s house loses one-third, and a planet in combustion
or defeated in war loses one half of its years. This is the
peculiarity of this method.
Notes
There is not only reduction, but also an increase which
is taken for granted by the author.
(a) The years contributed by a planet are trebled when
it is exalted or retrograde.
(b) The years are doubled when it is Vargottama (same
sign in Rasi and Navamsa), when it is in its navamsa
sign or Rasi sign or in its own DrekkKana. Only the
maximum multiplication has to be done, not two or
more.
In our example Budha is retrograde and his years have
to be multiplied by three. Shukra and Shani are in their
own houses and Guru is in his own house in Navamsa.
Kuja is Vargottama. Thus the years contributed by Kuja,
Guru, Shukra and Shani have to be doubled. We thus get
. the following figures:

50 , Uttara Katamrita
Ravi 8.95, Chandra .5, Kuja 9.93, Budha 25.995, Guru
17.14, Shukra 22,21, and Shani 23.0. The total comes to
107.725 years.
Next comes the reduction known as Chakrapata as
explained by the author. When there are two or more
planets in the same house, only the strongest is subject to
reduction.
The Shadbalas of the example chart show that Budha
is stronger than Ravi, and Guru is stronger than Kuja.
Guru gets into the tenth bhava. Hence the reduction is for
both Kuja and Guru.
Budha as a malefic loses half the years he has contributed. Guru in the tenth bhava loses one-sixth. Thus he
gives 14.283 years. Kuja loses one-fourth and he now gives
7.4475 years. Shukra in the eleventh loses one-fourth. His
contribution now is 16.6575 years.
Let us tabulate thus far:
— Ravi 8.95
Chandra 0.565
Kuja 7.4475
Budha 12.9975
Guru 14.283
Shukra 16.6575
Shani 23.0
Total 83.9005 years
The next deduction is one-third for occupying an
enemy's house. Here no planet occupies such a house.
_ Then we have to apply for combustion. It means a planet
with the Sun. The distances from the Sun where combustion begins and ends are in degrees—-Chandra 12, Kuja 17,
Budha 14, Guru ł1, Shukra 10, and Shani 15, Retrograde
` Budha 12, and Retrograde Shukra 8.
Budha is combust and he loses everything.
Finally there is the reduction due to a malefic rising in
lagna. In our example there is Budha.

Determination of Longevity 51
The author's treatment of this reduction is sketchy.
The last arises after all the increases and reductions are
made, Multiply the number of Amsas elapsed in lagna by
the total number of years given by the planets. This is to be
divided by 108. The quotient gives the years to be deducted
from the total.
For a more accurate method of calculating Amsa
Ayurdaya, the best text is Sripati Paddhati.
Weer cartes aiyaara get: 113
Find how many ghatikas and vighatikas have elapsed
in lagna. Multiply this by nine and divide the product by the
total duration of the lagna. This gives the years contributed
by lagna. The remainder has to be converted into months
and days.
The lagna becomes strong when its lord or a benefic is
in it or aspects it, or when its lord is exalted. Then the
number of years contributed by the lagna are to be counted
from Mesha to the lagna. This is the view of some astrologers.
Notes
When a malefic is in the lagna or aspects it,
the deduction is only half of what was arrived at in the
notes of the previous verse. lf two or more planets are in
lagna, we have to consider only the one who is nearer to the
lagna,
The years contributed by lagna have to be noted. In
our example only eight navamsas clapsed, and in the second .925 was over. Thus it gives 8.925 years. The aspect of
its lord does not fall on it as there is only a distance of
103°,12'. IL is not 120°. Adding 8.925 to the previous total
‘we get years 79.828. This is not true, as the Krurodaya

52 on at Uttara Kalamrita
harana has not been applied. The method explained under
these three verses is too general.
Drexerenrqurratarata enren:
Trapieitintiafagt yod fe mafia
a Urata acer wale
qa saged af Agf ii x N
Lagna has three drekkanas. It has one drekkana on
each side. Calculate the Sapta Varga strengths of the lords
of these three drekkanas in terms of Rupas. This represents
the Punya (religious merit) of the native. When this is
deducted from four, it shows the papa (sin or cvil) of the
native. If these differ by four or more Rupas, and if the
Rupas of Punya are more, the native achieves final emancipation.
Notes
The previous drekkana refers to the past, the drekkana
of lagna to the present, and the next to the future births.
In our example the next drekkana falls in the next
sign. The author does not tell us what to do in such cases.
We follow the traditional lords of the drekkanas. The three
drekkanas in our example are owned by the Moon, Guru,
and Kuja. The Sapta Varga strengths are—Moon 1.812,
Guru 1.4175, and Kuja 1.6875. Deducting these from four,
we get respectively 2.188, 2.5825, and 2.3125. These are
the malefic portions in Rupas.
rarnana: mfia
wen yua waafaginton wren: UN: |
Beat: magna weer wart
daiira acergat wad TTA: 11 Hh
After obtaining the benefic and malefic portions of
Sapta Varga strength of the three lords of the drekkanas,
take the malefic portions only. Multiply these by 120 and
divide the product by seven. Expunge multiples of 120. The
result shows the number of years the native lived in the

Determination of Longevity 53
past birth, lives in the present and will live in the future.
This method is suggested only to open up some discussion. It is simpler than the method of Amsa Ayurdaya.
Notes
This method does not work. It is faulty. For the previous birth of the native, the malefic portion of Chandra is
2.188. This multiplied by 120 and divided by seven given
37.51 years. For the present birth Guru's malefic portion is
2.5825. This gives 44.27 years. The native is alive even after
fifty six years of age.
Se alors fern: aem: qotagiweer ot a west cre fanfa fer: |
wes me Sarat CEU GT:
SASAKI A YS WA Ga: FAT 11 & N
. (a) The native has a long life if Shukra, Guru and
Budha are in kendras and konas. (b) When these are in
houses 2, 3 and 11 the native has a medium life (madhya
ayurdaya, which does not exceed 66 years of age). (c) If
these planets are in houses 6, 8 and 12, the native hasa
short life. (d) Planets other than these, the malefics, posited
in 8, 12, kendras (1, 4, 7, 10) and konas do not give rise to
any benefic results.
Notes
. Four kinds of yogas are given. The first three refer to
the benefics Budha, Guru
eee hee eel and Shukra. Budha, howp ever, should not be with a
malefic. The first combinaa tion is for long life. Guru,
Budha and Shukra should
Kuja 25.3091 be in kendras and konas. In
patie Chart 7 Guru is in the
strongest kona and is the
lord of lagna. Budha is in

56 Uttara Kalamrita
The fourth combination is peculiar. The malefics have
to be in Kendra, Kona, and houses 8 and 12. This is
inauspicious. A malefic like Shani in the eighth does give
Trani long life. Kuja in the eighth
26.49 does disturb the health. In
a Eel] the 13th chart Shani is in
lagna aspecting the tenth
13 Guru. Kuja is in a trine with
Rahu. Ravi, another malefic,
1937.3135 12415 Jis also in lagna. Only one
Nep Kendra has a benefic. The
Siea native had no robust health.
Guru Kuja 7.38 He died in March 1972 after
lying unconscious for a
month. eighth house has no planet. The twelfth has a
natural benefic.
The author's view has
to be modified. In chart 14
the eighth and twelfth have
malefics, a malefic is in the
tenth with the Sun and Shukra
combust Moon. She married a rich person who be- [Gun 11 1878.4.1
came poor. From the lord of :
lagna, who is in an enemy’s
house, the twelfth has
three malefics.
Another combination for short life and an exception
are given. When (i) the Lord of the Lagna is not aspected by
any benefic situated in a Kendra or Kona and (ii) at the
same time the owner of the sign occupied by the Lord of the
Lagna is not having the beneficial aspect from Kendra or
Kona and (iil) the lagna is devoid of benefic aspect from
Kendra or Kona, then the native has a short life and is

Determination of Longevity 57
denied spouse, children and intellect.
But when the Lagna, Lagna Lord and the Lord of the
sign occupied by Lagna Lord are having benefic aspect from
Kendra or Kona then one has a long life, plenty of fortune,
wealth, intelligence and fame.
Notes
The combination wants the aspect of a benefic situ1.46 car loa ated in 1, 4, 7, 10,5 or 9 on
there is to be a long life. In
chart 15 the lagna is not
aspected by any. The lord of
lagna is not aspected by
any benefic from kendra or
kona. The lord of the sign
occupied by the lord of la6.16 28.48 | Pluto Onora, a
Shani Rahu | 24.0 Kaa 2423
Ravi 8,82
16 Budha 24.22
m el FA
Ketu 28.48
Chandra 3.
Moon, is aspected by Guru,
but not from any kendra or
kona. He committed suicide in November 1985, at
the age of 19, The combination is fulfilled.
An example for the
exception is chart 17. Here
the lord of lagna is in a
F qik a Pluto 17.22
handra 27.1 21.46 Shani R
gna is in a kendra, but is
not aspected by any. The
lady died in July 1946 at
the age of 21. The combination prescribed fits in exactly. In chart 16 the lagna
is devoid of any aspect and
so is the lord of the lagna.
The owner of the sign,
Ketu Chandra | Shani R

58 . Uttara Kalamrita
kona. He is aspected by Shani and he, as a benefic, aspects
the lagna. The owner of that sign is aspected by the full
Moon. He had a long life, fame and fortunes. It is the chart
of late Dr Rajendra Prasad.
Shukra 1.47 | any kendra. One kona has
Rem 210 1 Ketu. The lagna and its lord
are aspected only by a malefic. He was married at the
age of 19 and had no children. His intelligence was
above the average because
Chart 18 is another
‘ good example for a short
ie life. There are no planets in
the fifth is aspected by
Shukra-who is subjected to
Guru's aspect. The fifth lord
is exalted. Inspite of all this,
he died in November 1946.
In chart 19 the lagna is not
aspected by any and it has
two malefics, The lord of lagna is in the twelfth aspected by Kuja, Shani, and
debilitated Guru. These are not in any kendra or kona. The
lord of the sign having Budha is Shukra who is not aspected by any. benefic. She died in July 1922.
Tin apeat MASTAAA |
wagner winger yt ar ate
wena a ated aat: wesaearcant
ULN
Now a combination for a short life is given. The lagna
or the moon should be aspected by che lord of the eighth
house; or the lord of the eighth house from the Moon or
lagna must be aspected by Shani or Kuja. In both cases no
benefic should aspect the lord of lagna or the lord of the

Determination of Longevity 59
sign occupied by the lord of lagna. Then even if his longevity
is normally expected to be similar to that of Markandeya,
the native has a very very short life.
Notes
Here are two important combinations:
(a) The lagna lord and the lord of the sign occupied by
the lord of lagna should not have any benefic aspect. The
_ lord of the cighth house should aspect the lagna or the
Chandra lagna.
(b) The lord of the lagna and of the slgn having the
lagna lord should not be aspected by any benefic. The lord
of the eighth from lagna or from the Moon should be
aspcected by Shani or Kuja.
Chart 12 fulfills the second combination. The lagna
lord is aspected only by malefic Kuja. The eighth lord from
T a the Moon is aspected by
Shani. But there is the
benefic aspect of Guru also
on Shukra. The lord of the
eighth from lagna is Kuja
who is aspected only by the
Sun. Chart 10 shows that
the lord of lagna is aspected
by the eighth lord. The
owner of the sign occupied
by the lagna lord has no
25 8 Shukra
shoe 2
benefic aspect. The lord of
the eighth house from the
Moon is aspected by Shani
and Kuja as well. In chart
20 the lord of lagna is not
aspected by any benefic,
though the lord of that sign Ketu
is aspected by the full
Moon. The Moon is aspected by the eighth lord.
Chandra
The Moon is also the lord of
the eighth from himself. He died in September 1926. There

Guru R Lagna | Chandra
Rahu 21
Kuja 17.26
Shukra 20.27
Ravi 1.5 Shani 16.16
Pluto
Uttara Kalamrita
is also a malefic in the
twelfth house from the lord
of lagna; and this too is an
indication for short life.
Shukra, lord of the sign
having the lagna lord, is
combust. Consider chart
21. Here lagna and the lord
of the sign occupied by the
lagna lord have no benefic
aspects. The Moon is aspected by Shani. The lord of the eighth house from lagna,
Guru, is aspected both by Shani and Kuja. He was fatally
shot in January 1974.
In chart 22 the lagna
lord is in his own house and
is not aspected by any
benefic. The lord of the
eighth is Venus and he is
aspected by Shani. She
died in November 1916. The
lord of the eighth house
also aspects the lagna, and
he is debilitated in a maraka house.
Shani 21.18) Kuja ie
les 2.16
ele 19.0 Ketu
17.39 Shani R kuiaata laso
10.48 Guru R Rahu 24 59
Shukra
8.15 Ravi
5.20 Budha
In chart 23 the lord of
lagna is aspected by Shani,
who is the owner of that
sign. There are no benefic
aspects on either. The lagna is aspected by the
|| eighth lord. The lagna is
also the eighth from the
Moon. She died in January
1937. There is also a malefic in the twelfth from
lagna. The Moon is debilitated and is aspected by the
malefic Mars. The lord of the third is in any enemy's house
aspected by Shani. Hence there is short life.

Determination of Longevity 6!
These examples show that the combinations given for
short life are valid. We give some more examples for short
life without offering any comments because the rules laid
down can be applied easily. Within the chart we give the
date of birth and the date of demise as well.
Chandra 15
Budha 14 A
a

62 l Uttara Kalamrita
Ketu 29
Kuja R 14
Kuja 28 | Shukra

Determination of Longevity 63
Aevi 1 pala a 4
Budha A

| Chapter IV
| Te UTamnerwavs:
Effects of the Planets and
Houses
sadn vert aed eae caren ie ul
When there is a mutual relation between the planets
of the following six groups, they bring much fame and make
the person the best ruler or administrator (literally, a king)
and auspicious.
(i) Planets in their exaltation, own houses, friend's
houses, and trikonas (1, 5, 9);
(ii) Planets in Kendras (1, 4, 7, 10) and in Vargottama;
{iii) Planets aspected by or conjoined with benefics, and
those that are between benefics;
(iv) Planets situated in their mula-trikona houses;
(v) Planets moving towards their exaltation; and
(vi) Those that own both a trikona and a kendra.
Notes
The groups are too general. The last combination
applies to Vrishabha, Karka, Simha, Tula, Makara, and
Kumbha lagna natives only. The planets involved are |
respectively Shani, Kuja, Kuja, Shani, Shukra and
Shukra.

Effects of the Planets and Houses 65
The fourth combination refers to Mesha (Kuja), Vrishabha (Chandra), Simha (Ravi), Kanya (Budha), Tula
(Shukra), Dhanus (Guru), and, Kumbha (Shani).
Benefics are Guru, Shukra, waxing Moon (from the
eighth day of the bright half of the lunar month to the
eighth day of the dark half), and Budha who is not with any
malefic like Ravi, Kuja, Shani, Rahu, and waning Moon.
In chart 32 Shani and Chandra (lords of kendras), Ravi
and Kuja (owners of kendra), and Guru and Shukra (benefics) have exchanged
23.27 10.35 | houses. Two planets are in
ee friend's houses, and three
reg! are in a trine, while one is
peat 21.48 in a kendra (combination
1). Benefic Guru is asce pecting Ravi, Budha and
Chandra (ili). All have left
Seema el their debilitation signs.
10.35 Rahu | 27 Kuja owns a kendra and
kona, and had exchanged
houses with his friend, Sun (vi). The results are fairly
evident as this is the chart of Mrs. Indira Gandhi.
Chart 33 is that of Pt. Nehru. Three benefics (Chandra.
Shukra and Guru) are in
their own houses and two
are in friend's houses
() Three are in kKendras,
(ii) Shani is aspected by the
benefic Guru, and Budha is
with a benefic, (iii! Shukra
is in his mula-trikona,
(w) The results stated were
revealed.
Consider chart 34 that
of Ramana Maharshi. Kuja is in his own house, ‘while the
Sun and Moon are in friends’ houses. Guru and Chandra
are in konas (ij) Kuja is in a kendra. Chandra, Guru and
Lagna are Vargottama, (ff Guru aspects Chandra and
lagna. Benefics Budha and Shukra are together, (iii) The

Shani Kuja 28.30
Chandra
Ravi 14
pod se fle |
Shani are in friend’s house (i)
Guru are in kendras, (ii)
Shani and Ravi are aspected by benefic Guru,
while Budha and Shukra,
Uttara Kalamrita
results are plain. Instead of
civil or administrative
power, he had the spiritual
power.
Chart 35 is that of the
great sage Svami Vidyanaranya, the founder of the
Vijayanagar empire. Ravi
and Shukra are exalted.
Guru and Chandra are in
their own houses, Ravi and
Budha, Shukra, Shani and
Budha
Shukra A
two benefics, are together,
(ui!) Guru is in his mula
trikona, {iv) Guru is moving towards lagna, {v} Out
of the six factors five are
fulfilled. He wielded spiritual power directly and
temporal power indirectly. The author's view is well substantiated in this chart.
The yogas mentioned in the first verse are destroyed by
the following groups of planets:
{i) Debilitated planets;
(ii) Planets defeated in war;
(tii) Planets in the houses of their enemies;
(iv) Planets aspected by, or are with, or are placed between malefics;

Effects of the Planets and Houses . ; 67
(v) Planets with a retrograde one, with the Sun, or with
Rahu;
(vi) Planets in a Bhava-Sandhi;
(vii) Weak planets; and
(vili Planets owning 6, 8, 12 houses but with the lords of
kendras or trikonas.
Notes
When two or more planets are within one degree in the
same sign, the planet that is ahead is said to be victorious,
The planets Budha, Guru and Shani are called Paura. Kuja
and Shukra are named yayi. The war between one Paura
and another Paura is the worst. The war involving two yayis
is mild. The war between one Paura and one Yayi is worse.
A weak planet is one weak in Shadbala having less
than five Rupas of strength. According to Sripati, the minimum strength required in Rupas is—Ravi 6.5, Chandra 6.0,
Kuja 5.00, Budha 7.00, Guru 6.5, Shukra 5.5 and Shani
5.00. The minimum i ete under various heads is as
follows:
Sthana Dik Cheshta Kala Ayana
Consider chart 36. Ravi 6.28
Kuja, a powerful lord, is Kya 24.3
vanquished by Shukra (li). Shuka 2422
Shani, a yoga karaka is in
an enemy’s house, (iii). and
he aspects the seventh
house (ip). Budha is combust {v}. Shani, Shukra
and Budha own houses 6,
8, 12. He was destroyed in

68 Uttara Kalamrita
14.36 | Shani 16.15] Shukra
Ketu 1as9 26.15
handra Guru
Ravi
gaas
the major period of Rahu,
inspite of the aspect of
Guru from his mula
trikona. This is the chart of
Adolf Hitler. In Chart 37 of
1883.7.29 Mussolini, Shani and
Chandra are vanquished
(ii), Guru and Budha are in
0.15 14.36 enemies’ houses (iti). With
Lagna | Rahu malefics is Chandra and
the malefics aspect lagna.
Guru and Shukra are hemmed in between malefics (iv).
Budha is combust {v). Kuja, Budha and Shukra own
malefic houses (viii). These have destroyed the other yogas
present in the chart.
In chart 38 the lord of lagna and the sixth is with the
debilitated lord of the tenth in the twelfth. Kuja is well
behind the Sun. The lords
of 2 and 7 have exchanged
houses and are in 6 and 8
relationship. The native is
bound to suffer and to lose
his position. Guru and
Shukra are in enemies’ i 1893.11.12
houses, while Kuja and
Budha are in the houses of Bix ee
neutrals. He has an ordi- |s 1a 28
nary education. Mars as- lemma
pects Guru in an adverse way. The ninth lord with the lord
of the twelfth made him lose much. He lost his wife.
worden aprenia fa 113 h
Wealth and happiness come tc the native under one of
the folowing combinations of Raja yoga:
(j The lords of the ninth and the tenth should be ‘in

Effects of the Planets and Houses 69
their own houses;
(i) These lords should be together in the 9th or 10th;
(iii) They should exchange houses (or stars);
(iv) They should aspect each other;
{ v) They should be with the lords of 1, 4, 5 or 7:
(vi) They should be in houses 1, 4, 5 or 7.
But these two lords should not own the eighth or
eleventh house.
Notes
The ninth is the strongest kona called dharma,
bhagya. The tenth is the strongest kendra known as karma,
rajya.
Chart 39 shows the exchange of houses between the
ninth and the tenth lords. The ninth lord is with the lords
of 4 and 5—education and
intellect. Guru as one significator of education is
aspecting lagna. The fifth
lord is exalted, from Chandra lagna the exchange is
between the lords of 4 and
5. This is the chart of the
author of relativity, Einstein. The effects of Rajya
yoga were well manifested
even though Shani owns the eighth and Shukra the twelfth.
But because of the exchange, Shani has lost the
ownership of the eighth.
Chart 40 is that of B.
G. Tilak. The ninth lord is
in his own house with the
waxing Moon. The tenth
lord and the ninth lord are
aspecting each other. The
tenth lord also owns the
fifth. It was in the major

70 i Uttara Kalamrita
period of Kuja that he became the undisputed leader of the
independence movement. K. Kamaraj also has a similar
placement of Kuja and Guru for the same lagna; and his
Kuja's period was a spectacular one.
In chart 41 the ninth lord has exchanged houses with
the lord of lagna. The tenth
ae Ketu lord is in the fourth with
10.48 the fifth lord and lord of
lagna. Kuja aspects
4 Shukra, the tenth lord. It is
isni 21.19 the chart of Hari krishna
bik Mehtab, who was a former
Kuja 7 Chief Minister of Orissa.
Basha 26.12 aeaa The Raja yoga is strengthShani handra ened by the lords of lagna
and fifth house.
In Mahatma Gandhi's chart (42) the ninth lord is in
lagna and the tenth lord is
in the tenth. The ninth lord
is with the seventh and first
lords. They are all aspected
by Guru. The Raja yoga ef-
- fects were well manifested
from the major period of
Mars onwards. In the major } 15.56
periods of Rahu and Guru
they were revealed to the Sat rst) Sun
full. 19.57 Jimma tava] 18.22
Chart 43 is that of Akbar. The ninth and the tenth
lords are in mutual aspect.
The ninth lord is aspected
by yoga karaka Shani,
while the tenth lord has the
aspect of benefic Guru. It is
; 1542.11.24 89 a clear case of Raja yoga.
Kuja Ketu Note also the tenth lord in
Shenley sa the ninth. From Chandra
Smee te. 1 lagna the lords of 9 and 10
Budha Ravi pale
£21.54 are in the fifth.

Effects of the Planets and Houses 71
Dr. C. Siva Rama Murthi, the noted art-critic, has the
ninth (Ravi) and tenth (Budha) lords together in the seventh. Yehudi Menuhin has these in the fifth Aries. Arjun
Singh (Mithuna lagna) has the ninth lord in the seventh
and the tenth lord in Lagna.Radhakrishnan’'s chart has the
ninth and the tenth lords in Kanya lagna aspected by the
fifth lord from Cancer. M. Visvesvarayya whose chart was
earlier given (Lagna Dhanus) had the ninth and tenth lord
in the tenth, unaspected by any. Tippu Sultan with the
same lagna has them unfortunately in the twelfth with
Shani and Rahu.
There are three pairs of planets: (i) owners of the ninth
and tenth houses from lagna; (ii) owners of the ninth and
the tenth from the ninth house; and (iii) lords of these
houses from the tenth. These three respectively give high,
medium or small position to the native.
These three pairs can have three kinds of relationship
between them: (a) conjunction, (b) interchange, and
{c) mutual aspect.
1. Any one of these pairs may be mutually related
by any of the three relationships. They should be
strong.
2. Any one of these pairs may be in mutual kendras.
3. Any pair must have conjunction with the planet
owning the house occupied by the lagna lord.
Any one of these combinations will make the native
wealthy and he will be a ruler (literally, a king).

72 Uttara Kalamrita
Notes
In Einstein's chart (39) the lords of 9 and 10 have
exchanged houses and they are strong. He is the presiding
deity of modern mathematical physics. In Tilak's chart
there is mutual aspect of these lords (40). They are in
mutual kendras. In chart 41 the ninth lord aspects the lord
of the tenth. A similar Kendra position appears in other
charts. Chart 40 also shows Kuja and Guru as lords of 9
and 10 from the ninth. It is a medium yoga. In another chart
the ninth and tenth lords from the tenth are Kuja and Guru
who are in mutual aspect and who are in mutual kendras.
The yoga is small. This may explain his suffering. In a chart
given earlier the lords of 9 and 10 from the ninth are Guru
and Shani who are together in Shukra’s house with
Shukra.
In Stalin's chart (44) the lords of 9 and 10 from the
T ninth are Shani and Guru
12.42 ‘$ who have exchanged
pik houses. This confers only a
medium Raja yoga. Their
ownerships from lagna and
Chandra did not make his
rise smooth or orderly. A
certain ruthlessness was
Rahu 24.23 | 17.42 maea clear from the Moon (tenth
Rad 8.98 |Budha fT a5 a6 lord) in conjunction with
- Shani in the sixth.
In chart 45 yogakaraka Kuja is in the tenth aspected
by Shani (lord of 6 and 7) and by Guru (lord of 5 and 8). Kuja
aspects lagna also. The
lords of 5 and 7 are in
mutual aspects; and these
are lords of 9 and 10 from
the ninth. He became a distinguished Dewan of Travancore, Mysore and Baroda. Jupiter aspects the
lord of the ninth in the
tenth, and also the lord of

Effects of the Planets and Houses 73
the tenth. .
In chart 46 the lords of 9 and 10 from lagna, from the
ninth, and from the tenth
Guru 8 Ketu 5
a= Ravi 18 are in mutual kendras.
eee ge eae This is a strong Raja yoga
by itself. There are other
46 yogas as well. He made a
: 1845.6.1 distinguished contribution
Shani 25] 1901.9.13 as the Dewan of Mysore.
The lord of the ninth is in
the tenth. The lord of 4 and
11 is in the eleventh. Guru
is with the Moon.
In chart 47 the lords of
9 and 10 are in mutual aspect and in mutual kendras. The tenth lord is exalted. Shani and Guru are
the lords of 9 and 10 from
the ninth and they are in
mutual kendras. He was an
I1.C.S. -officer. He was
wealthy and prosperous.
gi iaman qaqa @ ay: WaT a N
Note the following:
(0) The lords of the Lagna, navamsa lagna and of the sign
occupied by the lord of lagna.
(i) The lords of the ninth and tenth houses.
(li) The lords of houses 3, 4, 5 and 7.
{iv} The lords of 2 and 11.
These four sets of planets must be placed in any one
of these houses; or they should exchange houses; or they
must mutually aspect each other from a friendly, own or

74 Uttara Kalamrita
exaltation house. Then they give respectively (i) prosperity,
(ii) vehicles like horses and elephants, (iii) happiness and
children, and {tv} wealth.
Notes
In chart 48 the lords of 9 and ten are in mutual aspect
and in mutual kendras, (ti).
Rahu 8.2 |Budha 3.20 ae Shani (lord of 3 and 4),
Kuja 11.51 [Ravi 25.2 Guru 28 Guru (lord of 5) and
Shukra (Lord of 7) are in
B 48 A mutual aspects, (liii) She
1930.69 has vehicles, children and
happiness She wielded
power as the Chief Minister
4.29 of a State.
Shani p [Chandra |Ketu In chart 49 the lord of
L10.22 |82 lagna is in the ninth with
his friend Shukra. The lord
of lagna and the lord of the sign occupied by its lord are
together in the ninth (i),
Lords of 2 and 11 are conjunct in the tenth (1)... The
third lord with the seventh
lord is aspecting the lord of
4 and 5, (iii) There is a
strong Raja yoga. The native has great wealth arising from his powerful position in life. The lords of 10
and 11 have exchanged
houses, as required by the
author. He was an LC.S.
Chandra 24
Ketu 22
officer.
Chart 50 is that of a
highly placed influential
person. Shukra and Guru
are in their own houses,
and they are the lords of 4,
5 and 7 (i). The lords of 9
and 10 are conjoined in the
second (ii). The lord af
lagna and the lord of the
sign having him are iè
; Budha F
Shani 18 Rahu 22 |Ravi15
Guru 12 Shukra 24 | L25
Kuja 28

Effects of the Planets and Houses 75
gether (iti). The lords of 2 and 11 are in mutual aspect (iv).
Shani's aspect on 10 gave him valuable public service.
In chart 51 the lords of 9 and 10 are in mutual aspect
and in mutual kendras. The Sun as the second lord is
exalted in the tenth. The
25 lord of lagna is in his mula-
=e kelp
- end of the eighth. The lord
of the sixth is in the twelfth,
1907.4.17 The chart has Raja yoga.
The ninth house is aspected by the tenth lord.
The lord of the fourth in the
eighth denied happiness.
The exchange of the lords of
9 and 12 brought misfortunes as well. The welfare of his
children is assured.
mre erneta ayat
tafda afa AAA: |
aaae fangi gion: iaia difaAmia wA a fe an aanfearnt wer A
The lord of a bhava posited in the eighth house and
eclipsed by the rays of the Sun; occupying his sign of
debilitation or an enemy’s house and not with or aspected
by benefics—then such a bhava is destroyed. Even if that
bhava is associated with benefics, it does not give good
results at all. In this manner we have to ae the lagna and
the various bhavas.
dich afasataemcd eameti arias T
The lord of the lagna occupying the first, second or
third drekkanas will make the native respectively a judge,
a ruler of a mandala (district or extended area), or a head

76 bee Uttara Kalamrita
of the village. If this lord of lagna is with or aspected by
benefics Shukra, Guru or Budha; or if he occupies the
vargas of a benefic; or if he is exalted—then the native
becomes the chief ruler of the land and he will be respected
by other rulers.
miran: igp waft at aad
dai geyri: quit fagrar |
mara pakat dea f A,
weet: PEA WAA: A ETA AAT Ne tt
() The full Moon strong in Shadbala should be exalted,
in his own or in a friend's house and it should be the
fourth, seventh, ninth or tenth house from lagna; and
this full Moon should be with or aspected by Guru or
Shukra.
(i) Or, Kuja and Shani should be strong in Shadbala,
have the aspect of a benefic and be posited in the
second or the tenth house from Lagna. In either case
the native will be all-knowing (Sarvajna), full of virtuous qualities, Charitable and praised by the people
at large.
Notes
In the chart of George VI lagna is the first drekkana of
Tula; and its lord is posited in the second drekkana of
lagna. He became the king of the United Kingdom. emperor
Hirohito was born in the first drekkana of Dhanus and its
owner is in the third decanate of the same sign. Ravi, Budha
and Shukra are in the fifth,
Ravi exchanging signs with
Kuja. Shani also being in
lagna he was transformed
into a titular head of a
democratic nation.
In the chart of
Shani
Chanda
Ramana Maharshi, given
earlier, the full Moon is in
the ninth from Tula lagna

Effects of the Planets and Houses 77
and is aspected by Guru from the fifth. house. He was
virtuous, wise, generous, famous, and adored by millions.
In chart 52, that of Swami Vivekananda, the waxing Moon
is in the tenth with Shani who made him a yogi also the
spiritual benefactor of millions. The ninth lord is in lagna,
and the fifth lord is in his own house. Lords 2 and 10 have
exchanged houses.
In Swami Sivananda’s
| en] chart 53 the full Moon is
Chandra the lord of lagna placed in
the tenth. He is well aspected by Guru and Shani.
Apart from other yogas, the
yoga mentioned by the author is proved in this case.
It may be noted that
yogas have a reference only
to the Rasi positions, not to
the bhava chart.
Consider chart 54. The
full Moon is in the ninth in
a friend's house with debilitated but retrograde Shani.
This Moon receives the aspects of the lord of lagna
(Ravi), Budha, and Guru
(the lord of the fifth), Kuja,
yogakaraka for this lagna is
posited in the tenth having
a mutual aspect with
Shukra. This is the chart ef
Guru Nanak who was virtuous, famous, liberal and
wise.
Chart 55 is that of his
Holiness Sri Nrisimha
Bharati. Shani is practically in the tenth and Kuja
in the second, his own

78 Uttara Kalamrita
house. Jupiter is in the seventh while the tenth lord is in
the fourth unblemished. The lord of lagna is exalted. The
native had power, influence and all the virtuous qualities.
Budha is Vargottama and has exchanged signs with Shani.
This made the native highly philosophical and spiritual.
Shani also is Vargottama.
In chart 56 the yoga
karaka is in the tenth aspected by Guru. Ravi, Kuja
and Budha—lords of I1, 2
and 7, 9 and 12—are in
their own houses. The lords
of 9 and IO are together,
though in the 12th aspected by Shani. He was an
officer, holding a high rank
in one of the States of India.
Strong Kuja in 2 and Shani in 10 have caused the Raja
yoga.
Wee: yupa: opera afer
agahan aye Uwe: R N
-()} Jupiter as lord of 3 and 12 is a yoga karaka producing
~ benefic results.
(ii) Jupiter as lord of the eighth or in the eighth is equally
beneficial.
(iti) Shukra in the sixth.
fiv) Rahu in 4, 7, 9, 10 or 11, and
(vu) Ketu in the third are Yoga Karaka.
Notes
The first applies to Makara lagna. The second refers to
Vrishabha and Simha lagnas. :

Effects of the Planets and Houses 79
Kuja
Shukra 7.54
Shani 12.9 Ea
Ea o
Chart 57 is that of
Guruji Golwalkar. Guru as
lord of 3 and 12 is posited
in the fifth, the house of
intellect and mantra. The
lords of 9 and 10 are toee gether in the second with
Shani, lord of lagna, posChandra ited in the mulatrikona.
et Though he could not have
the full dasa Guru, his results appeared in the previous periods. Swami Yogananda
had Guru and Kuja in the eighth for Simha lagna while
Shani was in the second. Rahu in the seventh caused yoga.
It is difficult to agree that Guru in the eighth gives
benefic results, unless it be his own house. If he is in the
eighth he does affect the health or property adversely.
In chart 58 Shukra
Guru R [Shani R
gave the native good medical education. Guru as lord
of the ninth is aspecting the
lord of the tenth posited in
the fifth, his own sign.
Shani is Vargottama. This
is the chart of Dr. Pattabhi
Sitaramayya. Here Shukra
has given favourable results.
Shukra Budha
Chandra
Shani R L 20.31
was in the sixth, and he
Lagna 5
1880.11.24 Chandra
Shukra 15
Rahu 5
Mrs. Indira Gandhi
also had Shukra and Rahu
in the sixth for Cancer lagna. But her Shukra exchanged houses with Guru
In chart 59 we find
Guru in the eighth. The
chart belongs to the former
Maharaja of Bastar. He was
yt

80 Uttara Kalamrita
killed in the subperiod of Ketu during the major period of
Guru. The eighth Guru made him the bitter foe of the then
Guru
Shani
Chan 15.26
es a
Government of Madhya
Pradesh.
Chart 60 belongs to a
leading advocate. Note
Guru in the eighth, as lord
of 2 and 5. The sub-period
of Kuja in Guru put an end
to his life. The start of
Guru's major period was
the beginning of failing
health.
Chart 61 shows
Shukra in the sixth. As lord
of 3 and 8 his placement is
sound. But he came to
‘prominence in the major
period of Budha and Ketu.
' Though Shukra showered
great honours he passed
away in the major period of
Shukra. This is the chart of
President Eisenhower.
Shukra
aaaea fryer Pae Rai BAT 11 ko I
If the owner of a bhava ({) is in a malefic house like 6,
‘8, 12; (i) is debilitated or in an enemy's house; (iii) is
‘combust; (iv) has no conjunction with or aspect of benefics;
{v) is with or aspected by its enemy; (vi) is in an enemy's
amsa; (vii) is in a debilitated amsa; (viii) is defeated in a
planetary war with malefics—then that bhava is completely
destroyed. It becomes futile. All the bhavas from lagna
onwards have to be examined in this manner.

Effects of the Planets and Houses 8l
magare agaga i aAA war 11 R 1
(1) If the owner of a bhava (i) is in a kona or
kendra, (ii) is in the third or eleventh from it, (iii) is
in a friendly or exaltation sign, (iv) is in his own
Rasi or Navamsa, (v) and is between benefics—then
the owners of such kona, kendra, third or eleventh
houses also should be in exaltation; (2) or if the owner
of that bhava is with or aspected by benefics—then
such owner planet brings unequalled prosperity in a
short time to that Bhava.
scart frentea faerit mran ma ii 0 u
(1) When a bhava, its lord, and its significator (karaka)
(i) are al hemmed between malefics, (ii) are in conjunction
with malefics and are weak, and (iii) have no aspect from
or conjunction with benefics.
(2) () When malefics are in houses 4, 5, 8, 9 and 12
counted from the concerned Bhava, its lord and its Karaka,
(ii) and when the lords of the navamsas having these
malefics are inimical, combust, or defeated in Graha Yuddha.
Then one has to affirm that Bhava is destroyed (liter_ ally harmed).
weini act fran: chai mem ng oi

82 : Uttara Kalamrita
A benefic ( in his own house, (/ in his
exaltation, (ii) in his friend’s house, or (iv) in Vargottama brings happiness to the native. If such a planet
is a malefic one, placed in any of these positions will
give favourable results. The planets owning the Rasi
and Navamsa of the lord of a Bhava, should be strong.
Then the owner of that Bhava will give profitable
results. A powerful benefic in a friendly Rasi and
Amsa of any Bhava will confer the benefic results
of the Bhava.
Notes
It is not clear whether natural or functional
benefics are intended. For Vrishabha lagna the
natural benefic is a functional malefic. We have
to fuse natural with temporary relationships to
determine the nature of a
planet. This is logical and
proper.
In chart 62 the
fifth lord is in the
twelfth from it. The fifth
is aspected by Shani
aa Budha 1.20
Ravi 24.21 and Kuja. The ninth
has the eighth lord and it
is between malefics. The significator for children is
afflicted by Kuja and Shani. She had many abortions
and there is no
Shani R {Ketu
surviving child. The
Guru R Kuja 22.19
house of children is
ae
Chandra ani 15.8 Ravi
spoilt.
In chart 63 the
seventh house and its
lord are afflicted by
Kuja. The significator
for marriage is
conjunct Rahu. In Navamsa

Effects of the Planets and Houses 83
Kuja is in the second and Shani in the fifth, the two having
mutual aspects. The seventh Bhava is spoilt and she was
denied marriage.
Chart 64 is that of the noted astronomer and astrologer, the late K. M. Kharegat. The fourth lord Budha is also
the significator, posited in his own house (lagna). He is with
the benefic tenth lord Guru. An exalted planet aspected by
the benefic Guru is in the
Chandra Guru 28
Ravi
Kuja 0.13
fifth. The lord of speech is
in the eleventh having a
mutual aspect with exalted
Shani. The lagna, Guru
and Ravi are Vargottama.
Fourth and fifth houses
along with lagna are rendered strong explaining his
astronomical and astrological skills. The seventh is
aspected by Shani, while the significator of marriage is with
Ketu; and this is one reason why he did not marry. Also the
seventh lord is in the house of his enemy. The tenth is
vitiated by the malefic aspect of the lord of the sixth and
eleventh.
In chart 65 the ninth and tenth houses have benefics
and a benefic aspects the ninth. The benefics are in their
own houses. The Moon as22 Shukra 11 [15
Chandra Revi21 | Budha
Shukra 17
Ketu 22
pects the lagna. These
benefic points strengthen
the houses. The aspect of
the malefic sixth lord Shani
on lagna having Kuja made
him struggle. Mars is also
the lord of the eighth aspecting the fourth. The
conjunction of the ninth
lord with the twelfth lord in
Kuja 21
the ninth added to the struggles. Guru’s aspect on the
Moon and his mutual aspect with Shukra made him a good
philosopher.

84 . - Uttara Kalamrita
Chart 66 shows Budha in the tenth though he owns
the sixth house and is aspected by Kuja. This explains Dr.
` Sampurnanand’s astronomical, astrological and Sanskrit
c scholarship, The tenth and
” Rahu
Chandra
ead 66 E
aspected by Guru who is in
his mulatrikona, ninth
house. Guru is with an2.25 1890.1.1 11.17 lord of a kendra. Houses 4,
Puos Shani} 5, 9 and 10 are rendered
peie 7.56 strong. Chandra in lagna
Ravi 18.31 Kuja and the aspects of Kuja and
set Guru in lagna have made
seventh and Kuja has adversely affected the seventh house
matters. This educationist-cum-statesman passed away in
Chart 67 has many brilliant features. Lord of the
ninth, Vidyakaraka Budha, is in lagna with the benefic
other benefic Shukra, the
the lagna equally strong. Of course Shani's aspect on the
Guru who has exchanged
houses with Shukra, the ze 3.45 an
lord of lagna. Yogakaraka Rahu
Shani is in his own fourth
house. Lord of the tenth is 67
in the eleventh, and in his
own in the Amsa. Guru is |1857 1874.11.30
Shani
. Vargottama. Shani aspects
the tenth. A famous admin- 11.13 $ Guu san |
istrator, strategist and |Shukra a Ketu 3.43
Nobel Laureate in Literature is assured by this chart of Sir Winston Churchill.
ferea nipe
we RRT: faapa: AA ATT: 1
fiaen: wea at degen: gma Raar en: MT: 1 es I
The sign owned by a planet posited in houses 6, 8, or

Effects of the Planets and Houses 85
12 is inauspicious. The sign having the lord of 6, 8 or 12 or
the one aspected by such a lord is destroyed. Shukra in 12,
Budha in 8. and Guru in 6 give happiness. If the planetsin cui
6, 8 and 12 are in a friendly, own, or exaltation sign, or if 77
they are aspected by a benefic planet, they will prove { °
berslicial If the planets ii 6-8 and IZ are iran enemy planets in 6, 8 and 12 are im an enemy's
house, debilitated. combust, or defeated in planetary war, :
then such planets will be favourable and auspicious.
penghegat Fe: Wrest wey: wifey
qA yy: nara mea A ar wet 11 eh It
A planet , in old age, combust or defeated in
Benefic planets during the bright half of a lunar month
aspect towards the east. Malefics during the dark half of a
lunar month aspect towards the west. Jupiter in his aspect
towards the west is strong. In his direct motion Saturn is
strong. Even if they are combust Shukra and Shani do not
become weak. Kuja is strong even if he is in an enemy's
house. kS Z IA by l i
In an odd sign according to the number of degrees
advanced, a planet is respectively in infancy, boyhood,
adolescence, advanced, and dead. In an even sign this order
is reversed. Each stage covers six degrees of the sign.
Sun, Venus, Mars, Rahu, Saturn, Moon, Mercury and
Jupiter are respectively the lords of the east, south east,
south, south west, west, north west, north, and north east.
Mesha and Vrishabha, or lagna and the second house
rule the east. Mithuna or the third house refers to southeast. Karka and Simha or the 4th and the 5th govern the
south. Kanya or the 6th rules south-west. Tula and Vrischika or the 7th and the eighth refer to the west. Dhanush
or the 9th governs north-west. Makara and Kumbha or the
19th and 11th refer to the North. Mina or the 12th rule,

86 j ' Uttara Kalamrita
North east.
Shukra and Shani when combust do not lose strength
as far as the calculation of longevity is concerned—Amsa,
Pinda, Naisargika ayurdaya.
ae gaen: wast when: yar:
gardun weer riad Aes 1
PaRa A
Yat maiaa yi watery fam g n
(9 Benefics in a kendra, in houses 2, 3, 5,9 and 11 and
even in the sixth are auspicious.
(ii) Malefics are auspicious in houses 3, 6, 10 and 11.
(iü Sun and Shani are favourable in the ninth.
(iv) Mercury is beneficial in the eighth.
0) Shani in exaltation, own sign, or in a sign owned by
Guru will give benefic results, even if it is the lagna.
C ee when placed in the twelfth Shukra is auspicious except when he is in Rasi or Amsa belonging to
Shani.
Notes
Only for Mina Shukra in the twelfth is inauspicious,
according to Bhavartha Ratnakara.
(i) In chart 68 Shani is exalted in Lagna and he is a
Yogakaraka (v) Shukra is in
the twelfth and he is the
lord of Lagna debilitated
(vi). There is a mutual
aspect between Guru and
Shukra. The benefic Guru
is in the sixth in his own
house (iii). The malefics (i Revis
Mars, Ravi, Budha and
Shani 25| 6
Rahu are in upachaya E ee
houses which are 3, 6, 10
and 11 (ti) This is the chart of famous German poet,
Goethe, who gave a new direction to German literature.

Effects of the Planets and Houses
14.34 Ketu
Kuja 13.4
tional reputation.
In chart 70 two benefics are in a kona fi). Fifth
and seventh lords, and lords
of 4 and 8 have exchanged
signs. The ninth lord is exalted in the fifth. Shani is in
the ninth (iii), The major
periods of Chandra and Kuja
from May 1913 to May 1930
were very active and influential years in the life of Moti
Lal Nehru.
In chart 69 two benefics are in kendra and one in
the 9th (i). Malefic Ravi is in
the tenth in his own sign (ii).
Shani is in a sign owned by
Guru fill). This is the chart of
Mrs. Vijayalakshmi Pandit.
From the middle of Guru's
major period and in the first
half or Shani's major period
she acquired an internaShukra 24
15 Kuja 1
Chandra Budha 8 Ketu 26
Shani
Rahu 26 i
Ravi 25
Two benefics in the eleventh, one in lagna, and one in
his own sixth house are present in chart 71, The lord of
2 and 7 is exalted. Ravi and Guru are Vargottama. In
Guru R
SS 71 ae
Pa 1e o
Shukra 18
Ketu 15
Budha 5
Ravi 1
navamsa Budha is in the
eighth. This is the chart of
His Holiness Sri Chandrasekhara Bharati, the
Pontiff of Sringeri Pitha. He
was a scholar, Philosopher
and a realised soul. The two
philosophical planets,
Guru and Shani, are in
mutual aspects. The Yogakaraka Shani in the twelfth indicates his renunciation.
This is heightened by the Sun (soul of Kala Purusha) and

88 : Uttara Kalamrita
Ketu (significator of moksha) in lagna. Guru and Shani
are lords of 9 and 10 from the ninth, and they are
yogakarakas. The lord of 2 and 7 exalted in the fourth
from lagna and Budha have made him a highly learned
man in scriptures and philosophy. Exchange of houses
by the Sun and Venus show his great penance (tapas).
Moon representing the mind and Shukra the body in the
eleventh, aspected by exalted Kuja, intensifies the above
qualities.
In chart 72 the three benefics are placed in malefic
houses 8 and 12. Shukra is
anh a in the twelfth. He is the lord
Ee of the eighth. Waning Moon
Budha 21 and Shani are in the elevrunes 72 enth. Shani aspects lagna
- and the eighth. She had a
eee S short life which ended in
February 1928. The fifth
house has the aspects of
the malefics Kuja, Shani,
and waning Moon, while
the significator of children is badly placed. He had no
surviving children.
aigra gaisa opps: oig ward
varaga RAA AT |
Sred af maa A agg
Yat mg a aga maaa: 1 go
(1) The wang Moon, (ii) Budha, (ii Shukra, and
(tu) full Moon and Guru are auspicious respectively in the
: proportion of 1/4, 1/2, 3/4 and 1. When Guru and Shukra
are in the house of a benefic with the lord of that house,
they are beneficial.
(v) Wane Moon and malefic Buđha, (vi) the Sun,
{vii} Kuja and Rahu, and (viii). Shani and Ketu bring malefic
results in the proportion of 1/4, 1/2, 3/4 and 1.

Effects of the Planets and Houses | 89
_ Sera werereenrva fener tafar uquàm aniya wen ANTANTA |
URRETA TTT TET AH
PATS: CHET WH BTA ke i
(1) If the Karakas (significators) of the Bhavas are
inimical to those Bhavas (houses), and if the owners of the
Rasi and Navamsa having the lord of the bhava are hostile
to the Bhava and its significator, the effects of the concerned Bhava are ruined.
(2) If a malefic is posited in a sign owned by a Karaka
(significator), it destroys the effect to be given by the significator.
(3) A malefic occupying a sign owned by a significator
will lessen the effects of that Bhava.
Notes
The significator of the father is the Sun, and the house
is the ninth. For Vrishabha lagna the ninth is owned by
Shani who is hostile to the Sun. The same appiies to
Mithuna, Kanya and Kumbha lagnas as far as the father is
concerned. The fifth house and the Karaka for children are
hostile to Vrishabha, Mithuna, Makara and Kumbha lagnas. The seventh house and the Karaka for partner are
hostile in the case of Mithuna (neutral), Karaka (neutral),
Simha, Kanya (neutral), Vrishabha (neutral), Tula (neutral),
Vrishchika (neutral), Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha, and Mina
lagnas. In this way we have to judge the chart for the other
bhavas as well.
Yulara: egan ER AITTA:
| geriif fee A: TRT: |
FR Aaga at wega aT
TÄ VACUA HSM: Yaa: WATT: M RR 1
The full Moon, Guru, Shani and Ketu are called
Chadakas for the second and the twelfth houses from them.
When Guru owning a malefic house like 6, 8 or 12 becomes

ee ree aea
90 . Uttara Kalamrita
a malefic, he is a Chadaka only for the twelfth from himself. °
The others are Chadakas only for the second house from
themselves.
The owners of the various Bhavas and their Karakas
bring good luck or auspicious results when they are related
by way of aspect, position, conjunction, or exchange.
CART aT AAT eT ATT ROT TTA
CATT ST STAAL TAT: |
wae uara araara
emi manmanga AST BAT 1 Ro UW
A planet in the second from a Bhava is its Chadaka, in
the third from it is Vedhaka, in the fourth from it Bandhaka,
and in the eighth from it Prati-bandhaka. From the planet
in the the eighth from a bhava one should interpret the
increase or decrease of that Bhava. The owners of th
second and the seventh houses from a Bhava are its marakas (destroyers).
Notes.
Chadaka is that which shadows or over-shadows.
Bandhaka is one who imprisons. Pratibandhaka is an opposing force. Vedha is an obstructing power.
finga gier: emin ayer
mpa a men AA, |
urd: qime aitai vied: wereng
Sardara: emang: BATT R tt
The aspect by friendly planets on a malefic planet
is called ‘Svadhina Vedha’. The aspect cast by unfriendly
malefics on the malefic one is *‘Paradhina Vedha’.
The aspect of the benefics gives similar results; and these
are experienced at the beginning, while those of the malefics arc a little unfortunate experienced towards the end.
The ‘bhagya’ or fortune and longevity of the native is similarly determined by the strengths of the benefics and
malefics.

Effects of the Planets and Houses 9]
Notes
g ‘Svadhina’ is that which is under control and therefore
not productive of bad results. The other is beyond control
and hence malcfic. The enemies of ihc malefics are:
Sun - Shani and Shukra; Waning Moon - no one; Kuja
Budha; Budha - Chandra; Shani - Ravi, Chandra and
Kuja.
Actually the term Vedha plays a major role in transit
(Gochara) results. i
Tat ara frquit TÀ wea ar feat
fingisty ada caftqa wena aaraa, |
arara agarar
mAs yaa: yafaa TAFET: N RR N
There are three yogas: (i) The lord of the eighth in the
sixth or twelfth; (ii) The lord of the sixth in the eighth or
twelfth; and {iii) The lord of the twelfth in the sixth or
eighth.
These three are Viparita Raja yogas—extra-ordinary
Raja yogas. These lords must be related mutually by conjunction, mutual aspect, or mutual exchange of houses.
They should not at the same time have any such relation
with other plancts. Then the native becomes a famous,
prosperous and powerful king or emperor.
Notes
The relation mentioned is only between the two. If all
the three are involved, it is
Ravi 25.12 À
Guru 10.35] Kuja 13.46
Shukra 18.39 R L 29.22
puaha 14:9 i eez“
all the more powerful. It is
an extraordinary Rajayoga.
Chandraf Ketu | Shani
In chart 73 the eighth
lord, a functional malefic, is
in the twelfth with the malefic Rahu. The first combination is fulfilled. The sixth
and first lord is exalted in
the eleventh with the lords

92 3 Uttara Kalamrita
2, 5 and 4. They are directly aspected by the yoga Karaka
Shani from the sixth. The lord of 7 and 12 is Vargottama.
The industrial and financial potential of Mr. R. K. Dalmia is
well known.
Chart 74 is a powerful
22 [10.41 one. The eighth lord is
Læ |Budha | retrograde in the sixth and
Shukra 8.16 unaspected. The yoga Kar-
[15.57 aka Shani is in his mulakao { trikona, the tenth, and
unblemished. Also Budha
and Chandra are in their
own houses. In April 85 the
major period of the Moon
has started. This is the
_ chart of H. H. Dalai Lama
the Nobel Laureate for
peace in 1989.
Chart 75 is that of
Jaya Prakash Narain. The
eighth lord is in the sixth
while its owner is in Shani's | Shere 23) 1902.10.11
house. Thus the two are
related. His Shani Dasa | 2353 Rahu 3.0 | Ravi 25.4
started in August 1955 and | Shani aan bisa
Shani, Rahu and Ketu are
Vargottama. Shani's period was one of a struggle and
achievement. In the subperiod of Shukra in Budha (lord of
12) he toppled the governShukra | Sudha 25.58
ment of Mrs. Gandhi.
Note also the exchange of houses by the
78 Ketu lords of 3 and 4, He passed
away in October 1979.
In chart 76, the sixth
and eighth lords are conjunct in the sixth, aspected
by the full Moon. The yoga
Chandra | 1.54
20.37 Shani R

Effects of the Planets and Houses 93
is spoilt. From the beginning of the major period of the Sun
his decline started. He lost a very huge property. His was
a hand-to-mouth existence till the end of Kuja’s major period. The twelfth lord is in the eighth with the lord of 4 and
11, and aspected by Shani, the lord of Lagna. His recovery
began rapidly in the major
Shukra B E
Budha 15
Ravi 1 77
the same period of the first
of May, 1956, he died.
ln chart 77 the lords of
8 and 12 have exchanged
signs. The owners of 6 and
8 are in the twelfth with the
functional malefic Budha.
He was very wealthy.
started in August 1947. In
The position of Kuja,
lord of 2 and 9, in the tenth Shoa 15
and his aspects made him L15
highly prosperous. Budha
and Shani are Vargottama.
ln chart 78 the lords of
6 and 8 are conjunct in the
twelfth. Shukra and Lagna
are Vargottama. The twelfth
is unaspected. The Sun is
exalted. The twelfth shows that he was free from enemies
and that he had some good
property. But he worked
more and received less. He
died in January 1914.
In chart 79 the lords of
6 and 8 have exchanged
signs, without receiving
any aspect. This yoga gives
a long life. She is lucky,
wealthy and prosperous.
a
Shukra 3.25
Budha 17.28) Pâhu |17.55
Ravi 12.37 [11.26 Chandra

94 ke Uttara Kalamrita
G at ra Wi. 54
l When malefics are debilitated, strong benefics are
posited in kendras and konas, and the lords of 4, 9 and 10
are together in the ninth or tenth house from the lagna, the
native becomes a ruler, wise or intelligent, highly wealthy,
famous, valorous and longlived. Such a wise one will be
respected by other rulers and is similar to an all-knowing
one.
; fad Faini ‘
3 3 oo : ràfi í
aa reni faaora aaaea
mA Aa ÅT eri w A: RY I
! Houses 1l, 4, 7 and 10 from lagna are called kendra,
kantaka (literally, thorn), and Chatushtaya (four). The
houses following these are 2, 5, 8 and 11, and these arc
known as Panapharas. The remaining ones that follow
these are 3, 6, 9 and 12 and these are termed Apoklimas.
Houses 5 and 9 from lagna are the Trikonas. Houses 3, 6,
10 and 11 are known as Upachayas (houses of increase).
The sign where the Moon is posited is the Janma Rasi or
Chandra lagna. The lagna is the first house.
Notes
The term Trikona means a triangle having three
angles. The author has mentioned only the fifth and the
ninth houses. Lagna is the third member of the Trikonas.
Lagna is both a kona and a kendra.
Saree afan fra ew wart yrarcaray aan:
R a g areata canfirarentitet TEST

Effects of the Planets and Houses 95
The Sun has the soul or nature of God Rudra, and he
represents the father. The Moon has the soul or character
of Shakti and stands for the mother. The planets Kuja,
Budha, Guru, Shukra and Shani have arisen from (born of,
produced by) the five elements which are respectively
Prithvi (earth), Apas (water), Tejas (fire), Vayu (air), and
Akasha (ether).
Guru, Shukra and Budha are born of (have the nature
of) Sattva Guna. Mars arose out of the Guna called Rajas
(desire, attachment). Shani is born of the Guna Tamas
(appetite, passion).
The Sun and the Moon do not bring about the death
of any native. But when they own the malefic houses 6 or
8, they cause much suffering.
Notes
In the Sankhya system of Philosophy and in the
Bhagavad Gita we come across the three gunas. Sattva
refers to the causal body, Rajas to the subtle body, and
Tamas to the gross or physical body with the senses.
Mars stands for the earth, as he is called the son of the
earth in our mythology. Mercury being the son of the watery
Moon, he stands for water. As fire is opposed to water, Kuja
is inimical to Budha. It is to be noted that the watery signs
are ruled by the Moon (Karka), Kuja (Vrishchika) and Guru
(Mina).
Varahamihira gives fire to the Sun, water to the Moon,
fire to Kuja (2.5), Earth to Budha, Ether or Akasha to Guru,
Water to Shukra, and Vayu to Shani (2.6). Further he
ascribes Sativa Guna to the Sun, Moon and Guru; Rajas to
Budha and Shukra, and Tamas to Kuja and Shani (2.7).
According to Yavanesvara, the Sun, Kuja and Guru have
Sattvaguna, Chandra and Shukra have Rajas, Shani has
Tamas, and Budha has the guna of the planet he is associated with. Satyacharya (Satyakirti) observed that Kuja
and Shani have Tamas, Budha and Shukra have Rajas, and `
the rest have Sattva. Varahamihira follows Satyacharya.

96 Uttara Kalamrita
The present author differs here from Varahamihira. In the
second Kanda verse 89 the author treats Shani and Kuja in
such a way as to make us infer that both have Tamas. It is
safer for many to follow Varahamihira.
maamme dearer: frat At wen
Tan Career Bay ale var wat RETT, |
datga sanar renada
agea ea aeara APT, R N
Benefics occupying houses 6, 7 and 8 from the Moon
cause Adhi Yoga. There should be no malefics in these
ouses. Then the native becomes a king or one equal to a
king and experiences greatest happiness. He is long-lived,
victorious, famous in all ways, and learned, and he has all
the pleasures. He has wife, children, friends and other
various supports that bring ananda foleasures or happiness) along with conveyances.
Notes
Srutakirti stated that the ancients spoke of seven
kinds of Adhi yoga. Then the three benefics need not be in
the three houses. They can be in two houses or in one only.
If there is only one planet strongly placed in one of these
houses, the native becomes a leader. lf there are two, he
becomes a minister. If there are three, he has an eminent
position in life.
Chart 80 shows Guru in the sixth and Shukra in the
seventh. There is also a
malefic in the sixth. Her fa- e een
¿ther was wealthy while her | 2" Shani A [Chandra
husband was in the Indian Le
Audit and Accounts Ser- 80
vice. Yoga karaka Mars is in
the fifth in his own house.
“The lord of the ninth is in
his mulatrikona in the
sixth. The lords of 7 and 11
Shukra
Rewies! 149% Kuja 15.30
Guru 5.46 Budha Ketu

Effects of the Planets and Houses 97
have exchanged signs.
If Guru were jo be in the sixth or eighth from the Moon,
it will give rise to kemadruma yoga which is undesirable.
Hence Guru should be in the seventh for a proper Adhi
yoga.
In Shivaji’s chart (Simha lagna already given), the
Moon is in kanya with Ravi and Guru in Kumbha, Budha
in Mina, and Shukra in Mesha. This is more or less a perfect
adhi yoga. the great scholar, philosopher and Saint Appaya
Dikshita (Kanya lagna) had his Moon in Mina while
Ravi and Budha are in Kanya and Shukra in Tula. The
two benefics are in their own houses, and Budha is
aspected by the Moon and mS Guru from Makara. This is a
perfect yoga.
amaaa e: Gert aNyaaa: wea ara, |
mri g fraag wtdtvyat AÀ,
A g E: GÀ eA RAT, i O
The units of brilliance for the seven planets (in
the order of the week days) are 30, 16, 6, 8, 10, 12 and
1. Take the Kalas of the lord of the ninth from lagna and
of the lord of the ninth from the Moon. Add them. Divide
it by twelve and take the remainder. Count the remainder from the Moon sign. This is Indu lagna. If there is
a benefic without any malefic, the native becomes a
multi-millionaire. If there is a malefic, his wealth is
in thousands only. If the malefic is exalted, he will be
multi millionaire.
Notes
To measure the financial assets this Indu lagna is
considered by some astrologers.

98 Uttara Kalamrita
8.20 In chart 81] the ninth
on ale ee lord from both lagna and
the Moon is Budha. The
el E kalas of Budha are eight.
The total is sixteen. After
expunging twelve we get
four. From the Moon the
fourth is Mesha with the
benefic Guru. The lord of
the fourth is in the tenth
and it gave the native
houses, vehicles and power. The ninth lord and Guru are
Vargottama, Indu lagna has Vargottama Guru. The native
held a very high position in one of the lndian States.
amg pyan: naa: waste at AN:
qaaa wert aya a pA i
merzad wads gatyaEe GERI LWIC Tikt EE Ls Li Uti ARA E te 1
Takc the lords of houses 2, 5, 9 and 11. lf two or more
lords of these houses are mutually related by conjunction,
aspect or exchange of signs, and if they are strong, the
native of the chart will have lakhs.
If the lord of any evil house (6, 8, 12) is in relation to
the above combination, the entire wealth is lost; and the
native is in debts and faces troubles from enemies. These
results will appear in the major periods of the lords of
houses 2, 5, 9 and 11.
Ketu 19.57
Shukra 31.2 18.27
Budha 10.42 j
Lig * Kuja
andra
zar 82
Shani Guru Rahu
foak
Notes
“In chart 82 the fifth
lord is with the sixth lord
aspected by Shani, lord of
11 and 12. The lagna has
the eighth lord in it. The
lord of 2 and 9 is aspected
‘by Guru and is aspecting
the lord of 11 and 12. This

Effects of the Planets and Houses
young man paid Rupces fifty thousand for a job in the gulf
Kuja 6.5
Rahu 13.48
Shani 28.35
Shukra
Ravi 20.25
Chandra
countries in 1987. He did
not get any job.
In chart 83 the lord of
2 and 11 and significator
for money is in the eighth.
The ninth lord is in the
sixth. The fifth lord is with
the lord of the sixth aspected by the twelfth lord.
He lost all his wealth and is
now subsisting on a small
Guru A |Chandra Rahu
aa B4
Shani R
Kuja
Ketu
In chart 85 the Karaka for wealth is exalted in the
tenth aspected by exalted second lord. The ninth lord is in
the house of money asRahu
pected by Guru and Shani.
The fifth lord is in his own
Guru
mulatrikona, unaspected
Eil ó by any. The lagna is bctween two benefics, Budha
1907.10.11 a (lord of 9) and Shukra (lord
second lord is exalted in a
kendra. From the tenth the
lords of 9 and 10 are Kuja and Guru who have mutual
aspects. He has a strong Dhana yoga. Adding the Kalas for
salary.
Chart 84 shows the
eleventh lord with the Sun
in the eighth aspected by
Guru and Shani. The fourth
lord has the aspect of Kuja,
lord of 5 and 12. The fourth
lord is the Karaka for
wealth. The ninth lord is in
the eighth. The native lost
seventy lakhs during the
major period of the Sun.
of 1 and 8). The lord of
lagna is Vargottama. The

` 100 Uttara Kalamrita
the ninth housès we get 24, giving us the twelfth house
from the Moon. Here are two powerful benefics.
weorufeagea wort waist Az: fern:
ami a Af waver at safe: I
a pam: ramya quieren
a i gi werger: o a gT n R I
If all the planets are only in Kendras, and not in the
Panapharas or Apoklimas, the native becomes a King or the
head of the administration. In this yoga if the benefics in
strength and the full Moon are not with or aspected by
malefics, the native becomes wealthy, and is praised by the
good persons. lf the planets have no strength, the native
lacks the above qualities.
O AR a steeniuert aan Ib go 1
If one is born at two ghatikas (48 minutes) after midnight or mid-noon, he becomes a king who conquers all his
enemics, who observes the traditional codes of conduct,
and who is well versed.
In the above situation if an exalted planet is posited in
the sccond and is aspected by another exalted planet, the
native becomes a multi-millionaire. If the aspecting planet
is in his own house, and
not cxalted, the native will
be happy owning only
lakhs.
Notes
The first part is too
general. In chart 86 the
birth is at midnight. The
powerful yoga Karaka
Shani, aspected by Dhana

Effects of the Planets and Houses 101
Karaka Guru is aspecting the lagna. Shani is lord of 9
(Bhagya) and 10 (Rajya). The second lord is with the fourth
lord in the fourth aspected by yogakaraka Shani. The native
served as Dewan in two former States of India. The second
(dhana) lord aspects the tenth and is with the royal planet
who is in his mulatrikona. He became very rich.
gftevmesavaheavarngea iyà |
aren gt frg cere faq wa: waren Prana
ennaa qoini ay: Ge WERT: 11 Be
A fixed sign is stronger than a cardinal or movable one.
The dual or common sign is stronger than the fixed one.
When there are three planets in three houses, the two
aspects of two planets over the third depends on their being
a Chadaka or Vedhaka. The power of the aspect increases
in relation to the aspecting planet being in a movable, fixed,
or dual sign. The same principle applies to the effects of the
planets from these three signs and houses.
When three planets are in the first drekkana of a
movable sign, in the second drekkana of a fixed one, and in
the third drekkana of a dual sign, the effects are full. The
effect is average if they are in the second decanate of a
movable one, the last one in a fixed sign and the first in a
dual sign. The effects are little when the planets are in the
jast decanate of a movable sign, in the first of a fixed sign
and the second of a dual sign.
wo pura wagheert wt arqurarcaci
qaivivara@atsncra are aR: 11 3211
The planeis may cause a good or bad yoga when they
are within an orb of twelve degrees. Of these two, if the
planet that has a slower average motion is in advance and
the one that has a faster average motion is behind, the yoga
yields results. The effects are fully realised when they are

102 Uttara Kalamrita
within one degree, and they are absent when they are
separated by twelve degrees. In the intermediate positions
we have to determine the strength of the yoga proportionately.
lf the faster planet is in advance by twelve or more
degrees, the good effects of the yoga are spoilt till that
period.
Notes
This combination is known as conjunction. lts orb is
eight or twelve degrees. In chart 87 the lords of 9 and 10
from the ninth and from
the tenth are Ravi and
Budha. They form a strong
Raja Yoga. Ravi and
Shukra are Vargottama.
The ninth lord aspects the
tenth while Shani, the lord
of 10 and 11 aspects the
eleventh, The combination
of the lords of 3, 5 and 7
made the native influential
and prosperous. Jupiter is a powerful yoga karaka. Malefics
are in 3 and 6. Venus is combust.
meinga at we: mara
CATT RTA TPT STS: TTA: |
Wa GM: KATA TAN AAA:
amie War saver Sra: Gerwraay 11 3g 10
When a strong Moon has an applying aspect on one of
the two planets causing the yoga (given in verse 32), within
the limits of the orb, the results will be specially significant.
If the aspecting Moon is posited in 6, 8 or 12, the results
will not be marked ones. Planets aspect all houses. The
aspect gives the best results if the aspecting planet is
exalted or is in his own house. The results are average when
the aspecting one is in a friend’s house.

Effects of the Planets and Houses 103
Notes
When the aspecting planet’s degrees are less than
those of the aspected one, it is an applying aspect. When
the aspecting planet's degrees are more, it is a separating
aspect.
Earlier in verses 2. 18 and 19 the author states that
no planet aspects 2, 6, 11 and 12 from itself. Here he
observes that planets aspect all houses. The aspects on 2
and 12 are called Parallel, on the third it is sextile (60°) or
semi square (45°) and on the sixth it is quincunx (150°).
_ This is the view of Western astrologers. In calculating
drishti bala (aspect strength), we take into consideration
only the distance from 30° to 300° between the aspecting
and the aspected.
vat kea àg gi Aa 11 ax 11
Note the sign where the lord of a Bhava is posited.
Count from that Bhava to the sign having its lord. The same
number of signs counted from that lord gives the Pada or
Arudha Pada of that Bhava. With reference to this Arudha
Pada of the concerned Bhava, we have to judge the-auspicious or s Nature o va, its decrease or
its increase. Thus we have to determine eight Arudha padas
for houses 1, 2, 4, 5, 7, 9, 1o and 124 The Aruana Tor the
fwelfth house isc called upapada and that of the seventh is
Darapada.
Notes
The special names are 1, Lagna-Arudha lagna, 2. Kosa
Pada, 4. Vahana or mairi or Vidya Pada, 5. Mantra Pada, 7.
Dara Pada, 9. Bhagya Pada, 10. Rajya Pada, 12. Upapada.
If the lord of lagna is in the fifth from lagna, the fifth
from him is Arudha lagna. If the lord of the fifth is in the
seventh from it, the fifth itself is the Arudha of that house.
If the lord of the seventh is in the fourth from it, the fourth
from its lord is the lagna and it is the darapada. Take the

104 Uttara Kalamrita
example chart 88.
Here we are not to count the distance in degrees, We
have to count only the number signs. The Arudha chart for
this horoscope is as follows: a
Arudha of
Chart 68
Four of the arudhas are in odd signs. Arudhas of
houses 2, 4, 10 and 12 are in odd signs. Those of 1, 5, 7 and
9 are in even signs. From the arudha lagna the arudhas of
10 and 12 are in a kendra, those of 5 and 7 are in konas,
that of the ninth is in seven, and those of 2 and 4 are badly
situated.
E: PrE yÈ ag aaurTPagamenage Yat war aerafrsga: |
Weeds faá afk ya: maret ar
We adud: pee maaar 11 a 1

ae
Effects of the Planets and Houses 105
When the arudha lagna is a benefic sign with a benefic
in it, the native enjoys all pleasures and good fortune.
Benefics in the konas and kendras of Arudha lagna will
make the native a king and a great scholar. Malefics in the
Arudha lagna and in its konas and kendras will give the
contrary results; and the same effects will appear when
malefics are in houses 6, 8 and 12 from Arudha lagna. In
this way the benefic and malefic nature of the results
should be predicted for all the eight arudhas.
Notes
In chart 88 the Arudha lagna is Vrishchika and
Shukra occupies it. The sign is owned by the natural
malefic but functional benefic Kuja, Guru is in a kona,
Shani in a kendra and Kuja and Rahu are in the twelfth.
The health of the native will be indifferent; and because of
Kuja and Rahu in 12 he underwent some operations. The
arudha of the tenth (Rajya Pada) is Kumbha. The kendras
have Shani and Shukra, while a kona has Kuja and Rahu.
Guru and Budha are in upachayas. The native succeeded
in his professional career, but after a struggle. In this way
we have to judge the other Arudhas. For instance, the
Arudha of the seventh is Mina. Kuja and Rahu are in the
eighth indicating the loss of wife. But as the lord of DaraPada is exalted, a second marriage is bound to be there.
witistradatafiand gira gare 136 N
If we want to know about the children of the native, we
have to take the help of the arudhas of houses 2, 5 and 9.
We have to examine carefully these Bhavas, Jupiter and the
lord of lagna. Also the Arudhas of these Bhavas from Guru
and from the lord of the lagna have to be examined along
with the upapadas from these two and the benefic conjunctions and aspects. If any malefic conjunction or aspect is

106 í _.. Uttara Kalamrita
not there, there will be many children. The larger number
of planets in odd and even signs will enable us to infer the
number of sons and daughters.
mpaka FAT: 11 39 1
Note the following combinations:
(0 Budha, Shani and Kuja in the arudha Padas of
houses 2, 5, 9 and 12 from lagna, from the lord of
lagna and from Guru;
(i Budha, Shani and Kuja in conjunction with the lord
of those houses;
(adi) Budha, Shani and Kuja posited in the Rasi and Amsa
of the Bhava;
ftv) Shani and Guru in conjunction in one of these
Bhavas.
oo In all these cases there will be loss of children or still
Y births. l
lf the tenth house and its lord are with or aspected by
Shani, there will be an adopted son. The wise have declared
these various ways.
Notes
In chart 89 the tenth lord Budha and the tenth house
are aspected by Shani. The
Karaka for children is also | 2244 Ravi 2.17
with him. After many years | 27, Ket
f
of married life he adopted a A 0.39
Budha a9 Kuja
son. But as the fifth lord
and the fifth house are
aspected by Guru from his
mulatrikona and lagna,
later he had his own sons.
He died in 1973.
a Rahu Chandra

. Effects of the Planets and Houses 107
-MÅ FANANA ETNA arene
état a an p: gA gar: ey Ue 1
maeu: gird fig ae a ag,
dhistiaqarendtarrany, ya yore far i ac 1
The prediction about the first wife is to be made from
the seventh house (from lagna). The eighth house therefrom, which is the second from lagna, enables us to predict
about the second wife. The deaths of other wives are to be
read in this manner, considering the malefics posited
therein. Jupiter in or aspecting the eighth from lagna ora
benefic’s aspect on it will not cause the death of the first
wife. The conjunction or aspect of benefics like Guru indicates the number of living wives, their children, their qualities and other features.
wa fearga wie A war
wearer fe qefiot qoradt a eafearssifestt i
Wet A Hera WS LAG Ue
anag: glag at aa at: TA 1 ae
The Arudha of the twelfth hou: house is called upapada. If
_ there is a benefic in the upapada, the wife of the native will
be very beautiful, has a good character and is long-lived. If
a malefic is posited in il and that malefic is debilitated two
wives of the native will be lost. If this malefic is exalted and
is with or aspected by a benefic, there will be many living
wives.
But if the association of the benefic is not present in
this combination, the native will not marry again.
Notes
By benefic or malefic we have to mean the natural
benefic or malefic only, not the functional one.
In chart 90 the seventh house has unblemished Guru,
lord of 2 and 5. But the seventh lord, who is also the
significator of marriage, is in the eighth in mutual aspect

108 Uttara Kalamrita
with Shani. The upapada of
the twelfth is Kumbha aspected by Kuja and Shani.
Her first husband was assassinated. She married
again as the upapada was
aspected by its own lord
and as the seventh house
has a benefic.
This verse refers only
to upapada which is the
Arudha of the twelfth house. It does not appear to refer to
the Arudha of the seventh. The word Rihpha means the
12th from lagna only. Its ‘pada’ is its arudha and it is called
upapada.
SNreaaengegrrerarnenrat wa:
TIANA Water UT 1
aaay gf qatar ya aarfire yiri
ae Saget a ga ayer wa tt vo 1
From the arudha of the seventh (darapada) and from
the arudha of the twelfth (upapada) we have to find out
everything about the first wife. From the eighth houses of
these two arudhas we can know about the second wife. The
sages declare that the number of wives lost is determined
by the malefic content of these two arudhas. If these
arudhas are benefic, then the wife assures the family line,
brings happiness and lives long happily.
Notes Tiaa
Shukra A
Consider chart 91 15.38 Budha
which is that of late Mr. R. Raw 0.13
Lakshmanan. The seventh ues
lord and significator is
within the clutches of
Rahu. The arudha of the
seventh is kumbha afflicted
by Kuja. Upapada is Vris-

Effects of the Planets and Houses 109
chika which has Rahu with Budha and Shukra. His wife
died and he married again. The eighth house of the upapada has two benefics with Rahu. The eighth house of Dara
pada is aspected by Shani alone. The lord is well placed
from this. The second wife is chaste and virtuous, but
: childless. Moreover, as an earlier verse stated, the second
house refers to the second marriage. This house and its fifth
are aspected by Shani.
Chart 92 has the Dara- ie ae
Chandra} Shani A | Kuja
Rahu, and its lord is with
two benefics. The upapada Ea i
is Mina having its lord in ve
pada in Simha aspected by
the eleventh from it. As per
verse 4.39 the first wife was
alive when he married a
second time. Darapada has
a malefic content, while the
upapada has none. The first wife died three years before his
own demise in January 1988.
PTAA Ay VAT BTR
Asinau a yeaa Taa,
Tanman ai a: RAR:
qoihtefate: ynag aA wera i ER 1
Count in an anti-clockwise manner from lagna the
number of navamsas that have elapsed in the third house.
This gives the number of elder brothers and sisters. The
number of navamsas that have not elapsed in the third
house are to be counted from lagna in the clockwise
manner. This indicates the younger brothers and sisters.
As per the principles already given determine their sex. The
. number of the surviving and dead is to be judged in the
-light of the strength of the benefics and malefics respectively.

110 | | Uttara Kalamrita. `
Notes
This is an untenable principle. If the first navamsa of
lagna is rising, in an anti-clockwise manner we get at least
90 navamsa and in a clockwise manner 18. Even if we
expunge multiples of twelve, we get 6 and 6. This is found
to be untrue in actual experience.
qaia mafana astra:
Tee o anaaga: 1
qag agt greri,
Aegan eaae TE: s It
; From the Sun onwards note the planet which has
. traversed the highest number of degrees in a sign. This one
is the ‘adhika’, great or senior or advanced planet. If this
planet is with the Sun, the native will be a strategical
adviser in the royal palace. If the full Moon and Shukra are
with the advanced planet the native is wealthy, a scholar
and he enjoys pleasures. If Mars is with the advanced
planet the native is a soldier, a commander in the army, a
metal-worker, or a scoundrel.
Notes
This is the principle of atma-karaka, enunciated by
Jaimini in his Sutras. As per this theory, the position of the
Atmakaraka in Navamsa is the karakamsa lagna. From this
sign in Rasi and Amsa the judgement has to be made. The
present author takes only the atmakaraka position in Rasi.
This is not valid.
deinhiaissarfaat waishacrearcat
mpata wer east farafirereterfcard ae: 11 vat
When Budha is with the advanced planet (atma karaka), the native is skilled in sculpture, or a successful

Effects of the Planets and Houses 111
trader in earthenware and cloth, or a businessman. If the
planet is Guru, he is skilled in performing Vedic rites, a
great dvija (or Brahmana), and well versed in the Vedas and
the Vedangas. If the planet is Shukra, he has a long life and
is prone to have affairs with other women. lf the planet is
_ Shani, he is preoccupied in a variety of activities. 1f the
planet is Rahu or Ketu, he is skilled in handling poisonous
drugs and in manufacturing metal works and the like.
Notes
This is a continuation of the previous principle based
on the Atmakaraka’s position in Rasi only. Jaimini attaches
importance to his pcsition in Navamsa. Thus if the atmakaraka is Shukra placed in Vrischika 29°, he will be in
Mina in Navamsa. This is the Karakamsa lagna. Judgement
is based first on Mina in Navamsa, and next on Mina in
. Rasi. Vrischika is not considered.
The Vedas are four—Rig, Sama, Yajur and Atharvana.
The Vedangas are six. They are Shiksha, Kalpa, Chhandas,
Nirukti, Vyakarana and Jyotisha. These are the necessary
aids for an understanding and an interpretation of the
Vedic texts.
aftra entrama: uss n
From the atmakaraka planet note thé second house. If
it is with the Sun and Shukra or aspected by them, the
native serves a ruler. That is, he will be a government
employee.
If there is a malefic in the third house from the Atma
Karaka, the native is valorous or courageous. But if there
is a bencfic, he will be timid, always frightened.
lf the fourth house from the atmakaraka has the Moon
aspected by Shukra, he becomes a great sailor or navigator.
If this house has the Moon and Shukra or Ís aspected by

112 Uttara Kalamrita
them, the native has palaces, happiness and so on.
Seg aa ee 1i
If in the fourth from Arudha lagna there are Chandra
and Shukra or if that house is aspected by Chandra and
Shukra, the native has many great mansions. When this
fourth house has an exalted planet, the same results will
appear; but he will suffer from leucoderma and leprosy.
Thus the results have to be judged from a consideration of
the sign, its navamsa and its dvadasamsa, and also from
the planets having advanced or less advanced degrees in
any sign. Or these lines one should judge the profession
and manliness of the native.
Notes
In the decreasing order of degrees Jaimini speaks of
Atma, Amatya, Bhratri, Matri, Putra, Jnati and Dara karakas. One having the lowest number of degrees is Darakaraka. For details about these see our translation of and
notes on Jaimini Sutras, first chapter (Ranjan Publications).
Jaimini’s Amatya karaka (one having the next highest
degree position to the Atmakaraka) is stated by the present
author to determine the native’s profession. The one next
lower to Amatya Karaka will determine the native’s valour
and manliness.
Thus in chart 83 Jaimini's Karakas are: Atma - Budha,
Amatya - Shukra, Bhratri - Guru, Matri - Chandra, Putra
- Shani, Jnati - Ravi, and Dara - Kuja. The lagnas of these
in Jaimini are respectively Dhanus, Mina, Makara,
Mithuna, Kanya, Mina and Vrischika. As per the present
author these are Dhanush, Vrischika, Karka, Makara,
Simha, Makara, and Tula. Yet he seems to count the houses
from the sign occupied by the Atmakaraka in Rasi only.

Chapter V
PNAS:
Significators
and Significations of
Planets and Houses
raaa: YOGA FAA
wit: aoa arenda miada: |
ETE kS LE EIEE NENI GIE BaL Eii
LRAAELABLL EL LACE AES LEE ILES: ka LE Leca EA 118 E
Amang a mdai aage
nataran fafa Agotar:
The details about the folowing have to be read from
the first house which is the Lagna:
(1) Body, (2) Limbs, (3) Happiness, (4) Unhappiness,
(5) Old age, (6) Knowledge, (7) Birth place, (8) Fame, (9)
Dreams, (10) Strength, (11) Dignity, (12) Political life, (13)
Longevity, (14) Peace, (15) Age, (16) Hair, (17) Appearance,
(18) Self-respect, (19) Livelihood, (20) Gambling for others,
(21) Stigma, (22) Honour, (23) Skin, (24) Sleep, (25) Wisdom, (26) Wealth, (27) Nature to insult and to avenge, (28)
Freedom from ill health, (29) Nature to renounce, (30)
Ability to do work, (31) Endeavouring to preserve live-stock,
(32) Loss of decency, and (33) Defamation from one’s own
Kinsmen or persons of the same caste.
arian TRE ST TR gA
fragrant agar yee afi: 112 11

114 * Uttara Kalamrita
frorautgitareraaterrar Araneae
vender maraa wearer teu
The following items are to be judged from the second
house:
(1) Speech, (2) Wealth, (3) Faith in the sacred texts, (4)
Maintaining others, (5) Nails, (6) Enjoyment of pleasures,
(7) Truth and falsehood, (8) Tongue, (9) Eyes, (10) Clothes,
(11) Diamond, copper and precious stones, (12) Pearl, (13)
Determination or control, (14) Artificial products, (15) Family, (16) Sale and purchase, (17) Soft speech, {18) Generous
or charitable nature, (19) Efforts to acquife money, (20)
Helping others, (21) Friends, (22) Splendour or grace, (23)
Miserliness in giving money, (24) Great eloquence, (25)
Learning, (26) Gold, (27) Fine silver; (28) Corn, (28) Humility, (30) Nose, (31) Firmness or steadiness of mind,
(32) Close follower or neighbour, (33) Following the rules
of going and arriving, and (34) Powerful or prosperous
living.
afeaatafinermeworqon a wer 1 ¥ n
_ FM agag gaya farerei
O miega raTa, |

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 115
From the third house the following factors have to be
interpreted:
(1) Courage, (2) Brothers, (3) War, (4) Ears, (5) Feet, (6)
Road, (7) Land or place, (8) Mental instability, (9) Ability or
fitness, (10) Abode of the gods, (11) Causing sorrow, (12)
Dream, (13) Soldier, (14) Valour, (15) One's near relations,
(16) Friends, (17) Wandering, {18) Throat, (19) Taking
clean food and the like, (20) Power, (21) Partitioning of
inheritance, (22} Ornaments, (23) Good qualities, (24) Education, (25) Pastime or hobby, (26) Strength, (27) Profits,
(28) Physical growth or development, (29) Descent from
a good family, (30) Servants, (31) The part of the hand
between the thumb and the index finger (which is sacred
to the dead ancestors), (32) Maid servants, (33) Smiall good
vehicles or short good journeys, (34) Pilgrimages, (35) Great
undertakings, and (36) Performing personal religious
duties. :
frome ranrnetantereret—
=a wet @ eapggel wremat after iy tt
pial el qieiat A yeyiferar |
aata amaaan anaaJAg A ayaga, ite N
The things that can be delineated from the fourth
house are the following:
{1) Education, (2) National or governmental work, (3)
House, (4) Travels, (5) Vehicles drawn by men, boats and
similar conveyances, (6) Oil-bath, (7) Mother, (8) Relatives,
(9) Friends, (10) Caste, (11) Clothes, (12) Small well, (13)
Drink, (14) Milk, (15) Spices or perfumes, (16) One having

116 : ` Uttara Kalarnrita
happiness, (17) A good name, (18) Miraculously efficient
medicine, (19) Faith or trust, (20) False allegations, (21)
Mandapa or auspicious pavilion, (22) Victory, (23) Works
that give sorrow or suffering, (24) Agriculture, (25) Land,
(26) Garden or pleasurable place, (27) Digging tanks and
` wells, (28) The several sacred installations, (29) Relatives
on the mother's side, (30) Pure or steady intellect, (31)
Father, (32) Wife, (33) Securing and keeping safe one’s
earnmigs, (34) Palace, (35) Sculpture, (36) Entering into
one’s own new house, (37) Character, (38) Loss of one’s
house, (39) Paternal property, (40) Food like that of the
gods, (41) Art of giving mentally clues to the places where
stolen property is hidden, (42) Ant-hill, (43) Developing or
contributing to th tensive spread of the Vedic texts and
Shastras, (44) Buffaloes. cowe and bulle. horee3—and elephants in an intoxicated state, (45) abundance of crops
from wet lands, and (46) Wealth.
From the fifth house one has to examine the following:
(1) Children, (2) Virtuous deeds of the father, (3) King,
(4) Minister (or minister of a king or ruler), (5) Good character, (6) Sculpture, (7) Mind, (8) Education, (9) Pregnancy,
(10) Discretion, (11} Umbrella, (12) Listening to or spreading good stories, (13) Auspicious documents or parchments, (14) Clothes, (15) Employing great prayogas or
mantras for achieving varied desired ends, (16) Paternal
property, (17) Foresightedness, (18) Wealth and prosperity

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 117
acquired through the wife or her relatives, (19) Affairs with
courtesans or loose women, (20) Profundity or seriousness,
(21) Firmness, (22) Secrets, (23) Humility, (24) Good reporting of news, (25) Welfare, (26) Friendship, (27) Composition
of kavyas and prabandhas (minor epic narratives),
(28) Undertaking some good work, (29) Stomach,
(30} Mantra, (31) Upasana or worship with penance,
(32) Splendour which is graceful and pleasing, (33) Distributing food, (34) Discrimination between virtue and vice,
(35) Performing the japa of mantras, (36) Wisdom, (37} Deep
thought, (38) Means of earning money, (39) Having the
instrumental music of mridanga and the like that give
delight, (40) Scholarship in literature, and (41) Acquisition
of the hereditary post of a minister.
thn frorunttanrgqersarequranifuret
SERERA ARONET: 11 Ro 1
atara: aA ie n
yrna gaa a aa,
SIMA eH: g: mona |
We can judge the following from the sixth house:
(1) Diseases, (2) Obstacles, (3) Fighting in war, (4)
Maternal uncle, (5) Phlegm, (6) Tumor, (7} Cruel or fierce
activitics, (8) Madness, (9) Smallpox, (10) Foes and enmity,
(11} Miserliness, (12) Ill-health, (13) Venereal boils, (14)
Boiled rice, (15) Heavy breathing, (16) Debts, (17) Slanders,
(18) Delight of the foes, (19) Tuberculosis, (20) Healed
constitution, (21) Wounds, (22) Mental agony or worry, (23)
Many intense worries, (24) Hated by many, (25) Frequent
diseases of the eyes, (26) receiving alms, (27) Untimely food,
(28) Fall or loss or destruction brought about by foes who
are collaterals, (29) Profits, (30} Wearisomeness, (31) Poison, (32) Peptic or duodenal ulcer, (33) Fetters, (34) Protecting one’s own fame, (35) Urinary ailment, (36) Dysentery,

118 ; , Uttara Kalamrita
(37) Six flavours {tastes in food like hot, sweet, bitter
etc.}, (38) Reproach, (39) Sorrows from servants and
theft, (40) Imprisonment, (41) Quarrels from brothers and
others.
EELEE IE C NELDA -BE
AEEA T E ER n
The seventh house reveals the details about the following:
(1) Marriage, (2) Loose sex life, (3) Victory in love or
passion, (4) Hatred of a loose woman, (5) Deviation from the
right or proper path, (6) Having perfumes, music and flowers, (7) Delicious food, drinks and the like, (8) Chewing
betal leaves (tambula), (9) Break in travels, (10) Curd,
(11) Loss of memory, (12) Possessing clothes and the like,
(13) Semen, (14) Husband's (or wife's) purity, (15) A pair of
wives, (16) Generative organ, (17) Urinary track, (18) Anus,
(19) Commerce or trade, (20) Milk, (21) Sweet or pleasant
Mansion, (22) Food with cereals and ghee, (23) Charities,
(24) Valour, (25) Destruction of enemies, (26) Victory,
(27) Acquisition of money that is kept at a different or
distant place, (28) Arguments, (29) Sexual union,
{30) Adopted son, (31) Preparations with ghee, (32) Own
place, (33) Foreign or distant place, (34) Wife (or husband),
(35) All secret sex affairs, and (36) Theft.
aq: dharani qari dats ofaBeen morana Rae awed faery l ee n
yg: gana eama: wages
SANTA TATU SATAATINTAT: |

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 119
aaant et fared gahirah:
mi Aaa g Ag St Tey
forreareexneirrentaftentraterargera
Gerrard a aad MAGENTA, t
From the eighth house we have to judge the following:
(1) Longevity, (2) Happiness, (3) Disgrace or defeat,
(4) Money coming from the death of some one as in insurance or as in the case of a dead distant relative, (5) Afflicted
face, (6) Worry about or arising from death, (7) Absence of
quarrels, (8) Sorrow from an ailment of meha, (9) worries
arising from brother, enemy, wife (or husband), (10) The
‘fortress of the enemy, (11) Misery or worry, (12) Idleness,
(13) Fear of punishment from the government, (14) Loss of
money, (15) Debts, (16) Receiving the money of others out
of ignorance, (17) Long awaited money, (18) The arrival of
a wicked person, (19) Sin, (20) Killing a live being, (21) Loss
of a limb, (22) Capital punishment, (23) Terrifying sorrows,
_ (24) A story that disturbs the mental peace, (25) Series of
afflictions, (26) Attempting to do highly cruel acts,
(27) Battle, and (28) Utmost mental] anguish.,
arnteaofegitaien’ frock the Rg ul
QTE STATA ATT TAT AT ANT YATE:
yez: arada: ATA GTR |
anèyadginamrafgsn: rgrrerarerememng: apg: 11 eo 1
` The following are to be judged from the ninth house:
(1) Charity, (2) Virtuous acts, (3) Pilgrimages,
(4) Penance, (5) Respectful devotion and service to the
teachers and other elders, (6) Purity of mind, (7) Worship of
_ the gods, (8) Effort to learn, (9) Splendour, (10) Travel or
conveyance, (11) Fortune or prosperity, (12) Polity,
(13) Valour, (14) Listening to or spreading good stories;
(15) Travels, (16) Worshipping Shiva by pouring water on

- 120 . Uttara Kalamrita
the image, (17) Nourishment, (18) Coming into contact with
the virtuous, (19) Auspiciousness, (20) Paternal property,
(21) Sons and daughters, f22} Eight forms of wealth,
(23) Horses, elephants and buffaloes, (24) Coronation,
(25) Temple, (26) Establishing or consecrating Brahma, or
firmly securing the Brahmanic faith, (27) Vedic rituals
and sacrifices, and (28) Circulation or distribution of
money.
Notes
The fourth house is of great significance in the chart
of politicians.
The fifth house primarily refers to children
and ‘intellect.. Consider
chart 93. Here two powerful
malefics are aspecting the
fifth, and also the significator of. children. One is debilitated. The combination
of the fifth and seventh
lords in the fifth also denied
him children. Guru in the
fifth from the fifth and in
enemy's sign is also responsible.
The sixth ts primarily
the house of disease. Consider chart 94. The sixth
lord Shani in the ninth had
given a hip-bone fracture.
The lord of the natural
ninth Jupiter is debilitated
and aspected by malefic
Mars. s o
The seventh house refers to the husband or wife
or partner. The significator is Shukra. For a happy
married life, the seventh house, its lord, and Venus should
be well-placed, This house also indicates opposition and
quarrels.

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 121
The eighth refers to longevity. Earlier we have given
examples for short, medium and long terms of longevity.
Any relation of the Sun or Mars with the eighth causes
death by fire. The ninth house also refers to fire. A watery
planet like the Moon associated with the eighth may cause
death by drowning. An example of death by suicide is the
chart of Hitler given earlier. Death at the hands of an
assassin are those of Mahatma Gandhi, J. F. Kennedy, Mrs.
Indira Gandhi and others. Those were given earlier.
Abraham Lincoln's chart also may be studied.
Association of lagna
and the third with the
ninth, if beneficially posited, makes one a devotee, a
seeker after spiritual reality. In chart 95 Guru as lord
of the third is in the ninth
aspecting lagna, Ravi and
Budha. The native, a Muslim by birth, was a great
devotee of Ramana Maharshi. He built a house near the Ashram so that he be near
the Saint.
Chart 96 is that of a great Saint, a Jivan-mukta. The
Moon, lord of the fifth, is in the fourth owned by Budha and
aspected by the Sun. The
planet of renunciation and
the lord of Moksha house
(twelfth) is in the seventh
aspecting the third lord and
the Moon. One kona house
and one kendra have natural benefics. Lords of 7 and
il have exchanged signs.
Guru as lord of lagna is also
po foe fm [om
aspecting the ninth lord
and the Sun. Sixth and tenth lords have changed houses.
When the Sun and Shani are together in the tenth, the
native is subject to disgrace or dishonour. When the lagna

122 Uttara Kalamrita
Chendia,- enara 24.32 Kuja 1.368
6.8 Lag udha 9.18 Ketu 26.17
and the tenth houses and
the Sun are strong and
have no malefic association, the native becomes
famous. Take the chart of
. Rabindra Nath Tagore (97):
= 12.37 Guru and the Moon have
changed signs (lords of 1,
26.17 10 and 5). Budha and Kuja
aie (lords of 2 and 4) have
changed houses. Guru aspects his own house, the lagna. Ravi is exalted in the
second. The tenth lord is strong. The chart clearly establishes his greatness and vision.
When the second house or its lord, the eleventh or its
lord, and Guru join together by aspect or conjunction, the ~
native becomes very wealthy. If there is also an association
with the ninth house or its
lord, fortune smiles on him
permanently. Consider
chart 98 which is that of M.
A. Jinnah. Here the second,
eleventh and ninth lords
are together in the tenth.
One is Guru. Lords of 9 and
10 have exchanged signs. Belen Pee ET
The tenth is aspected by fiw aes Guru 25.23 Kuja
Shani, the lord of lagna.
The eleventh house has the lords of the fifth and the
seventh. Guru is also the
14.14 lord of the Moon sign and
Chandra aspects it.
hast eae The twelfth is primarKya 1416 | ily the house of expendiRahu 24,53
ture, separation, danger
and also final emancipation
(moksha). Separation or
loss can refer to wife or
husband, and children as
well. Chart 99 is that of M.
Guru
Ravi 21.54
Budha 16.2
Lagna 12.45
Shukra R

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 123
M. Gopinath Kaviraj, a great scholar, a Shakta, and a great
spiritual sadhaka. The ninth lord Moon, and the fifth lord
Guru have mutual aspects from the sixth and the twelfth.
The sixth and the ninth lords have exchanged signs. The
twelfth lord Shukra is debilitated but retrograde in the
eleventh. Shani aspects this Shukra. Shani causes renunciation. The tenth house is well fortified.
In this way the twelve houses have to be examined
carefully.
wearanarehaera: RATT: WA: Wk Ul
mi aA a yore wearfafiarear,
yamma aA a ayrarerarata: efa |
The tenth house gives us the details about the following:
(1) Commerce, (2) Honour from the ruler, (3) Riding on
a horse, (4) Wrestling, (5) Work of or in the Government, `
(6) Service, (7) Agriculture, (8) Doctoring, (9) Fame,
(10) Buried or hidden treasure, (11) Sacrifices and the like,
(12) Pre-eminence or the position of the best merchant,
(13) Teachers, (14) Religious yantras or symbolic diagrams,
(15) Chanting of sacred spells or mantras, (16) Mother,
(17) Wide spread or extensive religious merit, (18) Medicine,
(19) Thighs, (20) Gods, (21) Acquisition of the full power of
a mantra, (22) Prosperity, (23) Adopted son, (24) Lordship,
(25) Right path, (26) Good living with self-respect,
(27) Honour, (28) A prince, (29) Fame, (30) Expert teaching
ability and the like, (31) Authority using a seal, (32) Influence, self-control, and (33) A mind that gives orders to be
obeyed.
wre: udfase areira
| Auga ora m ERTER 11 ke 11

124 Uttara Kalamrita
frener sR eat qra aver
ageman goafori aan E
merang nata:
TE AUT FAA A AA: 11 R N
fagra: goaa aren ng
eaii: Jilke cco EE TUEK uet |
The following facts can be investigated from the eleventh house:
(1) Gains in all possible ways, (2) Evil desires, (3) All
forms of income, (4) Dependence on others, (5) Elder
brother, (6) Paternal uncle, (7) Worship of the gods,
(8) Worship of the sattvic deities, (9) Education, (10) Great
skill in earning gold and money, (11) Ancestral property,
(12) Knee, (13) Special position, (14) Love of or fondness for
ornaments and precious stones, (15) Wealth, (16) Lost
wealth, (17) Seeking to possess ornaments made of gold for
the sake of arts and women, (18) Wisdom, (19) Position of
a minister, (20) Brother of the wife, (21) Profits, (22) Rise of
fortune, (23) Achieving the desired goal, (24) Easy or good
returns, (25) Cooking, (26) Desires, (27) Longevity of
mother, (28) Ears, (29) Shanks, and (30) Skill in the art of
painting.
Aaea reaa: fireafird fg: 11 2 N
fi Mardketaaretredt areal war 14 RR U
Anirem niga
LEII AUBE LDE Jati apti LEZ De TET 2A ig da Lc |
The twelfth house gives us the details about the following:
(1) Disturbed sleep, (2) mental worry or anguish,
(3} The two feet, (4) Fear from foes, (5) Imprisonment,
(6) Freedom from suffering, (7) Relief from debts, (8) Elephants and horses, (9) Paternal property, (10) Enemy,
{11} Ascent into heaven, (12) Left eye, (13) Hated by the

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 125
public, (14) Crippled limbs, (15) Loose sex life, (16) Breakdown of marriage, (17) Giving up the sleeping bed, (18) Loss
of power or authority, (19) Kept in chains in an enemy's
house, (20) Mental imbalance, (21) Miserable condition,
(22) Harm, (23) Wounded by the thought of the loss of
happiness of the father and brothers, (24) Disputes,
(25) Anger, (26) Physical ailment, (27) Death, (28) Migrating
to a different place, (29) Expenditure of all kinds, and
(30) Loss of wife or husband.
Notes
‘These are the karakatvas or factors signified by the
twelve houses starting from the lagna. These have to be
correlated with planets that signify them. Thus the ninth
house refers to the father and so does the Sun. The two
have to be taken together. The fifth house and Guru refer
to Children. The second house and Guru indicate money.
In this way one has to proceed. Hence the author gives a list
of factors signified by the different luminaries (Ravi and
Chandra), shadowy planets (Rahu and Ketu), and the remaining five planets.
aranya aar ganra:
Aand N az: en n
qaa aie figearan
kei Eoas arai ans GALLESE CLRAE huke |
E ee nalk Lai: LESSEE AEG katli i h
Bsa mapaa ap N Ve 0
Et ale wayf: aana meityaTai Peg
Vrei enya yan: wa: |
Bea: qiira wed a Ta: ae:
urmon aaa TATA: 11 BU
TeaTEreIeqaa: Tatra frqmE: Aiwarara-quareneypeay Ta: |
The Sun is the significator of the following:
(1) Soul, (2) Power or strength, (3) Greatest severity,
(4) Fortress, (5) Gpod strength, (6) Heat, (7) Influence,
(8) Fires, (9) Worship of Shiva, (10) Courage, (11) Trees

126 Da Uttara Kalamrita
having thorns, (12) favour of the king or ruler, (13) Bitter
taste, (14) Old age, (15) Cattle, (16) Wickedness, (17) Land,
(18) Father, (19) Taste, (20) Awakening of knowledge or
enlightenment, (21) Looking up toward the sky-very great
ambition, (22) One born to a timid person or one whose
actions are born out of fear, (23) World of mortals, (24)
Square or harmonious, (25) bongs, (26) Valour, (27) Grass,
(28) Stomach, (29) Enthusiasm, (30) Forest, (31) Half a
year, (32) Eye, (33) Wandering in or over the hills, (34)
quadruped, (35) King, (36) Travelling, (37) Dealings with
affairs personal or social, (38) Bile, (39) Feverish or inflammatory complaints, (40) Circular forms, (41) Diseases of the
eye, (42) Body, (43) Timber, (44) Mental purity, (45) Sovereignty over the entirc country or over all countries, (46)
Freedom from disease, (47) Rulership over Saurashtra—
southern Gujarat, (48) Ornaments, (49) Diseases of the
head, (50) Pearls, (51) Ruler of the sky-control over airspace, (52) Short or dwarfish stature, (53) Rulership over
the eastern direction, (54) Copper, (55) Blood or blood-red
gems like ruby, (56) Kingdom, (57) Blood-red cloth, (58)
Stones, (59) Undisguised or open conduct, (60) Shores ofa
river, (61) Red coral, (62) Strong at noon, (63) East, (64)
Face, (65) Long-standing anger or strong indignation, (66)
Capturing the foe, (67) Sattvik or benevolent and good
temper, (68) Red sandal paste or saffron, (69) Otherness or
opposition or hostility, and (70) Thick or coarse yarn.
Aha: gagrag irenaAme R eaa: 1 R 1
ee. nN
: Ufterteprat:
Ter: wage AA watt ag:
mai fair aa fegnar:
yaffa Wet a: 11 a N

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 127
yanana yeos aed cat cafe: 11 22 11
The Moon is the significator of the following:
(1) Intelligence, (2) Flowers, (3) Perfumes, (4) Going to
a fortress, (5) Disease, (6) Brahmana or Dvija, (7) Laziness,
(8) Phlegmatic constitution, (9) Epilepsy, (10) Hidden or
ulcerous troubles in the stomach, (11) nature of the mind,
(12) Heart, (13) Woman, (14) Benefic and malefic nature,
(15) Acidity, (16) Sleep, (17) Happiness, (18) Liquids, (19)
Silver, (20) Stout sugarcane, (21) Malarial fever, (22) Pilgrimage, (23) Wells, (24) Tank, (25) Mother, (26) Impartial
outlook, (27) Noon, (28) Pearls, (29) Consumption, (30)
Whiteness, (31) Waist-band, (32) bell-metal, (33} Salt, (34)
Short stature, (35) Mind, (36) Abilities, (37) Ponds, (38)
Diamond, (39) Sarad or autumn, (40) Muhurta or 48 min-
- ute duration, (41) Facial lustre, (42) White colour, (43)
Stomach.. (4.44: ‘Worship of Gauri, the consort of Shiva, (45)
Honey, (46) Grace or favour, (47) Sense of fun or humour,
(48) Nourishment, (49) Wheat, (50) Pleasures, (51) Splendour, (52) Face, (53) Swiftness of mind or agility of mind,
(54) Fondness for curd, (55) One who does tapas or penance, (56) Fame, (57) Beauty, (58) Strong at night, (59)
Facing west, (60) Lover, (61) Saline, (62) Acquiring a post,
(63) Love of the west, (64) Middle world, (65) Nine gems, (66)
Middle age, (67) Self, (68) Eating, (69) Going to distant
places, (70) Ailments of the shoulders, (71) Umbrella and
other royal inslgnia, (72) Good fruits, (73) Fine blood circulation or vital energy, (74) Fish and other aquatic beings,
(75) Serpents and the like, (76) Clothes, (77) Fine blossoming, (78) Lustre, (79) Clean crystals, and (80) Refined clothsab ear Saree Ro N

128 - Uttara Kalamrita
aa wrecker afrararsaeaan it 33 Ut
medem agaianARRA gaat E N, |
Kuja is the significator of the following items: (1) Valour, (2) Land, (3) Strength, (4) Carrying weapons, (5) Ruling
over people — administrator, (6) Loss of virility, (7) Thief,
(8) Battle, (9) Opposition, (10) Foes, (11) Charitable nature,
(12) Love of deep-red objects, (13) Ruler over
sacred places—archaeologist, or religious endowments,
(14) Sound of a trumpet, (15) Fondness, (16) Quadrupeds,
(17) King, (18) Obstinate fool, (19) Anger, (20) Going to a
foreign country, (21) Steadfastness, (22) Supporter,
(23) Fire, (24) Controversy or arguments, (25) Bile,
(26) Heat, (27) Wounds, (28) Service under the ruler,
(29) Day, (30) Sky, (31) Sight, (32) Shortness, (33) Ailment,
(34) Fame, (35) Tin, (36) Sword, (37) Spear, (38) Minister,
(39) Firmness of limbs, (40) Jewels, (41) Worship of subrahmanya, (42) Youth, (43) Pungent taste, (44) Hall of the ruler,
(45) Earthenware, (46) Obstacles, (47) Eating nonvegetarjan food, (48) Abusing or bitterly criticising others,
(49) Conquering foes, (50) Bitterness of taste, (51) Strong
towards the end of the night, (52) Goid, (53) Summer
season, (54) Valour, (55) Strength of the enemy, (56) Profundity, (57) Courageous behaviour, (58) Man, (59) Character, (60) Brahma, (61) Axe, (62} Moving in the forest— forest
officer, (63) Chief ruler or officer of the village, (64) Favour
of the king, (65) Painful urination, (66) Square,

Significdtors and Significations of Planets & Houses 129
(67) Goldsmith, (68) Wickcd one, (69) Burnt place,
(70) Good food, (71) Leanness, (72) Skill in archery,
(73) Blood, (74) Copper, (75) Variegated or peculiar clothes,
(76) Face turned toward the south, (77) Fond of the southern direction, (78) Desire, (79) Anger, (80) Spreading scandals. (81) House, (82) Commander of the Army, (83) A fire
arm that kills a hundred—something like a machine-gun,
(84) Tree, (85} Sama Veda, (86) Brothers, (87) Hatchet,
(88) Controlling fierce or wild animals, (89) Independence,
(90) Persistance, (91) Land, (92) One who awards punishment, (93) Snake, (94) World, (95) Speech, (96) Fickleness
or imbalance of the mind, (97) Getting on a vehicle, (98)
Seeing blood and (99) Drying or coagulating of blood, and
many other such things are attributed to Kuja by the wise.
remige nyora areata:
qai Rarere, 11 ay i
foreqvarfrerctefararqaagreag carerant
aioa Bey n
a a ee as
EEGELE EUS LG IR: t
be E TA a etea
Amaga:
Pea forenyrsayireaquenentanyiterat
Ramga gaa: dread: 11 39 1h
Budha is the significator of the following: (1) Education, (2) Horses, (3) Treasury, (4) Mathematics, (5) Knowledge, (6) Speech, (7) Dvijas, (8) Infantry, (9) Script, (10)
Writing, (11) New clothes, (12) Construction of palaces, (13)
Green colour, (14) Sculpture, (15) Astrology and astronpmy, (16) Pilgrimages, (17) Wise or good conversation or
lecturing, (18) Temples, (19) Commerce, (20) Best ornaments, (21) Soft speech, (22) Vedanta system of philosophy,
(23) Maternal grand-father, (24) Bad dreams, (25) Eunuch,
(26) Face turned to the north, (27) Skin, (28) Moisture, (29)

130 Uttara Kalamrita
Bell-metal and the like, (30) Renunciation, (31) Seasons,
(32) Fine palace, (33) Medical practitioner, (34) Neck,
(35) Black magic, (36) Child, (37) Looking cross-wise,
(38) Heaven, (39) Humility, (40) Collaterals, (41) Fear,
(42) Dancing, (43) Devotion, (44) Tendency to laughter,
(45) Strong at sunrise or morning, (46) The season of
hemanta or the beginning of winter, (47) Scratching ailments, (48) Self-control, (49) Navel, (50) Flourishing of
one's own dynasty, (51) Mixed or compound substances,
(52) Presides over the Telugu language, (53) Worship of
Vishnu, (54) Shudras, (55) Birds, (56) Younger coborns or
brothers and sisters, (57) Witty language, (58) Sticks,
(59) Atharvana Veda, (60) Carrying out the karmas or religious rites, (61} Towers of temples, (62) Dust, (63) Garden,
(64) Sex organs, (65) Evenness, (66) Beneficial nature,
(67) Wandering in the villages, (68) Balanced nature and
outlook, (69) Fond of the north-western direction, (70) Wellversed in the Puranas or minor epics, (71) Grammar,
(72) One skilled in researching and testing the precious
stones—Ratna-Parakhi, (73} Scholar, (74) Maternal
uncle, (75) Mantras or sacred spells, (76) Yantras or symbolic religious diagrams, (77) Very powerful tantrik and the
like.
ECAP IRCI EALE CSE LESICUI Lir R tb Re tt
Asg aaan wt afo,
maa aane aN: |
art igr e
di maaana: 14 g ut
Rat na Tee ganag
wie magae Aa TEN, |
at: ymaa garea Riga
FETT ARTA TATET: wrrigdart Il xo n

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 131
APART TT TATE TTT
JAn gnaga A: wee ul
dee
Jupiter is the significator of the following: Nlouey f
(1) Brahmanas, (2) One’s own teachers, (3) Religious,
social and other duties, (4) Chariot, (5) Cows, (6) Infantry,
(7) Deposits, (8) Mimansa or enquiry into jurisprudence
and the nature of dharma, (9) Treasure, (10) Horses,
(11) Buffaloes, (12) Large or stout body, (13) Valour,
{14} Fame, (15) Logic, (16) Astronomy and astrology,
(17) Sons, (18) Grandsons, (19) Complaints of the digestive
system, (20) Wealth of the elephants, (21) Vedanta system
of, philosophy, (22) Elders like the great-grand-father,
(23) Mansion, (24) Gomedha or hassonite, (25) Elder
brother, (26) Grand-father, (27) Indra, (28) Second half of
winter, (29) Acts arising from great indignation, (30) Precious stones, (31) Tradesman, (32) Physical health,
{33) Strange or peculiar palace, (34) honour from the king,
{35) Great gods, (36) Penance, (37) Charity, (38) Dharma,
(39) Doing good to others, (40) Impartial outiook, (41)
Facing towards the north, (42) Circular forms, (43) Yellow
colour, (44) Wandering in the villages, (45) North, (46) Dear
friends, (47) Swinging on a plank or on an elephant,
(48) Great eloquence, (49) Brain, (50) Cloth of a medium
count, (51) Happiness in a newly built house, (52) Old age
or old persons, (53) Mantra, (54) Dvijas, (55) Holy water or
place of pilgrimage, (56) Knee, (57) Moving towards heaven,
(58) House that offers happiness, (59) Intellect, (60) Great
proficiency, (61) Great long poems, (62) Towers, (63) Delighting or impressing an audience, (64) Throne, (65) Installation of the idol of Brahma, (66) Cat's eye or lahsunia,
(67) The great results of Agnishtoma sacrifice, (68) Sweet
juices, (69) Sattvic nature, (70) Happiness and unhappiness, (71) Long, (72) Gentle or benefic, (73) Understanding
the minds or thoughts of others, (74) Gold, (75) Decorations, (76) Tantra or technical subjects and the like,
(77) Wind complaints (78) Phlegm, (79) Good yellow topaz,
(80) Sound knowledge of the sacred texts and scriptures,
(81) Soft and pleasant stones, (82) Worship of Shiva,

132 Utara Kalamriia
(83) Performing religious and moral acts strictly, and
(84) Travelling in a carriage covered on the four sides.
peer oma eer Tear fererrerat area aT
riaan gargarar: NRU
E paa use
KUILE BA ISLC Ae LESM IGNE D ara erat
PUR A TATU ATE:
ft naaa: agon tat mefa
mafaia a REA: Wee N
AARRE ETIN ARATA
maA THAT yra: ENAN: W wy n
T gmArRe waa mAT
minam gega wd amta, |
Shukra is the significator of the following: (1) White
umbrella which is a royal insignia, (2) Good chowrie, (3)
Good clothes, (4) Marriage, (5) Income, (6) Bipeds, (7)
Woman, (8) Dvijas, (9) Gentle or benefic, (10) White colour,
(11) Wife or husband, (12) Happiness from sex-life, (13)
' Short stature, (14) Acid taste, (15) Flowers, (16) Commands, (17) Fame, (18) Youth, (19) Pride, (20) Conveyance,
(21) Silver, (22) Fond of the south-east, (23) Saltish taste,
(24) Cross-wise vision, (25) Cough, (26) Fortnight, (27)
Rajasik nature, (28) Firmness, (29) Pearls, (30) Yajur Veda,
(31) Vaisyas, (32) Beauty, (33) Buying and selling—or buying and selling the articles that contribute to beauty, (34)
Pleasant talk arising from mutual love, (35) Watery place,
(36) Elephants, (37) Horses, (38) Peculiar or strange poetry,
(39) Dancing, (40) Middle age, (41) Music, (42) Enjoyment,
(43) Happiness from wife or husband, (44) Precious stones,
(45) Love of humour, (46) Swimming, (47) Servants, (48)

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 133
Fortune, (49) Strange lustre, (50) Tenderness, (51) Kingdom, (52) Fragrant garland, (53) Taking pleasure in violin
and flute, (54) Pleasant movement or walking, (55) Eight
kinds of prosperity, (56) Well-proportioned limbs, (57) Frugal in taking food, (58) Season of spring, (59) Ornaments,
(60) Possessing many women, (61) Facing the east, (62)
Eyes, (63) Speaking truth, (64) Skilled in the fine arts, (65)
Semen, (66) Sporting in water with love, (67) Profundity,
(68) Excess or eminence, (69) Pleasant musical instruments, (70) Decoration for the dramatic shows, (71) Indulgence in amorous sports, (72) Declining physical form, (73)
One who attaches great importance to sex, (74) Receiving
good respect or honour, (75) Fondness for having white
clothes, (76) Expert in Bharata’s Natya Sastra, (77) Having
the seal of authority or of the government, (78) Ruler,
(79) Fond of worshipping Gauri and Lakshmi,
(80) Emaciated from the pleasures of sex,
(81) Playing the role of a mother for those born during the
day, (82) Skilled in composing Kavyas, minor epics and the
like, (83) Blue-black hair, (84) Benefic, (85) genitals,
(86) Urine or urinary tract, (87) Moving in the world of
the snakes, (88) Strong in the aflernoon, and (89) An
awareness of the genital organs and the secrets connected
with them.
memferma a
ween g rT: a e
n TE etre ceprocrere iii EZET
Hai maraa aA RANAR
sA afnam: a
fraia aaea
wed Mengene AAs a we ul

134 Uttara Kalamrita
yaaan aR: eaa BA: o N
Shani is the significator of the following: (1) Il-health
and other sufferings, (2) Obstruction, (3) Horses, (4) Elephants, (5) Skin, (6) Income, (7) Standards, (8) Distress,
(9) Disease, (10) Enmity, (11) Sorrow, (12):Death, (13)
Happiness from a woman, (14) Maid-servant, (15) Asses,
(16) Outeastes, (17) Persons with strange or mutilated
limbs, (18) Roaring in the woods, (19) Disgust, (20) Charity,
(21) Lords, (22) Longevity, (23) Eunuch, (24) One born
outside the four castes, (25) Birds, (26) Tretagni, one of the
three sacred domestic fires, (27) Servant’s duties,
(28) Doing something other than the traditional or accepted
duties, (29) One losing his ego, (30) Telling lies, (31) Lasting
long, (32) Wind, (33) Old age, (34) Tendon, (35) Strong at the
end of the day, (36) The second half of winter,
(37) Indignation, (38) Exertion, (39) Born of a low woman,
(40) Born An adultery, (41) A widow’s bastard, (42) Dirty
cloth, (43) Dirty house, (44) Mind turned to dirty things,
(45) Friendship with the wicked, (46) Black colour,
(47) Sins, (48) Cruelty, (49) Ashes, (50) Grains.in black
colour, (51) Precious stones, (52) Iron, (53) Generosity,
(54) A year, (55) Shudras, (56) Vital or supportcrs of the
lover, (57) Significator of the father for one born in the
night, (58) Learning what belongs to another caste,
(59) Lameness, (60) Fierce or severe, (61) Blanket,
(62) Facing the west, (63) Remedies for restoring lie,
(64) Looking downwards, (65) Living by agriculture or farming, (66) One who knows where the arms are kept, manager
of an ordnance factory, (67) Cousin, (68) An external position, (69) Fond of the north-east, (70) World of the snakes,
(71) Failing, (72) Wandering in the battle fields, (73) Bones,
_ (74) lead, (75) Wrong or wicked valour, (76) Turks, (77) Torn
clothes or things, (78) Oil, (79) wood, (80) Brahman having
Tamsik quality, (81) Wandering in poisonous places,

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 135
(82) Roaming in hilly areas, (83) Long standing fear,
(84) Hunter, (85) Strange or ugly hair, (86) Whole kingdom,
(87) Fear, (88) Goats and the like, (89) Buffaloes and the
like, (90) Indulgence in sex, (91) Displaying amorous intentions in dressing, (92) Worship of Yama, (93) Dogs,
(94) Thefts, and hard-heartedness.
Sal ASAT ASAT HT: 1142 1
ARATE AST giae gea
Tene airean AANA Acar et: |
Rahu is the significator of the following: (1) Umbrella,
(2) Chowrie, (3) Acquiring a kingdom, (4) Faulty logic, (5)
Harsh speech, (6) One belonging to a caste outside the four
main castes, (7) A sinful woman, (8) A conveyance covered
on all four sides, (9) An irreligious person or a Shudra, (10)
Gambling, (11) Strong at sunset, (12) Having sex with a
wicked woman, (13) going to a different country, (14) Unclean, (15) Bones, (16) Hidden abdominal ulcer, (17) Falsehood, (18) Looking downwards, (19) Perplexity, (20) Emerald, (21) Facing south, (22) Depending on mlechchhas, low
castes and the like, (23) Malignant tumor, (24) Great forest,
(25) Wandering in difficult places, (26) Suffering from
mountains, (27) Staying outside, (28) South-western direction, (29) Complaints of wind and phlegm, (30) serpents,
(31) Southern breeze, (32) Severe, (33) Long, (34) Reptiles,
(35) Interpretation of dreams, (36) Travels, (37) One
muhurta, (38) Old age, (39) Conveyance, (40) World of the
snakes, (41) Maternal grand father, (42) Air, (43) Acute
duodenal pain, (44) catarrh, (45) Breathing, (46) Great
valour, worship of Vana-Durga, (47) Wickedness, (48) Asso-

136 Uttara Kalamrita
ciation with animals, (49) Writing Urdu or Persian, and (50)
Harsh speech.
audivivertrernicgrpararert aera
vant: pantie aad nu N
Aaram mma g nge GS I
Ari a faaea ERNER FA:
xiin ea, |
Ketu is the significator of the following: (1) Worship of
the lord of Chandi, Ganesha and others, (2) Medical practitioner, (3) Dogs, (4) Cocks, (5) Vultures, (6) Final salvation, (7) All sorts of prosperity, (8) Consumption, (9) Painful
fevers, (10) Bath in the Ganges, (11) Great penance,
(12) Wind complaints, (13) Friendship with hunters,
(14) Acquiring prosperity, (15) Stones, (16) Wounds,
(17) Mantra Shastra, (18) Instability of mind, (19) Knowledge of Brahmn, (20} Diseases of the stomach and eye, (21)
Stupidity, (22) Thorn, (23) Knowledge of the animals, zoology, (24) Observing silence religiously, (25) Vedanta,
(26) All kinds of luxury, (27) Fortune, (28) Suffering from
foes, (29) Sparing in eating, (80) Renunciation, (31) Father's
father, (32) Hunger, (33) Great pain from peptic or duodenal
ulcer, (34) Small pox, or boils and such other diseases,
(35) Horned animals, (36) A servant of Shiva, (37) Getting
the order of imprisonment
revoked, and (38) ConverKetu Budha 24 | 7.30 5.45 sation or association with
Ed Shudras.
We will now illustrate
some of these Karakatvas.
Chart 100 is that of
Mr. Nanavati. It was alleged
that he shot dead the paramour of his wife. The Moon

Significators and Significations of Planets & Houses 137
is weak and as lord of 12 is placed in the 11th aspected by
malefic lord of the fourth and ninth lord Kuja. The seventh
lord is devoid of aspects. The seventh lord is with Rahu and
retrograde Guru. The seventh lord afflicts the Moon. Both
body and soul are afflicted and so are the fifth and eighth
houses. Shukra is between malefics. Guru's aspect on him
shows love and a rival led to’the final shoot-out.
Chart 101 shows the
2321 | 5.31 |1128 [Eee | seventh lord afflicted by
Kuja Ketu | Shukra |audna 29.20
Kuja (lord of 6 and 11). The
Chandra] Shani R [Rahu |Guru `
significator of marriage is
UNIQUE CLASSIC
in his own house, but is
aspected by the powerful
Shani from the sixth. The
lagna is afflicted by Mars.
This girl's husband committed suicide within ten
months of the marriage.
(Original Text with Translation, Notes &
Exhaustive Commentary in lucid English)
by Dr G.S. Kapoor
Excellent Work on Predictive Astrology

Chapter VI
axe Gus:
Results of the Major Periods
of Planets
Jer eiaa fr at Affwe ug wa Geshe war |
aan ar Raan wer a gfear erat @ gtr at
Gian enkem wen gi er eter Fa Ht N
Planets appear under one of the nine avasthas, states.
These are:
() Dipta - blazing, when the planet ts exalted.
(ii) Stimita - stable, when it is in its own house.
(ii) Mudita - delighted, when it is in the house of an
adhimitra (highly friendly sign).
(iv) Shanta - Calm, quiescent, when it is in the house of
a friendly planet.
(v) Hina - deficient, when it is in the house of a neutral
planet.
(vi) Dukkha - sorrowful or dejected, when it is in the
house of an enemy.
(vi) Vikala - vexatious, when it is conjunct with a malefic.
(viii) Khala - base or wicked, when it is defeated in the
planetary war.
{b} Kopa - angry, when it is with the Sun, that is, when
it is combust.

«ft
Results of the Major Periods of Planets 139
Notes
The natural relationships of a planet with others get
modified by temporary relationships. Then we get Adhimitra (very friendly), mitra (friendly), sama (neutral), shatru
(inir.ical) and Adhi Shatru (highly inimical). Here the author has ignored the last one.
Being with the Sun means combustion. The orb of
combustion differs from planet to planet. The degrees given
below have to be counted forwards and backwards as well.
These are the degrees from the Sun. Within these degrees
the planet is combust. These are:
Moon 12, Kuja 17, Budha 14 and when retrograde only
12, Guru 11, Shukra 10 and when retrograde only 8, and
Shani 15.
yee aaa uena ar anA grad
aera J Gare fe amga |
aenAzami Fe aay aaraa
we maafa Fa AAT tz A
The results of the virtuous or sinful actions of the,
previous life have to be gone through in this life. These are
‘revealed by the planets and their major and minor periods
on the basis of the horoscope of a person. Hence it is
necessary to know the duration of the major periods of the
planets, and the minor periods in each major period. Then
one can undertake the necessary remedial or propitiatory
activities to overcome any malefic results and to acquire the
desired happiness.
aA aft a: Her ware afgwrerasragfestergferiisaten fie mAT 11 3 ty
The major periods of the planets follow the sequence
of the Sun, Moon, Kuja, Rahu, Guru, Shani, Budha, Ketu
and Shukra. The number of years for the major periods of

140 Uttara Kalamrita
the planets are respectively 6, 10, 7, 18, 16, 19, 17, 7 and
20 years. The order or sequence is given above. The major
period that operates at the time of birth has to be found out.
Count from Krittika to the constellation of the Moon at the
time of birth. Expunge multiples of nine. The remainder is
to be counted from the Sun onwards. i r
Notes
The following table gives the constellations, their corresponding planets, and their periods.
Constellations Dasa lord Years
Krittika, Uttara Phalguni, Uttarashadha Sun 6
Rohini, Hasta, Sravana Moon 10
Mrigasira, Chitra, Dhanishtha Kuja 7
Ardra, Svati, Satabhisha Rahu 18
Punarvasu, Visakha, Purvabhadra Guru 16
Pushyami, Anuradha, Uttarabhadra Shani 19
Aslesha, Jyeshta, Revati À Budha 17
Magha, Mula, Asvini Ketu 7
Purva Phalguni, Purvashadha, Bharani Shukra 20
Total number of years is 120. Hence it is called Vimshottari and at times it is termed Udu Dasa. Udu means
nakshatra, constellation.
The method given by the author can be illustrated in
this way. A person was born when the Moon was in Sravana. Counting from Krittika and including Sravana, we get
twenty. Dividing by nine we have two as the remainder. The
second one from the Sun is the Moon. Hence at the time of
birth the native was going through the major period of
Moon.
wre gar: wegfafteres mA i N

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 141
Note the total duration of the nakshatra in which a
person is born. Find how many Ghatikas and Vighatikas
are yet to pass after the time of birth. Divide this by the total
duration in Ghatikas and Vighatikas. Multiply the product
by the number of years allotted to the planet governing that
nakshatra. This gives the number of years still to be experienced by the native in that Dasa. The remainder is to be
converted into months and days.
Notes
An illustration will make this clear. A person was born
at Bombay on the twelfth of October 1989 at 11,30 A.M. The
local mean time of Sun rise at Bombay on that day was 5.57
A.M. The time elapsed by the time of birth from Sun rise was
five hours and 33 minutes. Multiplying this by 21/2 we get
13 ghatikas and 521/2 Vighatikas. The total is 8321/2
Vighatikas.
The Panchanga gives the ghatikas and Vighatikas from
Sunrise—the ending positions. On the 12th of October
Satabhisha was upto 19 ghatikas and 46 Vighatikas. The
unexpired portion is five ghatikas and 531/2 Vighatikas or
3531/2 Vighatikas.
On the eleventh of October 1989 Dhanishtha ended at
24 Gh. 23 Vgh. Then Satabhisha started. Day and night
together make up sixty ghatikas. Thus on the previous day
Satabhisha was for 35 ghatikas and 37 Vighatikas. On the
12th of October Satabhisha was upto 19 Gh. 46 Vighatikas.
Adding the two we get 55 Ghatikas and 23 Vighatikas. This
works to 3323 Vighatikas.
Satabhisha refers to Rahu whose Dasa is for eighteen
years. Then we have:
This gives one year, ten months, and 29 days as the
portion of Rahu’s major period yet to be gone through from
the date of birth.

142 Uttara Kalamrita
Now-a-days we have the Ephemeris. They generally
give the positions of the luminaries and planets on every
day at 5.30 A.M. Now Lahiri's Ephemeris places the Moon
on the twelfth at 5.30 A.M. in Kumbha at 14°.53'.18". On
the thirteenth at 5.30 A.M. the Moon is in Kumbha at
29°.36'.18". During these twenty four hours the Moon has
traversed 14°.43'. The birth being at 11.30 A.M. the time is
six hours after 5.30 A.M. During this time the Moon covers
3°.40'.45". Adding this to 14°.53'.18" we get Kumbha
18°.34'.3". From Mesha it is 19114 minutes and three
seconds.
Each nakshatra covers 800 minutes, and each quarter
of a nakshatra is for 200 minutes. Dividing 19114’.3" by
200 we get 955 quarters and 114’.3". Dividing 19114'.3" by
800 we find that twenty three constellations are over, and
in the 24th 714'.3" are over. The 24th is Satabhisha from
Asvini. It gives Rahu mahadasa at birth. From the duration
of 800' for a constellation deduct 714'.3". We get 85'.57" or
5157 seconds. Multiply this by eighteen, the years of Rahu.
The product is 92826’. Eight hundred minutes of a nakshatra give 48000 seconds. Since we have converted the remainder into seconds, divide it by 48000. We get one year,
eleven months and six days as the balance of Rahu mahadasa at the time of birth. This is the correct balance as
compared with that derived from the Panchanga. There is
only a difference of seven days.
madea fafa Aran: yitgeraTage fonts wad ae fe mwad: 1
aR Reiter wre waare
asuen faa ragas Seer fear way ib & tt
waaa neria faytatsitat ae
warn ufzanfeectitg areaisat A wary |
The method for obtaining the duration of an antar
dasa is explained now. Note the number of years allotted to
a planet whose major dasa is running. Multiply it by the
number of years given to a planet whose sub-period is

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 143
required. Multiply the number in the place of the units
- by three. The result is the number of days. The numbers
in tens and hundreds give the months of the antardasa.
‘Thus we get the durations of each sub-period in a major
period.
Convert the duration of the antardasa in days. Multiply it by the number of years given to the planet concerned.
Divide the product by 120. The result is the duration of the
sub-sub period (Vidasa) of the planet in the antardasa of
another. The remainder is to be converted into ghatikas and
Vighatikas.
Still a sub-pcriod of this sub-sub-period can be obtained. This is the sukshma Dasa of a planet. The numbers
arrived at will be the duration of the sukshma dasa in days,
ghatikas and Vighatikas.
Notes
Take Rahu dasa which has 18 years. The first period
will be that of Rahu, and the last that of Kuja. We require
the sub-period of Shani who has 19 years. Multiply the two.
The product is 342. The figure in units multiplied by three
gives the number of days. The sub-period of Shani in Rahu
is thus for 34 months and six days. The first Vidasa in the
antardasa of Shani is that of Shani and the last is that of
Guru. Now we want vidasa of Shani in Shani's antardasa.
By converting the sub-period of Shani into days we get
1026 days. Multiply it by Shani's years (19) because we
want the Vidasa of Shani. The product is 19494. Dividing
this by 120 we get 162 days. The remainder is 54. This is
to be converted into ghatikas. Multiply this by 60 and divide
it by 120. We get 27 ghatikas. The Vidasa of Shani in the
antardasa of Shani during the major period of Rahu is for
five months, twelve days and 27 ghatikas.
Similarly for Sukshma Dasa, multiply the vidasa period by the years of the lord of the sukshma dasa, and divide
it by 120. Thus for Budha'’s Sukshma Dasa in Shani's
Vidasha we get 162 days 27 ghatikas x 17 +) 120 = 23 days
and 191/2 Vighatikas.

144 Uttara Kalamrita
When the Sun is highly beneficial in a chart, during
his major period he gives sons, intelligence, wisdom, power
or authority, knowledge, access.to wealth, fame, powers,
happiness and the favour of God. If the Sun is a malefic to
the native or is malefically situated, the native has great
suffering, and his efforts become fruitless. One has then
loss of money along with ill-health, worries and troubles
from foes, displeasure of the ruler, danger to the father and
other similar things.
If the Moon is highly beneficial and powerful, during
his major period one experiences the prosperity of the
mother’s well-being, digging tanks and the like, lands,
gardens (or sacred places or public buildings), house,
blessings of the dvijas, wealth, auspicious events, and
palanquins. When the Moon is a malefic, during his period
one has want of food, misery, loss of pleasure and money,
ill health, absence of knowledge, and he will be a source of
disgust to others. He loses his money, becomes irritable,
and is subject to malarial fevers.
When Kuja is highly beneficial, during his major period the native has lands, acquisition of desired objects,

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 145
wisdom, clarity of mind, valour, money, destruction of foes,
and younger brothers. If he is unfavourable, one experiences distress to younger brothers, quarrels, troubles related to lands and fire, wounds, loss of eye or eye-sight and
the like. There is suffering from the government, anger of
the wise, wound or cut from sword, and diseases.
When Budha is beneficially disposed during his period
one has good clothes, immense wealth, increase in food
grains, prosperity, happiness, home, relations, success and
possession of desired things. If he is a malcfic, during his
period one has journey to foreign countries, anger or irritability, loss of relatives, deterioration of the intellect, worries from the trading community, quarrels, loss of lands,
loss of money, and dangers.
When Guru is strong and favourably situated, during
his period the native has enough clothing, endless wealth,
food-grains, status, prosperity, happiness, house, relatives,
success, luxuries and acquisition of desired things. If he is
a malefic during his period he has displeasure of the rulers,
worrles and anxieties, diseases, loss of courage, absence of
food grains, lack of money, troubles from the Brahmanas,
anger of the father, worries about food, and consumption,

146 Uttara Kalamrita
When Shukra is beneficially disposed, during his period one has happiness, prosperity, great position, palanquins, eight forms of wealth, mind directed towards
dharma, gold, gardens or sacred places, horses and music
festivals. If he is malefically disposed during his period one
has fear about his wife (or her husband); he becomes
wicked and base. There is loss of money. There is great
thievishness and he commits serious mistakes in life. He
suffers diseases arising from his contacts with many
women.
When Shani is beneficially disposed, during his period -
the native becomes prosperous. He has good intelligence
and he performs various sacrifices and rituals. He acquires
lands and becomes the head of a village or a town. He
becomes a good tradesman. He is successful.in a variety of
activities and is always full of enthusiasm. If Shani becomes a malefic, during his period, one has prisoning, loss
of wealth, physical and other ailments, and anger of the
ruler. He indulges in forbidden activities, is crippled and
suffers from diseases.
TEFEN BU URANGwatabrquadtearteartannaneary 1 R
Tet: aare: Aare gy
i SATA TA STAT
When Rahu is favourably placed, during his period he
gives full and complete prosperity, great position of authority, Dharma, wealth, knowledge of scriptures, pilgrimages,
knowledge, influence and rise. When he is not so placed,
` one has fear from snakes, fear of poison, ailments and
troubles of the entire body, danger from weapons and fire,

Results of the Major Periods of Planets "147
enmity of the iow born, fall from a tree, and torture from
enemies.
If Ketu is favourably posited, during his period the
native experiences success, acquisition of wealth after
undertaking cruel or difficult activities, good fortune from
. a Mlechchha ruler, beginning of poetical efforts, and destruction of foes. If he is unfavourable, during his period,
. one has great difficulties, failures, useless or unprofitable
works, loss of job, peptic ulcers, bone-fever, quivering,
hatred of the Brahmanas, and obstinate or idiotic follies.
Notes
In all these results, we have to find out whether a
planet is favourable or unfavourable. A natural benefic can
become a functional malefic as in the case of Guru for
Vrishabha, Karka and Tula lagnas. A benefic in malefic
houses like 6, 8, 12 can become a malefic. By owning
kendras the natural benefic may turn malefic, while a
natural malefic may become a benefic. Slokas 90 to 96 of
the second kanda of this text clarify some of these points.
Hence great caution is required in determining whether a
planet is favourable or not.
Consider chart 102.
|| EL Here from lagna Guru is
Ketu lord of 2 and 5, a natural
benefic situated in the
tenth in a friend’s house
and with a friend. Kuja as
13.45 1883,7.28 Kuja 6.8 the lord of lagna and Shani
Chandra Gwu] as lord of a kendra are
benefics, and they aspect
piste) | x7 | the lagna. The ninth and
mes the tenth lords mutually

148 Uttara Kalamrita
aspect from the third and the ninth. Most of the planets are
in the second half. Kuja in the tenth in Ravi's house rules
over locomotion. The native is Henry Ford, a name to be
reckoned with in automobile industry.
In chart 103 Guru is a functional malefic as his mula
trikona is the sixth house. But he is well situated. Shani is
a benefic as lord of a Kendra, and his ownership of the
eighth is not a disadvanBao to 3 and 12 i
Budha [Fetes | Shukra | lord of 3 and 12 on him is
not desirable. The yoga
jue | jue | karaka Kuja is exalted and
aspects the tenth, his own
28.24 1924.6.3 house. Rahu is adverse. In
Kuja September 1948 he had the
SA start of Guru mahadasa
Guru R with mixed fortunes. In
1983 his Budha mahadasa
started and he is back in power (tenth house aspected by
Kuja and Shani) as the Chief Minister of Tamil Nadu. The
lord of the sixth in the fifth and that too Guru gave his
outlook a casteist turn. It is the chart of Mr. K. Karunanidhi. These two charts show the actual problems to be
faced by an astrological interpreter. .
werentortat a enya WA:
wet daada Poraa fe yequet n g on
Impe fretorafagret gA
ARAVA ey A |
‘Rahu or Ketu in a kona (1, 5 and 9) with or aspected
by the lord of the second or seventh house causes the death
of the native during his major period. If Rahu or Ketu
occupies the second or the seventh house from the lagna
and is with or aspected by the lord of 1, 5, or 9, he gives long
life and wealth. Any malefic planet in conjunction with the
: lords of 2, 7, 5 or 9 brings about the native’s death. Rahu
or Ketu with the lord of that sign also causes death of the

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 149
native.
emai Ager fret kareya-
-gek ar iad ufe aA: widi 1 e 1
| ares erayryereareiviga gA
prear a wert gi |
When Rahu and Ketu are in common (dvisvabhava)
signs, and when the lords of those signs or Rahu and Ketu
are with the lords of kendras and konas, the native has
wealth, power and the like during their periods. If they are
with or aspected by the lords of 6, 8 or 12, there is little
benefit to the native. But during their major period the
native’s mother or his maternal relatives will die.
Notes
In chart 83 Rahu is not in a common sign. But he is
aspected by the lord of the twelfth situated in the sixth. As
soon as his major period started, his maternal grand
mother passed away. That,is, the principle given here has
to be modified. But being with the lord of the ninth, Rahu
gave him very good education.
ermepetire © et ETT reo ut
When Rahu or Ketu are in a fixed or in a movable‘sign,
and are with planets owning a Kendra or a kona, they will
give great fortune during their major periods. But if they are
in a bad house, they do not give any good results. Some
- authorities, however, say, they bring happiness. When
Rahu and Ketu are in a malefic house with benefics, they
cause death of the native.
Notes
In the chart of Mrs. Gandhi, already given, Rahu is in
the sixth from lagna and from Shani whose major period

150 Uttara Kalamrita
started iri November, 1970.
The sub-pericd of Rahu
was from June 1984. This
Rahu is with Shukra, lord
of a Kendra. Just six
Sni 4755.112 ei months alter Rahu’s subperiod started she was asPeR sassinated. Consider chart
ae j Rahu 4 ;
O pee Se a 104. Here Rahu is in a
Ravite $ Guru 17
kendra with the lord of two
kendras. Guru is also a maraka. The two are aspected by
Kuja, the lord of 6 and 11. The owner of that house is in the
sixth, exchanging signs with the sixth lord. The chart
belongs to Marie Antoinette who died tragically in the subperiod of Rahu during the major period of Guru. Instead of
Rahu, Guru killed her.
fixeretityefterdt weftrijadtindt fireeant
ware maig aafia gÀ 11 ee N
Tay a. fraia aA
Ani C R ANAA, |
When Rahu or Ketu are in §, 8 or 12 and are with or
aspected by the lord of any of these houses, they bring harm
to the native. When they are with maraka planets or with
the lords of 6, 8 or 12, they cause death to the native. But
if they are associated with the lords of kendras or konas and
are in houses 6, 8 or 12, they give some happiness, and
later bring about the native's death through disease,
wounds, misery, wounds from swords, drowning, or death
by imprisonment.
Notes
This is not correct. In chart 83 Rahu is in the eighth
and he is with the lord of the ninth. He is aspected by the
lord of the twelfth, Shani. Kuja owns also the second house.
The native completed his Rahu Dasa, had a very good
education, and was well settled in life during Rahu’s period,

` Results of the Major Periods of Planets 151
thor’s interpretation. Conda
; is in the sixth aspected by
Chandra 2 Travi ag | Ket25 | 4 and 5). He had many setbacks in life and put an end
to his life by drowning. The twelfth lord is in the second
aspected by the sixth lord from the eighth and by Shani
from the twelfth. Guru is aspected by Kuja, lord of two
maraka houses. Lord of lagna and the Sun are in the
houses of their foes. They do not promote longevity and he
died in June 1930. Kuja and Shani being very close, they
gave suicidal tendencies.
marag afaria
Re: A R
area efa af ar farara
wai gaceit war EÀ carat RETER I
If Rahu and Ketu are with powerful yogakarakas and
are in 1, 3, 4, 7 or 10 they give wealih, happiness, money,
children, governmental power, and conveyances of the best
type. But if they are with the lords of the second and
seventh houses or if they are aspected by these lords, they
bring about loss of wealth and death.
gosein g wad qafa a 20 8
fig: mhea gat p Aet gr firadsia aiana gyfa at afe |
Rahu is exalted in Vrishabha and Ketu in Vrischika.
The own house of Rahu is Kumbha, and Ketu's is Vrischika.
Rahu's mulatrikona is Mithuna, and Ketu's is Kanya.
He is alive and running the
major period of Budha.
This may be due to other
factors. We cannot therefore brush aside the au-

152 Uttara Kalamrita
Simha is an inimical sign to Rahu and Karka to Ketu.
Friendly sign for Rahu is Tula, and for Ketu it is Makara.
Their neutral signs are Mesha, Dhanush, and Mina. They
have the greatest strength when they are exalted. At other
places we have to calculate their strength by the rule of
three. In this we have also to consider the nature of the
houses and their relation to these houses.
Notes
According to Phala Dipika the benefic signs for Rahu
are Vrishabha, Karka, Mesha, Vrischika and Kumbha; and
for Ketu these are Mina, Kanya, Vrishabha and the second
half of Dhanush. Their enemies are said to be the Sun,
Moon, and Guru while Kuja is Neutral (4.5; 2.35). Rahu
functions like Shani, and Ketu like Kuja (8.34). The Guru
cannot be the foe of Ketu. Different opinions are given by
different authorities.
Parasara and Jaimini make Kumbha the own house of
Rahu, while Ketu’s own house is Vrischika (Parasara
One authority states that Rahu is exalted in Mithuna,
has own house and mulatrikona in Kumbha. His exaltation
degree is 20. Others say that the mula trikona is Kanya and
his enemies are Ravi, Chandra, and Kuja.
Jaimini takes Ketu to be a benefic in certain contexts.
This seems to be valid because Ketu is a Moksha Karaka.
Then his friends are Ravi, Chandra, Kuja, and Guru. The
others are the friends of Rahu.
The different views about their own houses, exaltation,
and mulatrikona are tabulated for a proper study and
investigation by those interested.
Quin house Exaltation Mulatrikona Friends
1. Jyotishar nava- All houses
Navanita
2. Uttara Kalamrita
{a) Rahu Kumbha -Vrishabha Mithuna
(b) Ketu Vrischika Vrischika Kanya

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 153
Own house Exaltation Mulatrikona Friends
3. Parasara
fa} Rahu Kumbha Vrishabha Karka
or Kanya
(b} Ketu Mina or Vrischika Dhanush
Vrischika
4, Phala Dipika
{a} Rahu Shani,
Budha,
Shukra
(b) Ketu Shani,
Kuja
8. Gopala Ratnakara
(a) Rahu Kanya Mithuna Simha Shani,
Shukra
ib) Ketu Mina Dhanush Kumbha Ravi,
Chandra,
Kya
6. Chamatkara
Chintamanl .
(a) Rahu Shani,
Budha,
Shukra
{b} Ketu : Ravi,
Chandra,
Kuja
In our own view based on five decades of experience,
Rahu's own house is Kumbha, exaltation is on 20° of
Mithuna, and mula trikona is Vrishabha. Ketu’s own house
is Vrischika, exaltation is on 6° of Dhanush, and mula
trikona is Vrischika.
Guru with Rahu causes a Chandala yoga. Guru with
Ketu gives Jnana and Moksha if situated in a favourable
place. We associate Ketu with the friends Sun, Moon,
Mars and Jupiter. The readers are requested to investigate
further.
mga nyah wired frecarcertt
were fayraisa Aia AeA A R
A D oer We wes arenwaaraf EA werqanrged |

154 - Uttara Kalamrita
When Rahu and Ketu are strong in a Bhava, or when
they are related to the owner of that sign by conjunction,
mutual aspect, or exchange, they give results independently. The effects of other planets do not come in their way.
They acquire the strength of the Jord of the house in which -
they are posited. The good and bad results of the bhava they
occupy are to be interpreted in the light of the strength of
the lord of that house.
Notes
The results given by Rahu and Ketu are said to be
determined by the strength of the owner of that sign. Then
there is no need to mention that they have own houses,
exaltation signs, and mulatrikona houses. We can say at
the utmost that the Bhava and its owner modify the results
which they are expected to give.
TANET THEA SAY Tees RAFArare gigei werniterciea eater: A RR
Weare afa ma tereken yi
at an fasgnag Aaga |
When the major period of a planet is running at a given
time, treat the sign occupied by that planet as lagna. Then
note the sign occupied by the lord of the antardasa. Reckon
it from the sign having the lord of the major period. Note the
strength of these in the light of their conjunction with or
aspects from other planets. lf these are not in the sixth and
the eighth houses from each other, the results will be good.
Otherwise malefic results appear, depending on their
strength. i
AAAA AAEN: FÄNN:
marna Mame T: WR a
WSSU THEI: HAT MAY: HT
Agere Taw aaefa t
The dasas and antardasas of planets owning kendras

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 155
and konas are highly beneficial or auspicious. Those
owning houses 2, 3 and 11 give average results. Those of
the planets owning houses 6, 8 and 12 are always difficult
or troublesome. These results should be given only after
examining the position and house occupied by the lords of
the dasa and antardasa.
urareghrarcasrafrert weet fandra:
weaqiade ervey Theres way on Be a
UY A BMA AAPA TTL
qamagan: WATT aT |
When the lord of the antardasa is in the sixth, eighth
or twelfth house from the lord of the major period, he
becomes the enemy of the mahadasa lord. When the anta- |
rdasa lord is in houses 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 or 10 from the mahadasa
lord, he gives auspicious and prosperous results. The
antardasa lord will be equally beneficial when he is with the
lord of the major period or in the seventh from him.
tees yrs: we qa: wert
fet agape aem teary, 8 2 N
Gri we gfi war qieg arg aamerd afaa va gi gat I
When the lord of the major period is a malefic and the
antardasa lord is a benefic the results will be bad, if they are
not conjoined. If they are associated with one another, there
are mixed results. The antardasa lord may be a yoga karaka; but if he is not conjoined with the lord of the mahadasa, the results are unfavourable and sorrowful, If the
lord of the mahadasa is capable of giving both yoga and
death, he will first give results of the yoga in his own
antardasa,
MERAN YRA HT We RARRSP Brewers aA N
amna yar: YET an pa at fa
mru adds fe am at Perera 3

156 l i Uttara Kalarnrita
When the whole major period of the yogakaraka mentioned above is entirely auspicious, and if the sub-period of
the malefics also are good, the sub-period that can cause
death gets postponed by the yoga karaka planet. A Dasanatha like this does not give mixed results. If he gives mixed
results, his major period is fruitless. This is the opinion of
the ancients.
Notes
The dasa natha (lord of the major period) is not expected to give good results in his own sub-periods. If he
does, the remaining sub-periods will prove fruitless. But if
the last sub-period of the previous planet gives good results, he will improve the position in his own sub-period.
: Possibly this is the meaning of the author.
Sarat A eq: qopt at Saat ramwart yarn aga nAg ow wou
tren arafa agerit either
. UAH PM eaaRTaM aA: |
Guru and Shukra in their mutual major and subperiods will make the native a king or a minister. They give
wealth, happiness with wife and children. But they must be
in benefic houses, strong, and are with or aspected by
benefics. The native will perform sacrifices and other rites,
has the birth of children and performs marriage and other
similar auspicious things.
. When Guru and Shukra are in the sixth and eighth
from each other, or in the second and twelfth from each
other; or when they are with or aspected by the lords of
these houses (2 and 12, 6 and 8 from them); or when they
own these houses and are also with or aspected by malefics,

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 157
and when they are weak in sthana bala (positional strength)
then during their major and sub-periods they will
bring about separation from wife (or husband) and
children, hatred of the strong Brahmanas, trouble
through the liaison with women, fear from the ruler, and
fear of epilepsy.
qari af ape carat mir feet
O TÈ torah acter aA eft Afad ora aR a
q aa aad irat ona:
aie wet n erada: 1
Now the author makes some observations on Shukra's
sub-period in Shani's major period, and on Shani's subperiod in Shukra‘s major period.
If Shukra and Shani are in their exaltation, own sign,
or Vargottama, and if they are strong and powerful to give
tise to yoga, then in their mutual periods and sub periods
they will make even a king or a kubera (lord of wealth) a
beggar seekirig alms. He becomes powerless. If one of these
is strong and the other weak, the yoga comes from the
strong planet.
Notes
Chart 106 is that of Mr. N. Sanjeeva Reddi, a former
president of our country. Shani is Vargottama and is
with Shukra in navamsa. The two are in two and twelve
from each other. One is a yoga karaka. But when Shani’s
antardasa in Shukra
me 3.37 [Ravi 5.29 started, he had to undergo
Pahu 7.45 Budha 20 34) Shani'1338 heart-surgery. Shukra
made him the President of
408 the union of India. But in
Shani’s sub-period (placed
in the sixth from lagna and
in the second from
Shukra), he had a serious
physical ailment.
A 19.10 Chandra | Ketu

158 Uttara Kalamrita
Pe 107 a
Ravi 23.17
Budha ias 1900.25
Kuja 1241
e
Rahu 24.50 passed away in March
When Shani and Shukra are well placed from each
other and from the lagna their mutual periods are unfavourable. In the examples given above, they are not well
placed mutually and yet they gave malefic results. This is
contrary to the author's statement. It is a warning that we
should not blindly accept what is given in the texts. We
have to reckon with other factors. In chart 93 Shukra is in
„an upachaya; and it is not he who kiled the native but
Shani.
In chart 108 Shani and Shukra are in mutual kendras.
Shani is debilitated, but is with Guru. Shukra and Kuja are
yoga karakas. Kuja aspects TE l
Shukra, Shani aspects 12.52 Ketu 13.27
both. What happened? Guri wel |
From 1906 he had ihe major period of Shani and it
nourished him. Budha in
Shani's house made him
President Roosevelt. Ketu
in Shukra's house, functioned like Shukra and became a maraka. In their
mutual periods Shani and Shukra .only impaired his
health. l
The principle given by the author needs to be read
along with the modification given in the next verse. In
essence the rule is valid, not in details. This is because it
In chart 107 Shani is
well placed in lagna and
Shukra is in Shani's house.
They are in sextile. The sec- -
ond and sixth and the
ninth houses gave him a
stroke from which he did
not recover. As soon as
Shani dasa started he

. Results of the Major Periods of Planets 159
gets modified by the ownership and placement of the two
and the aspects on them.
Å maaa aeg mna aft aq
apragradt wet ypratt dA A a gon
wre gaara at eA
If Shukra and Shani are both weak and are placed in
the sixth, eighth or twelfth houses from each other, or if
they own such houses, or if they are with the lords of these
houses, they become in their mutual periods beneficial and
they give happiness and enjoyment. lf one owns a bencfic
house and the other a malefic one, even then they give
auspicious results. If both are malefics, even then they are
highly favourable.
Ue
Notes
This verse gives the exceptions proved by the
examples given under the previous verse. Consider
chart 109. Here both Shani and Shukra are benefics.
Shani 7.37 Shani is debilitated and
O ES aspects Shukra who is in
his own house. Shukra is
not combust. He inherited |
a huge property, a Press
having a daily, a weekly.
and a monthly from his father-in-law in the major
period of Shukra. One
owns the eighth house and |
Ravi 11.48
Budha 19.7 [Chandra pee
aed joo Lagna (9
the other is aspected by the lord of the sixth. The principle
is sound.

160 f é - Uttara Kalamrita
wae aremania ar
Seat Broreqearenet aana a 3
wet q go: wer wri a emah
Aram Ge i a fad at acai eft
When Ravi and Shani arc in their own signs or in their
exaltation signs, or in their navamsa signs, and if they are
in the konas and kendras or if they own such konas and
kendras, they confer royal favours, wealth and happiness in
the Sun's sub period of Saturn's major period. In Shani's
sub period during the Sun's major period the native has
happiness, wealth and success. But if the two are malcfics,
they cause losses to the native.
Arafa argett serge gend Afd
Gath or ydagi mgA a N
amafamiA quart waaay
sameaa sees BHATT |
In the same manner if Kuja and Guru are strong and
are posited in favourable houses and if they are with or
aspccted by benefics, they cause Raja yoga. They give
pleasure, all kinds of luxurics, happiness, surviving good
sons, marriages and other auspicious functions. Otherwise
they will give the very opposite results.
Notes
Consider chart 110. Here Kuja is a yoga karka, posited
ina neutral's house, though it isa kendra. Guru is in Kuja’s
house with two bencfics.
Guru owns 6 and 9 and is
if
13.11 Ketu
9.18 Shani 410
Rahu
have mutual aspects. But
the results arc contrary to
what the author stated. By
the end of Guru Dasa in
October 1939 he lost all his
property. The conjunction
or opposition of Guru and
ina kendra. Guru and Kuja
Kuja R

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 161
Kuja has always shown in our experience that one of these
two is a malcfic and the other a benefic. At the very fag end
of his period Guru gave him a daughter who remained
unwed. The author's views cannot be accepted. As
Shudraka said in his famous play Mrichchha-Katika, Kuja
appears to be the enemy of Guru. The exaltation of Guru is
Kuja’s debilitation sign, while Guru's debilitation sign is his
house of exaltation. Further research is needed on this
point.
When Budha and Guru are strong in the same manner, they will give in their mutual periods and sub-periods
good acts, learning, skill in trading and the like, wife (or
husband), sons, and happiness. Guru and Shukra, Guru
and Chandra, Chandra and Shukra, Guru and Sun, Sun
and Kuja, Sun and Budha—each one of these pairs will give
the resuits in their periods and sub-periods similar to those
ascribed to Guru and Budha.
Note the exact position of the Sun at the time of birth.
In any year find when the Sun returns to the same degree,
minute and second. That is the solar-return day of the year
for the native. Calculate the lagna and the positions of
ihe planets and houses for that time of the year. Calculate
the Sapta Vargas (Rasi, Hora, Drekkana, Saptamsa, navamsa, dvadasamsa, and trimsamsa) strength of each
planet. The results show what will happen to the native
during that solar year. Count from the natal star (Janma
nakshatra) the constellation in which the Moon is located
on that day. Divide this by nine. The remainder is to be

162 | | Uttara Kalamrita
counted from the Sun in the order given in the next verse.
This gives the first dasa for the solar year.
Tay a ae at areas:
Afaa: meme alia qed w ak oe
wae aang gastear
sare fafaga a mae ares YW SA, |
Note the exact position of the Moon at the time of the
Sun's return to the position at the time of birth. Find how
many morc ghatikas and Vighatikas are yet to elapse in that
constellation. This is to be multiplicd by the number of days
given to the planet and divided by the total duration of the
constellation. This gives the balance of the first dasa in
aays, Ghatikas, and Vighatikas. Then follow the other
dasas in the sequence given below. These days and‘ thcir
order arc given thus—Sun 110, Moon 60, Kuja 32, Budha
40, Guru 48, Shukra 56, Shani 4, Rahu 5, and Lagna 10.
The subsequent dasas follow this sequence only. The
benefic or malefic results of any dasa are to be interpreted
with reference to the strength of the planet concerned, the
strength of the lagna for the year, the strength of the Bhava
having the planet, and the various aspects on the planets
and houses.
Notes
The author has propounded a simpler method than
that of the Tajaka authoritics like Nilakantha. The Tajaka
system requires the calculation of the strength of five
Vargas, and of the twelve vargas. Then of the planets and
lagna. that which has the lowest position rules the first
dasa in that order. Here the method is simplified.
We illustrate with reference to a chart given earlier.
Here we take only the nirayana (sidcreal) posilion of the

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 163
Chandra
Sun at the time of birth.
The Sun was in Makara on
8°.10'.3". He returned to
that position on January
chart for that time is chart
Ravi B10 Ketu 111. The Moon is in
Pushyami. Counting from
maas] po the natal star Sravana, it is
Bhant A 14.19
the fourteenth. Dividing it
by nine we get the remainder five. In the serial order the fifth is Guru who is given 48
days. Out of 800 minutes for each star, the Moon has to
traverse 488 minutes because Pushyami ends at 16°.40'.
The balance of Guru's period at the beginning of the year
is 29 days. In the Sapta varga strength the planets and
lagna are like thus:
Lagna 2.375, Rahu 1.875, Kuja 2.25, Budha 1.92,
Chandra 1.847, Sun 1.438, Shukra 1.28, Guru .938 and
Shani .594.
Guru and Shani are the weakest ones. The periods of
Guru, Shukra and Shani were over on April 21. Rahu and
Lagna periods were completed by May 6. Chandra in the
ninth sign, but in the eighth bhava, had his period from
August 24 to October 23. This was a period of ill health in
the family. Shani as lord of 3 and 4 is with Shukra, lord of
7 and 12. Shukra’s period ended on April 17 and he created
quarrels and misunderstandings with his brothers. Kuja in
the fifth Bhava has to give benefic results (from October 23
to November 24) and he did not.
This method is simpler than the Tajaka one. Dr.
Raman and Mr. Lahiri have given tables for the annual solar
return. These tables are not to be accepted blindly. They
have to be verified by calculating the exact time when the
Sun returns to the natal position. The day of return coincides with the date of the Christian calender. Lahiri’s tables
give the solar return for 1989 at H 3.38.9 A.M. Actual
calculation gives H 3.49.44 A.M.

164 Uttara Kalamrita
Dr. B.V. Raman has given a table on page 247 of his
Hindu Predictive Astrology (Edn. 1986) and stated that he
corrected it in his book Varshaphal. The 1982 edition of the
second book gives for the completion of 69 years the time
of solar return as 3.38.9 A.M. on January 22, 1989. This is
not correct as per the calculations made by us.
Mr. V.S. Sastri in his edition of Uttara Kalamrita
(1951), page 200 gives a table. The native whose example
we have taken was born at gh. 10.57. This table gives the
solar return as H. 2.51.19 A.M. (1.S.T.). There is an error of
nearly 58 minutes. This is just to show that the tables given
are not to be trusted. One should calculate for a given time.
There is also a problem. Should we calculate the lagna
and other bhavas, for the latitude of the place of birth or for
the place where a person happens to be on that day. Mr.
Bradley prefers the latter. We hold to the place of birth. But
it is open for an extensive research.
Annual solar return is also known as Chalit Kundali,
or Varshaphala, or as the Hindu Progressed horoscope. All
these, literally understood, are misleading terms.
The error in calculations based on the tables given is
due to an error in the duration of the solar year. Modern
astronomers give the duration of the sidereal (nirayana)
year as 365.256363 days, and of the tropical (sayana) year
as 365.242 193 days. The duration of the solar year as per
the Surya Siddhanta is greater by 3.245 minutes. This has
„given rise to the errors in the tables for the annual solar
return.
The duration of the dasas given by the author is better
‘and simpler than the one given by the Tajaka writers. Even
` though some argue that the Tajaka system originated in
India, the names of the yogas given therein and other
factors prevalent in that system compel us to the belief that
the Tajaka was an Arabic system, probably outlined by
Indian authorities known as Yavanesvara (actually
Sphujidhvaja) and others. lt is partly based also on the
teachings of Ptolemy and Monetho (Manittha). The present

Results of the Major Periods of Planets — ` 165
author's view is more rational and it is borne out by the
facts of experience.
warqadamitiasa aaea ERAqiradi agaaa: A 29 0
unde fy are a an qarana
aAa epei fai wer aa, |
While interpreting the solar return chart we have also
to pay attention to the transits of the planets during that
year. The counting is from the sign occupied by the Moon
at the timė of birth. By blending the solar return chart with
the transits (Gochara) one should make the predictions.
Now we explain in a very easy manner the results of the
dasas during the year.
Notes
Gochara or transits are generally reckoned from lagna
tilt one is 33 years old. For the next 33 years the count is
from the Moon sign at birth. The last one-third is from the
occupied by the Sun at birth. Some argue that the
r®cxOfiing is from the radical Moon sign or lagna, whichever
is stronger.
It is not enough to consider Gochara effects from the
rad oon-sign. a has a direct reference to Ashtakavarga, without reductions. The bindus in the original
Ashtakavarga can and do modify the results of Gochara
positions.
If the Sun is strong, during his period there will be the
acquisition of money, ornaments and clothes. If he is not
strong, sins and foes increase, money is lost, and many
troubles or sufferings appear.

166 Uttara Kalamrite
If the Moon is strong, during his period one has royal
favour, an ever increasing wealth, and honour. But if the
Moon is weak there is an increase of enemies. The native
suffers from diseases, is unhappy by wandering or chang-
- ing the place, and has quarrels with his own relatives.
When Kuja is strong one is favoured by the king, has
success and is happy during his period. If he is weak, one
has the fear of the king, has quarrels with his own sons and
enmity with his wife (or her husband) and there is loss of
wealth.
When Budha is strong, the native is valorous,
has benefic results, is extremely happy. and has
many gains. But if Budha is weak, there are misunderstandings or enmity with brothers and the like. He will
follow evil or sinful ways and prove treacherous to the
3rahmanas.
wha qhe tense: eagai
erat wert afa cararag: wat & wo n
Ur Pee ema: emae
SF emgar fq eithrarcarar: |
If Guru is strong, during his period one has chariots
(cars), horses, wealth, and increase of wealth. If he is weak,
one wanders from place to place, has loss of money, takes
to evil ways and evil associations.
If Shukra is strong, during his period there is amassing of wealth along with fame, white or refined clothes and
happiness from his wife or woman. If he is weak, he faces
loss of wealth, fear from foes, bad name, and diseases
through contact with women.

Results of the Major Periods of Planets 167
wet quien gapen ÈSa ferret: mip sR w wr a
TA gagatan
mà ate a agga, 1
During the period of a strong Shani one has a house
and other forms of happiness. He will be a ruler over the
tribes called Bhillas. If he is weak, the person faces loss of
wealth, emaciation of the body (anaemia, neuritis or wasting fever), diseases and a bad name.
During the period of a strong Rahu the native performs
virtuous and good acts, has gains, does good things and
finds a rise in his profession. If he is a malefic, there are
inauspicious results, death of the father, and has association with the base ones and with his foes.
During the period of the Lagna, the results are good,
average, and bad according to the nature of the drekkana
of the lagna, association of the lord of lagna, and the yoga
formed by the lord of lagna.
Thus we have given the annual results in a brief hut
elegant way, of the various planets and lagna. Taking into
consideration the strength or weakness of the planets
based on their association with the benefics, the wise one
should predict the results.

Chapter VII
uya:
Horary Astrology
Wa waaa: weirs wd amak
wat Bea wares ar ATNA, |
Wet magga ys A waqiatsuar ger
Wwe wefan yerciendiva yore T et
In the manner described earlier predictions should be
made after considering the position of the planets and the
- lagna at the time of birth. Where a horoscope is not available, the effects should be predicted on the basis of the
rising lagna and the position of the planets at the time of
query. There will be no difference between the effects based
on the birth chart and those based on the chart at the time
of query.
If the day is clouded, the ghatikas from sunrise to the
time of the query cannot easily be calculated. Then the
different Rasis and Navamsas have to be fixed by further
questions. These are given in the next three verses.
The person seeking an answer to his problem should
approach the astrologer with fruits and money (ltterally,
gold in hand). After approaching the astrologer, he should.

Horary Astrology 169
when asked, choose a number within 108. This number
provides the basis for the predictions for the past, present
and future. After giving the number, the querist should take
refuge at the feet of the Guru.
qiigan wh: ufteresssd narei
AISA SANT STASI: BHATT |
AHA: WE: WT Ase
FARA ATTA aT ae Wye
The number given by the querist is to be divided by
nine. The quotient gives the number of signs that have
elapsed from Mesha onwards. The remainder gives the
number of the navamsas that were over in the next sign.
The bhavas and the planets should be fixed as per the time
of lagna and its navamsa. The good and bad effects should
be predicted on the lines of the principles given earlier. But
these results are determined by the strongest among the
Karakas, Bhavas, and the lords of the Bhavas.
aiaga Bem yeahs
waad ftufa: que: eer i
Taq aAA esata ad gAwaaier maeaea A: A
The number of the flowers and coins given by the
querist to the astrologer have to be noted. These should be
multiplied by the number chosen by the querist. Then
divide the product by twelve. The remainder is to be
counted from Mesha. The sign thus arrived at is the one in
which Guru was situated at the birth time of the querist.
From this position and by looking at the querist, the astrologer can give the approximate age in years of the person.
The degrees covered by Guru in the sign of the time of the
question will give the number of months and days that have
elapsed in the age of the querist.
The total period which is got in this manner should be
deducted from the longitude of the Sun. This gives the year,

170 Uttara Kalamrite
month, and day of the birth.
Brat meiga staf acres arerfed
wa war varsqnraferaisht Rta MART, |
ye Aaea wed ei Àaa mamua an ARR g a y a
The months, the week days, the Ghatikas and the like
that have elapsed on that day are all solar ones. From this
we can get the position of the month, the lunar year, the
tithi and so on. Then the horoscope can be cast easily.
In this way we have briefly described the method of
casting a lost or unknown horoscope. This method is described for the delight of the Astikas--believers in the authority of the Vedas.
Notes
Nashta-jataka has been elaborately explained by Varahamihira, Kalyana Varma and others. How far the chart
thus constructed can give accurate results is a debatable
point. One having his date of birth and approximate or
correct time of birth should go to the astrologer, and try to
get his chart. Then he should compare it with the original.
An extensive study in this way can prove the validity or
otherwise of the rules given.
arenes TIERE EEN
à gie gega aÀ wre
Re magi gà g uma: wramifeen gÙ
uyi whet waaa: eaaa wt wg N
Take the number given by the querist. Multiply it by
two and divide it by three. If one is the remainder, the
question is about a living being; if it is two, it refers to some
‘dhatu (mineral), and if it is zero, it is related to a plant
(mula). If the lagna rising at the time of the question is
Mesha, the problem refers to the creatures having two feet;
if Vrishabha, to quadrupeds (four feet); if Mithuna, to preg-

Horary Astrology , 171
nancy; if Karkataka, to a legal or other dispute; if Simha, to
the government.
waai g min e miah giya%
TA geai gaia ert ae afertentt |
PA andy fami aa wre faa nàaa dedgeraqersracrararauzrenfior: ECE
If the rising lagna then is Kanya, the problem refers to
a woman who is not his wife; if Tula, to trade; if Vrischika,
to fear from the wicked; if Dhanush, to the wealth lost; if
Makara, to some sinful act; if Kumbha, to some religious
rites; and if Mina, to some problem about position or house.
The great sages have thus directed us to predict the
basis of the Rasi or Navamsa, which is stronger at the time
of the question.
wash faam wet aent
it aa AA opaa: t
whe finza grà denir ere
Wea maa fered aaisa a e n
If the Sun occupies his own Rasi or navamsa, whichever is stronger at the time of the question, the matter refers
to the sovereign and the state (Rajya). If the Moon is
similarly placed, it refers to tanks and the like. If Kuja is
thus posited, it relates to fire and fear from the king or foes.
If Budha is thus situated, it refers to trade, agriculture and
the like. When Guru is thus located, the problems refer lo
friends and the ruler. If Shukra is thus situated, there ts
greater happiness. Shani in a similar position refers to
human beings and fixed money.
ua ena wr faii aha g spa wei
Ainiai wet yraa eA aa dia: |

172 i Uttara Kalamrita
When a planet is exalted, the effect is doubled, and
when debilitated the effect is not there. When it is in a
friend's house, the results are halved, and in a ncutral's
house the effects are very less. When two planets are
exalted or in their own houses, the wise astrologer should
base his prediction on the stronger one and on the concerned significator and the Bhavas occupied by them.
aaa Gat agama aea A,
wre waite afa gÀ maA |
werd en wearorga A A gÀ
waite arg AA Arra a to N
When a planet is exalted at the time of the question,
the problem will be solved in a few ghatikas; if it is in his
own house, the matter takes a few days; if in a friend's
house, in a few months. Otherwise, it will be prolonged for
years. If the planet is in any other place and is with or
aspected by a malefic, one should predict failure. When
Shani is exalted in Lagna, or when the lords of the Lagna
and Bhava related to the query and with or aspected by
strong benefics, the problem will be favourably accomplished in a short time.
we giia agaaa e prsi |
afty foad fafeq a Akh ra:
ym: BAA: WHIT Aaa, Ara week
The Zodiac is a circle having 360 degrees. lt has twelve
spokes, each at a distance of thirty degrees. The 108 Navamsas are fixed in that circle. The four groups of movable
and fixcd signs starting from Mesha stand for the east and
other principal directions of the compass. The four common
signs starting from Mithuna respectively represent the
south-east, south-west, north-west, and north-east. The
exact longitudes of the planets at that time have to be
entered in their Rasis and Navamsas.

Horary Astrology 173
Notes
Mesha and Vrishabha represent the east, Karka and
Simha the South, Tula and Vrischika the west, Makara and
Kumbha the north. In like manner we may take lagna and
the second house for the east, the fourth and the fifth for
the south and so on.
A & gaenen eats aftr, TÈ
fray gusta wang afa ates AMETE, |
aAa fedas: VIA YT Asya
WRAY HATA AST WL N
A person approaches the astrologer with flowers, fruits
and the like in his hands, and stands at a place putting his
query. From the position of the astrologer determine the
Rasi indicated by the position of the querist, as per the rasis
given in the previous verse. This is called the Arudha at the
time of question. In all such queries one should predict the
benefic or malefic effects from the planets owning the
arudha lagna; and also from the house related to the nature
of the question. The astrologer should also note the planets
with or aspecting them.
Notes
This problem of the arudha is elaborately treated in
Prasna Marga. Dr. B.V. Ramanand the late Mr. J.N. Bhasin
have translated the text. It is a special product of Kerala
astrology. From this arudha there are badhaka (obstructing
or destroying) signs. The badhaka houses are the eleventh
from movable signs, the ninth of the fixed signs, and the
seventh of the dual signs. There are also a few variations
given in Prasna Marga.
aga amemfanya ulcer: qatearenieta
neve aaia epza: wetter waz |
ysg aeea wud aaa dart
HA: Ban pia agud maiia wu eyo

174 l i Uttara Kalamrita
Note the Ghatikas that have elapsed from sunrise to
the time of the question. Multiply them by nine and divide
the product by twenty. The quotient in Ghatika and
Vighatikas gives the position of the Moon. This is uscful for
answering the question. The position of the Moon at the |
time of query given by the Panchanga and by Graha Sphuta
(Ephemeris) are known respectively as subtle and gross. Fix
their corresponding navamsas.
If the gross Moon is aspected by the subtle Moon,
Budha and Guru, the question refers to an animal. If it has
the aspect of Kuja, Shani and Rahu, it is about a dhatu
(mineral). If the aspect is from Ravi and Shukra, it refers to
plants or vegetables (mula).
If the gross Moon is aspected by Guru, Shukra and
Rahu, the question refers to something of a mixed nature.
When the gross Moon is in Mithuna, Kanya, and Tula
navamsas, the question refers to a biped. If it is in a
navamsa of Karkataka, Vrischika, or Mina, it refers to many
legged creatures (like the centipede, octopus). If it is ina
navamsa of Dhanush or Kumbha, it is about a creature
without legs (serpent). If the navamsa is owned by Mesha,
Vrishabha, Simha or Makara, it refers to a quadruped. The
Bala (Childhood), yauvana (youth), and Vriddha (old) avasthas (conditions or stages) of a planet are to be inferred from
the first, second, and third drekkanas respectively of the
Rasi in which it is at the time of question. This is the view
of the earlier Munis (sages).

Horary Astrology 175
The movable, fixed and common or dual signs are
respectively counted from Mesha onwards. The movable
signs are also called garbha. The fixed ones are called dvara
(door-way). The dual signs are known as bahya (external).
The garbha and dvara signs indicate an object kept in the
right hand. The bahya signs show the same in the left hand.
The things concealed in the hands are to be known in this
manner.
PATH AM LY TAO ARARA a vo N
Any thing hidden in the tight fist has to be guessed in
this way. The short or long side of the object is determined
by the length or duration of the concerned sign. The shape,
colour and the like are known from the navamsa. The
benefic or malefic nature of the object is known from the
nature of the benefic or malefic planet occupying the sign.
Whether the place of the object is on the land, in the sky,
in water, or in the hills, and whether it is cruel, wild, tame
or domestic is to be determined in the same manner.
The original number given by the querist is to be
divided by five. The remainder 1, 2, 3, 4 or 5 will indicate
whether the problem referred to will be solved respectively
within the ghatikas, the tithi, the week, the month or the

176 Uttara Kalamrita
year.
Add the quotient to the original number chosen by the
querist. Divide this respectively by 60, 30, 7, 12 and 60 in
five ways. The remainders show respectively the ghatikas,
tithis, days, months, and years when the desired object will
be accomplished. This method has to be followed in all
kinds of queries.
‘Note whether the lords of the lagna and the bhava
indicating the object of the question are benefic, whether
they are in benefic houses, and whether they mutually
aspect each other described earlier (Chapter 2, verses 18 to
20). The orb of the aspect is not beyond twelve degrees.
Then the astrologer can predict the fulfilment of the object
on the basis of the strength, benefic nature and the like
referred to above, of the two planets. Proper attention
should be paid to the nature of the aspect as explained in
Chapter 4 and verse 33. The strength of the significator
should also be considered. Then alone one should give the
prediction.
lf there is any planet between the two lords referred to
above, and if it has an applying aspect within twelve degrees with either of the two, one may predict on the basis
of that planet the nature, functions, and the like ascribed
to the planet in the fifth Chapter. The time when the matter
will be accomplished is to be made on the basis of Sloka 18
of this Chapter.
Notes
The author has briefly explained how one can determine the results of the question asked. Here he refers to the
applying aspect. A planet at three degrees of a sign aspecting another on eleven degrees has an applying aspect.
If the aspecting planet is on twenty degrees it has a sepa-

Horary Astrology 177
Tating aspect.
The lord of the lagna and the lord of the action must
have an applying aspect. This is from the houses 1, 3, 4, 5,
7 and 10 from their positions. Then there is the successful
result. If there is a separating aspect, the good results may
not follow. The orb of the aspect is twelve degrees. If the
Tange is zero, the result has taken place at the time of
question. If it is within twelve degrees, the result comes
quickly. If it is beyond twelve degrees, the result may take
a long time.
If there is a planet between the two and has an applying aspect, the result comes easily, but through a middleman. The nature of this planet indicates the caste, colour,
and age of the person who helps.
Kuja at 3°.25’ of Tula aspects the Sun in Nialeare on
8°.10'. The Chandra on 19°.44' is conjunct the Sun. The
aspect of Mars on the Moon comes via the Sun. Such
aspects also are to be taken into consideration.
For horary astrology one has to go into greatcr details.
These can be had from works like the Prasna Tantra and
Prasna Marga, All these have to be studied carefully before
answering queries. The present author has indicated only
a few guidelines.

Chapter VIII
Miscellaneous Problems in
Prediction
Garbhadhana or impregnation would be auspicious if
it takes place when the Moon is in Rohini (40°.0' to 53°,20'
from the beginning of Mesha), Mrigasira (53°.20' to 66°.40'),
Purva Phalguni (133°.20' to 146°.40'), Purvashadha
(66°.40' to 80°.0'), Punarvasu (80°0' to 93°.20'), Pushyami
(93°.20' to 106°.40'), Hasta, Chitra, Svati, Visakha and
Anuradha (160° to 226°.40'), Sravana, Dhanishtha and
Satabhisha (280° to 320°) Uttara Phalguni (146°.40' to
160°), Uttarashadha (253°.20' to 266°.40') and Uttarabhadra (333°.20' to 346°.40'). The lunar days should be
2,5, 7, 10, 12 and 13. The week days are those ruled by
Chandra, Budha, Guru and Shukra. The lagna should be
auspicious and there should be no planet in it.
AA: wernt Pree sfea: asin arena
mataafi gafa amema mera fir
wert Aa Pree saa yia aa R N ao N
The first sexual union of the man and the woman, after
her menstruation is called Nisheka. The same union after
the succeeding menstruations is called Garbhadhana,

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction r 179
impregnation. The nisheka is highly auspicious if the Moon
is in Rohini, Uttaraphalguni, Hasta, Svati, Anuradha,
Mula, Uttarashadha, Sravana, Satabhisha, Uttarabhadra
and Revati constellations. The wise ones stated that the
lagna must be auspicious and that it should not be occupied by any planet. ;
a m ga: paaa E T
ge A afa vier a fak at afya, |
Tà me famanqa wurifefnsfrat
yAn fiep apanar A a g A
A girl may be in her sixteenth year with fully developed
breasts and body. But if she did not have her first menses,
she should be seated on a decent and beautiful place with
great love and affection. It should be an auspicious day. She
should have white clothes and should be well decorated
with ornaments. Her genital is to be smeared with red
saffron powder mixed with rose water and other perfumes.
qa guaira azad ster aged fer
erat at arate: wre ee qa gi |
wa daraga genfa girs
wrnfactatgangrantéat a far ux a
We have then to treat her as if she was really having
menstruation. She should be given a bath on the fourth
day. The husband should come to her in an auspicious
lagna. The fifth house should have no planet. If this procedure is followed, the girl will have her first menses soon.
She will become a happy mate for her husband and beget
children. She becomes fit for sex life, and will have the right
to participate with her husband in all the religious rites
addressed to the Gods and the Manes.
are aRt naai wit: warerd acaci
dierent errererreanrrantte: wat fore: 1
Se arena a aag aardwafkfragqeey faye aed are wa y N

180 Uttara Kalamrita
There are some special predictions to be made for a
child born when the Moon is in Aslesha or Magha. Each
constellation has four quarters (Padas, charanas). For the
four quarters of Aslesha the results are respectively (i
destruction of wealth, (ii) loss of brother, (iii) death of the
mother, and (iv) death of the father. Ifone is born at the very
end of Aslesha, the child may die. To prevent this danger
one should propitiate Rudra, Kala, Antaka and Mrityu.
If the birth is when the Moon is in Magha, the results
are opposite to those given for Aslesha.
Notes
This is too sweeping a statement. There are many born
in Aslesha, and yet the adverse results did not appear.
We give the method accepted by the authorities on
Dharma Shastra. Divide the total duration of Aslesha into
5, 7, 2, 3, 4, 8, 11, 6, 9 and 5 ghatikas, when its total
duration is sixty ghatikas. Each ghatika equals 24 minutes.
When its duration is more or less than 60 ghatikas, calculate accordingly. These ten parts in the sequence give
kingdom, loss of father, loss of mother, sex enjoyment,
devotion to father, strength, cruelty, renunciation, enjoyment and wealth. The first quarter of Aslesha is good. The
second quarter gives loss of wealth. The third is bad for the
mother, and the fourth for the father. The last quarter is bad
for the father-in law. The first quarter of Magha is bad for
the new-born,
agang: wa yorfyaatreaet
qy fry mfama merana |
wa ara aae m ESN; WR
Wt CSIC EIECILERIDIER iIk: ELGE A 0 & 0
The effects are the same if one is born when the Moon
is in Jyeshtha, Mula, Revati and Asvini. The last degrees of
Aslesha, Jyeshtha and Revali, and the first degrees of
Magha, Mula and Asvini are called gandanta (critical)
nakshatras. They provide vulnerable points and they can
bring about the death of the child. If the child happens to

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 181
survive it will be a great emperor or ruler and have unequalled valour.
Notes
Revati and Asvini, Aslesha and Magha, Jyeshtha and
Mula are gandanta nakshatras. They appear at the critical
junctures of two signs each.
The duration of Jyeshtha is to be divided into ten equal
` parts. These parts denote respectively deaths of the maternal grandmother, the maternal grandfather, the maternal
uncle, mother, itself, collaterals (gotra-ja), the families of
both parents, elder brother or sister, father in law, and
everything.
A boy born in Jyeshtha destroys his elder brother and
a girl her husband's elder brother, The last quarter destroys
the child and its father. These readings have to be modified
and carefully considered. They are intended to compel the
parents to perform Shanti.
The first quarter of Mula is dangerous to the father, the
second to the mother, the third to the wealth, and the
fourth to the family. Some wise men have ascribed no defect
to the fourth quarter.
The ghatikas before and after Mula started is called
Abhukta Mula. This is highly dangerous.
The first quarter of Asvini and the last quarter of Revati
are dangerous.
Asvini, Magha and Mula are the starting points of
three signs. Aslesha, Jyeshtha and Revati are closing
points of three signs. Thus these six stars represent
nakshatrantarala and also Rasi antarala. Hence the birth in
these constellations requires the performance of major
Shantis.

182 Uttara Kalamrita
A girl having first menses in these gandanta stars soon
becomes a widow and she has no children, wealth, happiness and good clothes. She becomes sinful and is a destroyer of the father's family. To avert these results and to
make her happy, prosperous and the mother of children,
one should perform Japa, Homa and sacrifice to the planets
(Graha makha) and worship Gods and Brahmanas.
arar agane wet THAT
ee arent A yet aT AAT
aguen ate foguiqhtaret gars wc a
If a girl's birth or her first menses takes/ place in the
prohibited time (tyajyakala) of four Ghatikas, the results \
will be the death of the father, death of the mother, loss of `
money, or one’s own destruction. These four refer to the
first, second, third and fourth Ghatikas respectively of the
tyajyakala. To avert these dangers the worship of Rudra, |
Yama, Agni and Mrityu respectively is necessary. lf the |
birth or first menses takes place during a solar or a lunar |
eclipse, the death of the father or of the mother respectively
happens. l
Abbe
Notes
Tyajyakala is the time to befrejectea for any good
activity. Its duration is the fifteentH part of the total duration of the nakshatra. The moment when it begins differs
from star to star. Assuming that the nakshatra extends to
sixty ghatikas we give below the ghatikas in that nakshatra
when the tyajyakala begins. These are counted from Asvini
wet uamafsarg fad frodi miya
TRA FEE TITA RRT
mAmueiaiaepeni ag:yi Aeri
ward ENT WS AAAA R TR: w R N

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 183
A precious and divinely efficacious medicine should be
prepared or taken when the Moon is in the amrita ghatikas
of a star. Then it acts like the nectar of the Gods and cures
the ailment of the native. It removes completely all ailments
arising from the three humours. It brings back perfect
health, makes the organs firm and strong, and assures a
long life. The founder of the medical science was the sage
Dhanvantari, born of the milky ocean. He has explained in
many ways the medical treatments to be followed for removing the various diseases.
Notes
There are Mrityu Bhagas and Amrita Bhagas in each
sign for the Moon. The degrees of mrityu in the various
signs from Mesha onwards are 26, 12, 13, 25, 24, 11, 26,
The auspicious degrees likewise are 21, 14, 18, 8, 19,
The three humours mentioned in Ayurveda are Vata
(wind), Pitta (bile) and Kapha (Phlegm).
The following table gives the beginning of the
vishaghatikas, Amrita Ghatikas and Mrityu Bhagas of the
several nakshatras. The first two have a duration of four
Ghatikas.
arak Stakof shevkd.
Nakshatra Vish Amrita Mrityu
Ghatika Ghatika Bhaga
o gdiAsvini Zaja : l 50 [Pago 42 9°20 gi? 46
Krittika 306° 54 WY" 12 2°40
Punarvasu 30 Gt 54(2° Lo 2° 13'2e"
Aslesha 32 Fob = 5g 12°2e 24 2o

Uttara Kalamrita
« Nakshatra Visha Amrita
r Ghatika Ghatika
'P Phalguni 2047260" 444b
U Phalguni . 184° 42920
Chitra 204° 2640" = ga OF EG
Svati 14 3? œ 38 8 le
Visakha 14306 388 le
Anuradha 102° Ib'e" 28 %62
Jyeshtha 143° ob 38 p° 26
P Ashadha 2480 48 Wah
Dhanishtha 102° 20" 34799
Satabhisha 184° 42 9°20
U Bhadra 24520 a8 lo’ 40
ameneng Ute aa eaaa aRyaqeurahts eaaa aoea |
STE aaa aaa
aer adfa: aa ufe ya a ATAA I to n
If a person has no son even alter he completed sixty
years of age, or if his horoscope indicates a short life and
he finds that he has no child so far, he must try to get an
` adopted son in the year desired by him. The boy chosen
must have a long life, children, prosperity, fame and good
intellect. This adoption ceremony should be in the forenoon
of an auspicious day in ullarayana.
Notes
Mrityu
Bhaga
Uttarayana starts from the Sun's entry into Makara

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 185
and it ends with the entry of the Sun into Karkataka.,
A nna i an
taraa a A ga afta
maaan paR An e
Between to-be-adopted and the adopting father the
different kutas should agree. The boy should belong to his
own gotra. At the time chosen the Moon should be in
Asvini, Rohini, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Uttara Phalguni,
Hasta, Svati, Anuradha, Uttara Ashadha, Sravana,
Dhanishtha, Satabhisha, Uttara Bhadra, or Revati. No
malefic should be in Lagna and the fifth house. Moon's
placement and the nakshatra on that day should be in
harmony with the natal ones. Benefics should be in lagna
or aspect it.
Notes
The author has suddenly brought in the kutas. They
are considered generally for forging a marriage alliance. The
kutäs take into consideration the nakshatras of the boy and
the girl. Their application here is irrelevant.
There are twenty kutas. Of these eleven are important.
These are Dina, gana, yoni, Rajju, Vedha, Nadi, Mahendra,
Stridirgha, Rasi, Rasyadhipati, and Vasya. Of these 3, 4, 6,
8 and 1 1 refer to the girl also, and the counting is done from
the girl's star. Hence their application in the case of an
adoption is meaningless.
ert Seventies: afa atceritararenfeht: 11 e211
The preliminary activities for a marriage should be
begun by women whose husbands are alive. At that time
the Moon should be in Asvini, Punarvasu, Pushyami,

186 Uttara Kalamrita
_ Hasta, Chitra, Svati, Anuradha, Sravana, Dhanishtha or
Satabhisha. The week days should be other than those
related to Kuja and Shukra. The lagna should be auspi-
- cious, and there should be no planet in the fifth and ninth
houses. There should be the Puja (worship) of the nine
planets. The function is to be accompanied with dance,
music and the like.
apri yefrafed nirea yi ea
The auspicious letters of invitation for the marriage
are to be written in a soft and sweet language. The time of
writing these should be in conformity with the following
conditions:
() The Moon should be full Moon. The day is to be
Wednesday when Budha is free from the conjunction
with or aspect from malefics. ,
(ii) The day is to be that of Guru or Shukra.
(tt) The tithis must be Bhadra, Purna, or Jaya.
(liv) The Moon should be in movable stars—Svati, Punarvasu, Sravana, Dhanishtha, or Satabhisha, or the
Moon is to be in the stars that have a quick motion—
Asvini, Hasta, or Pushyami.
{ve} Budha, Guru and Shukra should be in lagna or
aspect it.
(vi) The fifth house should have no planet.
Notes
The lunar tithls called Bhadra, Purna and Jaya are the
second, fifth, third, seventh, tenth, eighth, twelfth, fifteenth
and thirteenth. In the dark fortnight the last three are not
preferred.

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 187
vigneeraten fate: yom anaes gi
art ger: gagi feree maiaa: |
mAn ofa aag: @ wasemi wert arenes Bhs yee SATIN eS Ut
At the moment of erecting a pole or a bamboo for the
marriage pandal, note the number of the Tithi (the lunar
` day). Multiply this by five. To this product add the number
of the nakshatra counted from krittika. To this product add
twelve and divide the total by nine. When the remainder is
1, 40r 7 the king of the tortoise will be in water. The result
is beneficial. If the remainder is 2, 5 or 8 the tortoise is on
the land and the result is loss or destruction. If the remainder is 3, 6 or 9 the tortoise is in the sky and the effect is
death.
Notes
The author is confusing Kurma Chakra which is to be
‘satisfactory only for entering a new house. Evidently this
chapter was included by some one else.
fat tear: verrat ogad aAA
ferpanterarvamea afa aÀ aaaf: |
amigrefa qerara ET
tani aadar afe grig: UÀ ATN gy
When you are constructing a new building, note three
indicators in the vertical forms. In each one draw four
horizonial lines. Begin from the bottom on the left side and
note the stars from Asvini onwards. The nakshatra rising
then and the three on the top give good results. But a
malefic posited on the rising side suggests death. If it is a
benefic, the result is beneficial.

188 t Uttara Kalamrita '
Notes
Look at these diagrams as indicated.
Rohini Ardra
Krittika . Punarvasu
Bharani Pushyami
Asvini Aslesha
Hasta Svati
U. Phalguni Visakha
P. Phalguni , Anuradha
Magha Jyeshtha
Sravana Satabhisha
U. Ashadha P. Bhadra
P. Ashadha U. Bhadra
Mula Revati
aT meraga ern VAhAAR ATga rT I
ana wet g arent mimma:
HAA Ya ygan Carer cyt RA N
When one enters a new house or a new town, or when
he is to undertake a new thing, count from the star occupied by the Sun to the star in which the Moon is located at
that time. In this counting include Abhijit. It is after Uttara
Ashadha and before Sravana. If the star is within the first
seven ones (counted from the Sun), it portends evil. There
are good results if it is within the next four. In the next
three, the result is bad. If it is within the next 14, the result

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 189
is good. This is the Vrishabha Chakra.
H the star is within the first five from the star occupied by the Sun, the result is bad. Within the next eight,
the effect is good. In the next eight it is bad, and in the
last six it is good. This is the kalasa chakra. The good or
‘bad effects of any undertaking can be predicted in this
manner.
Notes
The Vrishabha and Kalasa chakras are dealt with in
the (Purva) Kalamrita. And when the author deals with the
same, we have to conclude that the author was not the
writer of the (Purva) Kalamrita.
In Vrishabha Chakra we include Abhijit, and in Kalasa
Chakra we exclude it. The count is from the star in which
the Sun is posited to the star in which the Moon is on the
required day. In Vrishabha Chakra the stars 8 to 11, 15 to
18 and 23 to 28 are auspicious. In Kalasa Chakra the stars
6 to 9, 10 to 13 and 22 to 27 are auspicious. The two must
coincide.
We mgen fe ra Aradeni qe
ayei giht rad fred eedan
qÈ nri aa: yuent aed) patè
Afad a an ta ga o
qaam wears mat wa eran
gheir qe ga yest: ca a yfe: yer
aa g Tea paR watt aT i Ret
Sift oaa madya wate carefarot ama
aareaarofesitare afaa aired wer
This Chakra has the form of a human being. Count
from the natal star of the part till that of the master in this
Dasa Chakra. The first three are on the head, and the result
is gain of money. Within the next three it is on the face and

190 Uttara Kalamrtia
` it portends destruction. The next five refer to the chest and
they denote possession of much wealth. The next six refers
to the feet and they indicate poverty. The next two are the
back and they indicate danger to life. The next four refer to
the abdomen and the results are beneficial. The next twa
. refer to the anus and there is fear. The last two belong to
the right and left hand, and they respectively give wealth
and death.
Similar to this is the Dasi Chakra. But it refers to the
female. In this Chakra the first three stars form the head
and suggest gain. The next three are on the face, and they
suggest loss. The next two form the shoulders suggesting
the death of the master. The next five form the back and
suggest growth. The next seven are on the chest suggesting
loss. The next one is on the genitals suggesting insults. The
last six are on the feet, three on each foot. They indicate loss
of wealth.
mA Seat BT aee Taree 1 et
Tpeheretirg eg a ah cedar onfread .
yria ayy FPS aaa wea |
shana were Trt YT: Test
Rega fa wera aafe Preet Toe
SH UAT
When a cow or a she-buffalo is to be received,
the effects indicated by the time of receipt are being
- given now. Count from Uttara Phalguni to the star in
which the Moon is at that time. If the number is within
three, there is gain. If it is within the next two, there is
loss. The next eight indicate gain of money. The next
five show happiness. The next eight suggest gain. The last
one denotes great fear.
The six groups mentioned above suggest respectively
the head, face, two feet, chest, breasts, and the genitals.

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 191
Bulis and other quadrupeds are to be received only after
consulting this Chakra.
giya mra AT
Barras WA Tat wT YER R
gania mersa Eft: yi
wera TANS g RA |
' When one seeks to ride a horse, count from the star in
which the Sun is posited to the star of the native. Include
Abhijit, if it comes in the count. If the number is within the
first five, the back is suggested; if it is within the next ten
the hind part is indicated; the next two show the tail; the
next four, the legs; the next five, the stomach; and the last
two the face. The effects of these respectively are prosperity,
gain, loss of the partner, obstacles, destruction and acquisition of money.
ame fami fava HAT
qatenfag asa a eraga VA 1 22 N
antag anea a pyi wf parse
wearer ferrite waged agra yf gaq |
Next the author determines the time when one can
mount an elephant. From the star in which the Sun is on
that day count up to the natal star (Janma nakshatra) of the
person. The groups of the numbers resulting are—{i) 1 and
(vi) 11 to 14, (vii) 15 to 18, (viii) 19 to 22, and fix) 23 to
28. Abhijit is included. The corresponding limbs that are
affected are respectively—{i) ears - gain, (ii) head -
gain, (iii) neck - much gain, (iv) tail - destruction,
@) trunk - prosperity, (vf) back - wealth, (vii) chest -
ailment, (viii) face - no change and (ix) feet - gain.
When one wants to get into a palanquin, count from
the star having the Sun to the one occupied by the Moon
at that time. Distribute groups of five stars from each side

192 Uttara Kalamrita
of the palanquin, starting from the east. The last seven’are
‘located in the centre. The effects respectively are:
(D) health, (i) great difficulty, (HÌ) wasting or emaciation, (iv) disease, and (v) auspiciousness. Getting into a
palanquin in an auspicious moment gives long lifc, growth.
or development, and happiness.
wre TEN forata sige at za
Areva Mel YM cee ARA Ut TAI 2B N
M WA Y RUSH VAR BUS INTI
Warde werat arstent T I
ware kagi yui an q warp
Aira eaa seni 1 Be 1
For holding a royal umbrella, the auspicious stars
where the Moon is located are—-Rohini, Ardra, Pushyami,
Uttara Phalguni, Uttarashadha, Uttarabhadra, Sravana,
Dhanishtha and Satabhisha.
Count from the Janma nakshatra (natal star), to the
star in which the Sun is on that day. The first three stars
stand for the handle of the umbrella. The next seven forin
the holder. The following five refer to the protruding stick
or handle above. Thc next eight refer to the inside of the
umbrella. The last four cover the top. The effects respectively are (i) destruction, (ii) loss of wealth, (iii) favours from
the ruler, (iv) a great and benevolent king, and (uv) fame.
yén miaa arnt aeras fraag ae ay waka |
wea we faiaga yy IG Aq
Afi anqaarad finfed nearh, 11 ee i
Next the author speaks of Khatva Chakra, the bed.
Count from the star occupied by the Sun to the one in
which the Moon is posited. Four stars are for the four fect
of the cot, and one star for each of the four Knobs of the
legs. Seven stars are for the centre of the couch. The
respective cffects are (i) extreme happiness for the centre,

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 193
(ii) fear from the four corners, (iii) good children, and
(iv) prosperity for the knobs. This is the Mancha Chakra.
wraraerhurestga Waa CT: PRTÀ anon ae aa: wens: virial
ave ufgad g wena warr: waa
wit: eafefs anata wert arrears freq: 2a 1
Next comes the Chapa Chakra, referring to the bow
and arrows. Count from the star occupied by the Moon to
the natal star (Janma nakshatra) of the person. The first
five refer to the blade of the arrow. The next five are for the
handic of the arrow. The next five are given to the junction
of the arrow and the bow. The next two are for the cane of
the bow. Then five each are as the two ends of the bow. The
effects are respectively, (i) gain, (ii) victory, (iti) valour, (iv)
discomfiture, and {v) destruction. This is what the elders
say about the Sashara Chakra.
Next the author speaks of Ratha Chakra. From the star
in which the Sun is posited count to the natal star of the
person. The groupings of the star-count arc (i) 1 to 3, (ii) 4
and (vii 25 to 27. These seven parts are in the following
parts of the car, and their effects respectively are these:
(i) Central pole - success, (ti) wheels - fame, (ill) top - death,
(iv) bottom - happiness, (v) front of the chariot - gain of
wealth, {vi} yoke - obstacles or failure, (vii) all round -
happiness,
aaaf fe miaa faan
Aa erent anfa myi erate aa:
yotar Raeren eranan 1 ee 1

194 : Uttara Kalamrita
Now the Ghurna Chakra is described. lt refers to the
grinding of oil from sesamum, groundnut and coconut.
From the star occupied by the Sun on that day count the
star in which the Moon is located. The remainder is divided
by nine. Note in which part it falls. The nine parts respectively denote - (i) destruction, (ii) prosperity, (ili) freedom
from ailment, fiv) destruction, {v) access of wealth,
(vi) trouble from the rulers, (vii) poverty, (viii) death and
. (tx) happiness. This is the special feature of the oil mill for
extracting oil from sesamum, groundnut, coconut and the
Hke.
qnia yatta Qe’ A 3 T
Now the author describes sugar cane and its crushing.
From the star occupied by the Sun count to the one that
has the Moon. The groupings of the stars are eight: (i) one
to four, (ii) five to six, (iii) seven and eight, (iv) nine, (v) ten
to fourteen, (vi) fifteen to nineteen, (vii) twenty to twenty
one, and fvilij) twenty two to twenty seven. The results
respectively are: (i) prosperity, (li) destruction, (iii) great
gains, (tv) destruction, (v) death, (vi) benefic results, (vii)
emaciated, and (vii) great wealth. in the light of the Ghurna
Chakra one must choose the proper time for crushing the
sugar-cane.
qalfattoere quran araara
OT aA TATRA Aa |
eI Bua wears a Ba wart
SATA ATA AMT AHO Hat À qa! Fo II
Now the author describes the Hala Chakra, the time
when the ploughing of the field should be started for the
next crop. Count from the star occupied by the Sun to the
one ihat has the Moon on that day. If the number is within

`- Miscellaneous Problems in Predictton 195
the first three it is bad for agriculture. 4 to 6 is good. 7 to
7is bad, 10 to 14 it is auspicious. 15 to 17 is bad. 18 to 22
ss good, 23 to 25 the results are bad. The last two give good
` results. This rule is to be cbserved'in ploughing for sowing
_ the seeds and beginning the agricultural activities of the
new year. ,
adalarda carat a area wal
qha wa myi caf yesh g IT
aotar fk nfa Aaratigarak faguan aAA 1 ae 1
The sukkani is the wheel on whose directions and
movements of the boat or the ship depend. The word is
Arabic and it came into vogue in Indian languages after the
seventh century A.D. The author now describes the moment for this.
Count from the star occupied by the Sun on that day
to the one occupied by the Moon. Abhijit is included. The
first six are above the foot, next three are on the top of the
prop, then three are on the bottom. Then have one on the
back, six on both sides (three each), three on the helm of
the ship, and last six inside the boat. This diagram has to
be used at the time of building a new boat, or of launching
it. The six over the boat and the six inside are proportions.
The rest are malefic.
weenie fe mA aor gÀ qrar
wus eia maT: WA Wa Iss
SOT Tear: PAHs Tatars wad
we iama way n 32 N
When a lamp is to be used freshly there is Dipika
Chakra. This is described now. The count is from Krittika
to the star in which the Moon is to that day. The first five
are for the face, next nine are for the neck, then eight are
for the centre, while the last five are for the pillar or the bar.
The results of these four groups are respectively—honour,

196 Uttara Kalamrita
gain, death of the master and royalty.
qarana fini g aeaaea qalfeg
Ra dfris aaie n
* R Yerai
wed efkan wate ATT eA ATI 3 l
Now the author lays down rules for the digging of a
well or a tank. The three stars from Rohini are for the
centre. Of the remaining twenty four stars distribute three
each for the directions starting from the east. A well or a
tank begun when the Moon is in one of these nine groups
will reveal about finding or not-finding water. These are
respectively—{i) found very soon; (li) no water; (ili) average
supply; (iv) no water; (v) plenty of water; (vi) sweet water;
(vii) saltish water; (viii) plenty of water; and (ix) average
supply.
Notes
In the above description[jiijrefers to the south east,liv)
to south and [Yj to south west. Digging of a well in these
directions is prohibited in Purva Kalamrita. But this author
gives plenty of water for south-west. We have examples of
persons dying or getting serious illness when a well is dug
in the south-west. This author cannot be the author of the
so called first part of Kalamrita..
seat wed aE AER
KLASS GEAL TLSE: E A ATTA
Teema Aga igg fey ax I
A pillar or a column has to be erected while building
a house, digging a well or a tank, or preparing the lay-out
for a garden. The erection of the pillar should be at an
auspicious time.
Count from the star in which the Sun is to that in
which the Moon is posited on the day. If the number is
‘-within the first six, it denotes death. Within the next

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 197
twenty, it brings fame and fortune. In the last two, it reveals
the loss of wealth. The proper day and time will bring fame,
happiness, and progress of the family.
Notes
This and the next two verses like the previous ones are
elaborately and more scientifically dealt with in Kalamrita.
arrest anigi ara i ay
Now the dvara-chakra is explained. It refers to the
door-frames and doors.
Count from the star in which the Sun is to the constellation of the Moon on the given day. The first four refer to
the upper part of the door-frame, next three to the centre,
two each for the four corners, next eight to the top hinges
(four for each), and the last four to the bottom. The effects
are respectively - (i) royalty, (ü) rulership, (ili) exile or
banishment, {iv) eight forms of wealth or prosperity, and
(v} death. Thus find out the auspicious star for erection of
the door-frame.
Notes
The author is silent on the number of doors and
windows. They should be in even number.
erraserarerafeerenrranenttrentiveieara if eit
Now the Chakra for opening a new oven, a new fire -
place, or a furnace is described.
Note the tithi (lunar day) at the time. Add the number
of the week day (counting from Sunday). Add one more

198 Uttara Kalamrita
numeral. Divide it by four. If the rém=tnder is zero or three,
it indicates happiness; if it is ofte-or two, there is loss of
money.
Count from the star in which the Sun is posited on
that day to the one in which the Moon is. Divide it into nine
groups of three each. These are to be allotted to the planets
in the sequence of Ravi, Budha, Shukra, Shani, Chandra,
Kuja, Guru, Rahu and Ketu. If the star belongs to a group
of the benefic planet, it denotes prosperity. If it belongs to
a malefic, the result is opposite. This Chakra reveals which
planet is to be propitiated or which rite is to be performed.
um enakan carn yeret eqdar NETAN GS
Now the author explains about a new box. Multiply the
length of box by its breadth in terms of inches and yavas.
Divide it by nine. The nine parts refer to the nine planets
from the Sun to Saturn (in order of the week days), followed
by Rahu and Ketu. If the concerned remainder refers to a
benefic, the result is good. Otherwise, it is bad.
Notes
One inch (angula) has eight yavas.
wad firedteat ai TATÀ Fa
yoram fxd werrat aed g yer we ee
tet da fart festa at emg ara
wae agemrparata we HAT!
weirs az wey weer:
Pattern fargrate qaraty:fragarcqargit R N
For settling in a town or ina country one must find the
proper auspicious time. The method for finding this out is

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 199
described now. The auspicious time will give the native
children, money and fortune.
The Chakra (diagram) is in the form of a human being.
Count from the star of the village or town to the natal star
(Janma Nakshatra) of the person. If the number is within
the first five, it is on the head and it denotes acquisition of
money. If within 6 to 8, it is the face, and destruction. If it
is within the next five, it is on the chest and gives wealth.
If it is from 14 to 19, it is on the two feet — three for each
foot, and it indicates the loss of money. If it is the 20th, it
refers to the back and there is danger to life. If it is from 21
to 24, it is on the pelvis suggesting prosperity. The next two
stars 25 and 26 are on the anus indicating fear and trouble.
The last two refer to the right and left hands, suggesting
respectively gain and poverty.
Notes
How are we to determine the nakshatra of a village or
a town? We have to follow the namanakshatra, taking the
first letter of the Lown or the village. The following table will
enable us. One ietter stands for one Pada only.
Asvini : 4, 3% a, ™
Bharani : Ñ, q, a À
Krittika : 3, $% =, %
Rohini: 3 a Ñ, q
Mrigasira : 4, a, +, fr
` Ardra : By, F, 8
Punarvasu : %, A, 7, fe
Pushyami : %, aa a
Aslesha : fs, 3, 2, 3
Magha : m, Ñ, 4, ù
P. Phalguni : Ñ 2, 4, g
U. Phalguni : 2, 2, v, f
Hasta: 3% 1, 3

200 a hs Uttara Kalamrita
Chitra: %, Ñ, q, @
Svati: 43 7
Visakha : @, q 3% @
Anuradha : 7, Ñ, 4, 3
Jyeshtha : 4, 4%, ai 7
Mula : à, 4, m, *t
P. Ashadha : % UW, H, 7
U. Ashadha :%, 4, oT, a
Sravana : Ñ, | È, @
Dhanishtha : m, 7, 17, *
Satabhisha : 7, m, 4, 4
P. Bhadra : à, Ñ, q, @
U. Bhadra : % 4, 3 7
Revati: %, à, a, {Ì
mainaa fe miah g aapt
N E rarer az
ween i aAa e amd mgè ui gda afar fve wo U1
Now he describes the time for upanayana — wearing
of the sacred ihread (yajnopavita) and the initiation into
Gayatri mantra.
Couni from the natal star of the boy who is to have
Upanayana (approaching near the teacher for initiation).
Count from that star to the one in which Guru is posited.
The first five stand for the head, 6 to 8 for the face, 9 for the
chest, 10 to 17 for the fect, 18 and 19 for the palasa or staff,
and 20 to 27 to the skin of the antelope lied to the sacred
thread. The results respectively are - (i) happiness,
fii) deviation from his religious duties, (iii) slanderer,
(iv) afflicted with discase, (v) lustrous, and (vi) learned.

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 201
merana aA arpa xe it
One may try to find out if there is any treasure of jewels
and money or bones and the like hidden in a house, and if
there is any truth of its existence, then the following Nidhi
Chakra is to be observed.
Draw five horizontal lines and cross them by eight
vertical lincs. You will get twenty eight squares. These are
allotted.to the twenty eight stars including Abhijit in the
manner described next.
agah farad aerer
aeaa wa akaya: afaa ana
amaaa enga
smiaran a ga wet ag g
Aaa mga msa arenrferant
gary ffir q raae aT RA
The seven squares on the top horizontal line are allotted to Revati, Asvini, Bharani, Krittika, Magha, Purva
Phalguni and Uttara Phalguni. In the next horizontal line
these are Uttarabhadra, Purva Bhadra, Satabhisha, Rohini,
Asicsha, Pushyami and Hasta. The third horizontal row has
Abhijit, Sravana, Dhanishtha, Mrigasira, Ardra, Punarvasu
and Chitra. The last row at the bottom has Uttara Ashadha,
Purva Ashadha, Mula,.Jyeshtha, Anuradha, Visakha, and
Svati.
The Moon is the lord of Asvini, Bharani, Krittika,
Ardra, Punarvasu, Pushyami, Aslesha, Magha, Purva
Ashadha, Uttarashadha, Abhijit, Sravana, Purvabhadra, «

202 i ` Uttara Kalamrita
and Revati. The Sun is the lord of the other fourteen stars.
The Sun and the Moon at the time of putting the question
will reveal the nature of the hidden treasure.
amera vented enn sia eragayei feae g WTI we it
TamaRa miya wena fe 7
crear rraufingiaerpst ufi: art fme: WATT wy N
The time taken by the Sun to traverse a star from the
beginning to the end has to be taken in ghatikas and
Vighatikas. This is the divisor. Note the interval in ghatikas
and Vighatikas taken by the Sun from the time he entered
the star till the time of the question. Multiply it by sixty and
divide it by the previous number. The remainder multiplied
by 27 and divided by 60 gives the number of the stars from
Asvini. These are the stars that have elapsed. With the
remainder in Ghatikas and Vighatikas these will give the
position of the Sun. Note the interval taken by the Moon in
the star in which it is posited, to the time of the query.
Multiply this by 27 and divide the product by 60. The
quolient counted from Asvini gives the stars traversed by
the Moon. The remainder in ghalikas and Vighatikas shows
the position of the Moon at the time.
Notes
Instead of this laborious and tedious process, one may
rely on the Ephemeris and calculate.
qeg ye cad a ae aat
ae force garna anata a ete T:
we wate wat: gagh aq àd-
| Sarnia 4 Afaa: auf Afa ared fretin we n
Note the position of the Moon (as described in the
` previous verse) at the required time. If this Moon is aspected by the planets counted from the Sun in the order of

Miscellaneous Problems in Prediction 203
the week days followed by Rahu and Ketu, the hidden
treasure is respectively - (1) gold articles, (2) silver,
(3) copper, (4) brass, (5) gold, (7) iron, (8) tin, and (9) lead.
If this Moon is aspected by many powerful planets, the
Treasure has many metals. If it is not aspected by any, there
is no hidden treasure.
we wea g gamos tatt
qa aa geet cost Aga Ret
AmA afa arrest gè Tera sitet
viet agè g goaia accitgst wat vie 1
If the Moon is aspected by all the planets, there is a
valuable treasure hidden in a large vessel. If this Moon is
in Simha, a golden vessel has this treasure. If the Moon is
in a house of the gross Moon, the treasure is in a silver
vessel. If the Moon is in the house of Kuja, it is a copper
vessel; if in a house of Budha, the vessel is made of a
precious stone; if in Guru's house, it is a vessel made of
stones; if in Shukra’s house, it is in earthen pot; and if
Shani's house, the vessel is an iron one.
Notes
Chapter 7, verse 13 explained the positions of the
gross and subtle Moons.
X anaa: RA sierra crafter are qÀywi aiaia q adioa fai free
we amaA afa fat i A daran
Aena paaa: Grd STE WAI ve I
When the Sun and the Moon are conjoined in a star
ruled by the Moon (as per verse 45 above), there is a
treasure. If these are in a star ruled by the Sun, the treasure
has only bones. When the Sun and the Moon have exchanged signs, one finds nothing. If the Moon is with
malefics, the person cannot have the treasure; and if it is
with benefics, he will get it. The number of degrees passed
by the Moon in that star will indicate the depth below the
Fa

204 . Uttara Kalamrita
ground where the treasure is.
meet mamafa fafaa sift gare A À
aaao weary A r e
f 4 . fi aat
ai goad agare faai mA
aniso pe tare aN
A aream aA afr o
Draw four vertical lines and on them draw four horizontal lines, giving a total of nine squares. Note the star in
which the Sun is at the time of the query, Three stars from
it are placed at the centre. Eight groups of three stars each, .
are. given to the eight directions starting from the East. The
position of the Moon on the marriage day will be in one of
these squares. The results of these starting from the Centre
are (i) loss of the couple, fil) prosperity, (tii) destruction of
the family, (iv) widowhood, (v) continuance of the family
line, (vi) debts and diseases, (vii) the girl goes astray,
(vill) wealth and corn, and (tx) all kinds of prosperity.
This is the way lord Shiva described the Chakras to
Nandikesvara.
Notes
The Tantras speak of the conversations between Shiva
and Parvati. The author has brought Nandi. Evidently he
came long after the tenth century A.D. The diagram mentioned in this verse is as follows:
East
Saveral Kinds Prosperity Destrction of
of Prosperity a tha family
Wealth and Loss of the Widowhood
Com couple
Girl going Debts and Continuance of
astray Diseases the famiy line

fadas:
Second Kanda
ygattavs:
Chapter 1
maana A gÂ R
One who has observed celibacy strictly and sincerely,
who has studied the sacred texts of his family, should
marry a girl. She should be pleasant having good physical
features. She should be pleasing to his heart. She must not
have been marricd earlier to another. She would be of his
age or a little less. She should not belong to his gotra or to
his relatives who receive tarpanas and the Hke from him.
She should be free from leprosy and other ailments. She
must belong to a different gotra and Pravara. She should
not be more than sixteen years of age. She must be pleasing
to the heart and to the eyes.
Notes
Now the law states that the bride should not be less
than eighteen years of age. Due to social and political
conditions, a girl was married when she was married at the l
age of eight. In the Vedic times the girls were married only
after they came of age. A Brahmachari is expected to devote
twelve years to a study of his own Vedic texts and the lke.
The minimum duration of study varies. By the time he is
twenty he leaves the guru-kula and gets married. The
farewell convocation message is found in the eleventh
section of the Taittiriyopanishad. As a celibant he should

206 Uttara Kalamrita
keep aloof from any contact with women, wine, non-vegetarian food and the like.
Sapindya means that the oblations (tarpanas) given to
the dead should not belong to the same set of persons.
Marriages between persons belonging to thc same gotra’
are prohibited. Now our government has unfortunately
legalised sa-gotra marriages. Sapindyas are allowed
only for the Andhras by Apastamba when he stated
that only the Audhras can marry the daughters of
their maternal uncles. For others it is prohibited. This is
in line with traditional custom. Manu also has stated
ATA |
According to the Dharma Sastras Sagotra or Sapindya
marriages are incestuous. Modern researches in Genetics
(Eugenics) do not approve of thesc.
Sureya wad waft frxrarey faver:
aren nem gaia artes eer |
wart afa farsa aa ga: paraytaRahas eres ATTA STOTT} RN
Father, grandfather and great-grand father are the
threc generations thal have a right to the offering of the
Pindas at the time of the annual Shraddha. The three
others can have only a Pindalepa, a fraction of the Pinda
with ghee. The native is thus the seventh in the line. This
is Sapindya. This is observed on the twelfth day of the
death. Note the generalion when the family or families get
different from those of the bride and the bridegroom. This
difference is to be counted from the seventh or the fifth
gcencrations from the father and the mother respectively of
the bride and the bridegroom.
Notes
These three generations are known as Vasu, Rudra
and Aditya in giving the oblations. On the twelfth day of
death there is the rite called sapindi-karana.

Second Kanda l 207
amaa faman fafi: g
The Sapinda relationship goes back to the seventh
generation of a man or a woman, or of the husband and his
wife. It is the seventh generation from the father and the
fifth from the mother. Within these groups no marriages
should be performed. Beyond these, there is no objection.
If a Sapindya passes away at a certain period for one party,
it does so for the other as well. This rule has to be observed
in making marriage alliances.
Notes
Kulluka Bhatta, the learned commentator on Manu,
observes that the mother’s father is not a Sapinda as his
-Gotra is different.
agefraaranTE
qea Ro pA Aa waar!
adiar farenin: arat a ardan:
aa a arasueafafa eadi: iv 1
Some authorities state that the fourth generation from
one is excepted, only three generations are forbidden for
marriage. There is no objection from the fourth onwards.
One must avoid those girls that can claim relationships as sisters, mothers and daughters.
A marriage alliance can be accepted between the sixth
generation in one line and the fifth in the other, and
between the fifth and the fifth generations. But the girl
should not be related to the boy directly or indirectly as a
sister.
In Utkala (Orissa) and Dravida (Tamil Nadu) countries
marriages are allowed between the third and the third
generations. This is not allowed in other parts of the country. If the bride comes from the sixth or eighth generation

208 Uttara Kalamrita
in the bridegroom's line, the prohibition vanishes fully.
The counting must always be made with reference to
a common ancestor of the parties. The rule regarding Sapindya has to be followed strictly. Also the standard of
particular families and countries should not be violated. In
all possible and available ways and connections, the relationship with the other family must be strictly researched
and examined.
Sapinda means a person who has an equal relationship with the pinda (body) of the common ancestor. The
body consists of six koshas (sheaths), bones, muscles and
marrow derived from the father, and skin, flesh, and blood
derived from the mother. If this common ancestry is not of
a binding nature, or even when it is strong, if there is no
question of inheriting the property, we permit marriage.
erat a qara Riema AT BHATTI & 1
Here is an exception. When a woman deserts her
husband and starts living with another, the husband can
marry her sister, if he desires to have children. This is an
exccption to the rule that one’s daughters should not be
married in the same family or to the sons of the same
parents. If there are girls who are twins they can be married
to the twin brothers.
wart ay fat SAAT ART
mig wats aaa at nafar
menera AMT Aa yR
aaea a At aT a SÈT, N 9

Second Kanda 209
A person may have children from his second wife.
Then the son born to the first wife gets into. Sapindya
relationship for three generations. If the first wife has no
children, the daughter of a paternal uncle will not claim the
relationship of a mother to the son mentioned above.
That is, he can marry her though she stands in the
relationship of a mother, because she is the cousin of his
step mother. The step mother's sister's daughter also cannot be a sister to him. He can marry her.
Notes
The view expressed by the author in the second paragraph of our rendering is outrageous. The author of the
second kanda is either insane or ignorant about the
Dharma Shastras. The author cannot be condemned more
strongly.
at agra feqra VAAN RATATAT
m aaga A FE AAS YET: ETAT: |
fasanit often + aeafiat grr srranfeat
ten oat aofa Aa waft career raat e
The father and the mother of the girls may belong to
the seventh and fifth gencrations respectively. Then they
become sisters to the boy. If they get married to each other,
even in this life they become Shudras. They may not have
fallen. But they make their parents and others fallen. One
docs not fall down by marrying a prohibited or low girl, if
they are not contaminated.
mirga farani yacofasterat
aren afe garm- Aaaa fag: 1
agrafa afremmen
at asa figya aged Aaaa R
Once the sapindya relationship ceases to exist, one
can marry a girl who may indirectly be related to his mother
as her sister or as her daughter. This is allowed only in the
couniries south of the river Narmada. Even when the

210 Uttara Kalamrita
Sapindya relationship is concealed, marriages are allowed
in the south of the Narmada between persons who belong
to the generation within five and three of the father and
mother respectively.
enifofatta fier aaga area
fosen giad afe aiT
Teta fem fe agag moineda uia a gE frgeafirarqi Ro 1
Marriages among the twice-born within five generations of the father and mother, or within five generations of
the mother and seven generations of the father; or within
three gencrations—such marriages-violate Dharma.and the
rules laid down by Dharma Shastras. In such a marriage
the sin committed is cqual to that of killing a Brahmana.
The daughter of the maternal uncle is on a par witha
girl of his own Gotra in matters relating to debt, buying,
women's assembly or fecding. Marriage with the daughter
of one’s own maternal uncle, or with the daughter of the
father's sister is forbidden.
Notes
The author claims to be superior to or wiser than
Apaslamba who has sanctioned the marriage with the
maternal uncle’s daughter {matula kanya vivaha) for the
Andhras. See the next verse.
edie yea: fogergqat wate arg
Raters: wari ger
. TEA: alt WT ada: AT: AT AL We tl
{1) Marriage with one’s own maternal uncle’s
daughter, (2) marriage with a girl whose Gotra and Pravara
are the same as those of his mother, (3) marriage with his
sisler's daughter, (4) marriage with the daughter of his
father's sister—these are prohibited. When he comes to
know of this relationship, he should give her up and per-

Second Kanda 211
form the expiatory rite called Chandrayana.
In the south persons marry the daughters of their own
maternal uncles.
There is a very wide gulf between the ladies who eat
fis}. and are given to many lovers, and those that are chaste
and do not drink.
Notes
Vyasa and Yajnavalkya spoke of four kinds of women
who should be deserted by their husbands: (1) those that
have sex with a disciple, (2) those that have sex with the
teacher, (3) those who hate their husband, and (4) those
that are guilty of sex with a hatred of the low class.
About eating fish, Apastamba has allowed it for the
Brahmanas of Vanga Desa (Bengal) only.
Well established and accepted traditions in the various parts of the country cannot be condemned. According
to Manu, the third source of Dharma is the way or the
tradition established by the wise and the virtuous (Sadhu).
The relevant verse from Manu Smriti is
aAa tgs afasia afger
saya aeaea AN
We cannot commend the present author’s view. We
have drawn attention to the seventh verse where the author
went outrageously contrary to the Dharma Shastras and to
the traditional codes of conduct.
Tava Gat sa mga gen: ufa:
a are fafi wer m (ei) sitet fafirgyat
qafiaaateetorafacagen ar ut
gern a fart ar wera afas ez
A young lady having taken a bath after her menstrual
course can be fed at a Sraddha (annual ceremony for the
dead). But if one has married his maternal uncle’s daughter, and a Brahamana who married a Shudra woman
should neither be fed nor worshipped. The Vedic injunction

212 Uttara Kalamrita
is also against feeding a woman who has sex with many.
Those worshipped must say that they are satisfied.
Indeed, we cannot lose faith in Truth, Fire and the Sun.
This is only an example, not an authority, not even the
opinion of the people at large. This is not accepted as
correct in the South.
mogi wate feae aariaa
% kaparangan wash A wat: |
wat oat wa aaaf aaa MeT,
l qam AHH UA en g Ugraa it a
Here in this place Sapindya relationship is observed
only for three generations. This is with regard to girl whose
mother and father belong to the same caste. All those born
of the same father, but of mothers belonging to different
castes are mutually brothers. The wives of their father are
mothers to all of them. The brothers of these women are
their maternal uncles.
A person given in adoption within the family has
Sapindya for seven generations, For a Kshatriya this period
becomes less.
One should not marry the folowing woman :—
{1} the sister of the wife of the father’s brother, and (2)
the sister of his mother’s co-wife; (3) the daughter of these
two; (4) the sister of his brother's wife; (5) one who may be
related even distantly as a mother; (6) the daughter of his
own teacher; and (7) the daughter of one who can be his
son.
The diffcrences in Pravara {Rishis who constitute the
Gotra) depend on the father’s Gotra, and not on the

Second Kanda . 213
wafer a ra ype nR PRT Me
After the marriage of the daughter, the father of the girl
should not eat in her house too soon, hoping to have the
pleasure of seeing the faces of relatives and friends. Likewise he should not displease his son-in-law as he was
treated as Adi Vishnu.
Two images (or idols) of Shiva, two of the Sun-god, two
sudarshana chakras (disc of Vishnu), two saligramas, and
three Shaktis of the son of Shankara are not to be worshipped in the house. Such a worship is not auspicious.
mmga gi x fated Sa fer gee
l grea ii eama fag qa: AA
Ageitenta ynei ANSA REN: 1 g on
; When there are two Saligrams in the house, only one
is to be worshipped, and not the two. Even a broken
Saligram should be worshipped, if its ring (Chakra) is not
spotled. The idol of Shiva under such a situation has to be
corrected and purified before worshipping il. The idol of
Shiva must have a uniform height and its top should not be
covered. The circumference of the stand should be three
times greater than the height of the idol. The pranala
(Course for the passage of water) should have a dimension
which should measure five times the height.
ait kafeni qe wren rei ts T
While performing the death anniversary (Shraddha)

2i4 Uttara Kalamirita
for the father, he should also do the same for his maternal
grandfather. By omitting him, he would have the sin of
patricide. The ordained annual ceremony must also be
performed for the wives of the fore-fathers separately. There
are three kinds of Shraddhas—Vriddhi, Gaya, and Ashtaka. |
It is the duty of a person to perform these three Shraddhas
and other religious rites addressed lo the gods. When the
Shraddha is done at home, the wife should hand the Pinda
over to him.
Notes
Shraddha is a rile performed on the lunar day every
year of the original demise. This rite can be parvana or
Ekoddishta. The ceremony of offering Pindas to the greatgrand-father, grand father, and father, and to mother, her
mother-in-law, and to the mother-in-law of this mother-inlaw, is called Parvana. The one done to the father or mother
alone is Ekoddishta. This has three forms—Nitya or daily,
naiimiltika or conditional as in Mahalaya fortnight (dark
fortnight of Bhadrapada) and kamya or optional or depending on the desire or intention. The Vriddhi Shraddha is
performed when a son is born. The tarpanas to the dead are
given on every new moon day, and on the Makara and
Karkataka ingrcsses (Sankranti) of the Sun.
maesan Aoa AiamA vad g uya fr a ws yA
shada eri anA: graè: Sarit ke 1
Between the twins the clder one is determined by the
order of the semen falling in the womb. The face seen by the
father first is the elder onc.
Trijveshtha (Three Jyeshthas) is to be avoided, the
marriage of the eldest son or daughter in the lunar month
of Jyeshtha, the child born when the Moon is in the constcllation of Jyeshtha and the eldest son or daughter form
the three Jyeshthas, The marriage of such a child should
not be performed in the lunar month of Jyeshtha.

Second Kanda 215
Likewise any auspicious rite, upanayana or marriage,
should not be performed. when two of these Jyeshthas
operate (eldest, natal constellation and month). The lunar
month of Jyeshtha is not allowed.
If there are two auspicious ceremonies in the family for
a brother and sister, or for brothers-or sisters, there should
be an interval of two months. As far as the others are
concerned, the functions are allowed after a purificatory
bath.
Notes
- Traditionally two auspicious functions are allowed in
a year only after the new lunar year begins. Moreover, a
marriage can take place after upanayana (sacred thread
and initiation into Gayatri). But Upanayana should not
come after a marriage ceremony.
Regarding twins, the one born after the first is the
elder one.
mi gigan: dome:
aiaa gnia erat oa: sarin: |
qaman wear arate: Sard
WaT Brest wa gaara fa: RA ee ut
Sons are of twelve kinds: (1) one’s own coborn; (2) son
of the daughter; (3) one born of his wife by another; (4) one
born of an unmarried girl; (5)“One born of a woman who is
remarried; (6) one given away in adoption; (7) one bought
from the parents; (8) one treated as a son because of his
good qualities; (9) one who comes to another as a son
because he is an orphan or abandoned by his parents; (10)
the son of a woman pregnant before marriage; (11) one born
secretly of the wife of another; and whose identity cannot -
be determined; (12) one abandoned by its parent or parents
and is brought up by another. Of these twelve, only one and
six are approved. The rest are not allowed in kaliyuga.
Notes
Kalyana Varma’s Saravali gives a detailed account of
these and other kinds of children. See Chapter 34.26 to 38.

218 Uttara Kalamrita
(mela, pollution for bad events) also, he is like his adopted
father.
mia Raga arafa agire irhfarsisemraaàfa aapear wat a tre!
gagara + Aer qa Garhi aA
aqai Peia agent Prea eT rari we tt
A boy who is given in adoption loses his right for a
claim in his original father’s property. He has a share only
in the adopted family. He loses his own father's gotra and
he has no obligations to the funeral rites and oblations
there. After the adoption he cannot offer funcral libations
and the like for his original father and the like.
The rule to be followed in the sacrifices and funeral
offerings is this—He has to follow the methods and conventions of his adopted parents.
A person may find his family coming to an end. He
gives his daughter in marriage hoping to adopt her son as
his own. This grand son is similar to his own uterine son.
This relationship becomes permanent. But there should
not be a desire for a double parentage—parentage with both
the families.
Serer eae mr AA
Aaa gen sa aans urafiz: 1
ag anaana maa afa
Tarna aara AL a
If one wants to marry, he can marry the younger sister
of his sister's husband, or the younger sister of his clder
brother's wife. One who has lost his wife or whose wife is
living away from him, must have the annual Shraddha of
his father performed by his brothers whose wives are living
with them. The others may do it as coparceners. The annual
Shraddha should not be done with the‘daily sacrificial fire.
After kindling it and offering oblations into it, it must be

Second Kanda 219
rejected.
wet efai argad aeea ager
mr n a aA agar: carat a À sett
qaae gA g a grea
4 anafaa aa pa eaer fearafs n Ra 1
It is improper to observe the rite of Homa in the land
of a Brahmana (who is a consumer at the time of the
Shraddha). This is a daring act of impropriety followed by
those belonging to the Rig Veda. The brother of a person's
wife or the husband of his sister (if their wives arc alive),
sister, brother, daughter, and son—these persons should
not perform the Shraddha of the person concerned, since it
will not achieve anything. This is the view of Bhrigu.
wear a Fata aag srk anaram 2911
For fceding at a Shraddha it is impossible in this world
to have a Bhikshu (mendicant, ascetic, Sanyasin), a person
devoting his time to yoga alone, and seeker after Truth (a
true Philosopher). Hence one should earnestly try to satisfy
completely such persons. The food offered at a Shraddha by
a Shudra should not be eaten by a Brahmana. Likewise the
food made sacred by a Brahmana at the time of Shraddha
should not be given by him to a Shudra, without following
the rules of distribution.
Notes
Manu states that after the Bhoktas (special consumers) and persons performing the Shraddha have partaken of
the food, the rest is to be given to the servants, to the
straightforward, to the active persons (3.246). But if he
offers it to a Shudra he is a fool (murkha) and enters the hell
called kala-sutra with his head downwards (3.249).

220 Uttara Kalamrita
These prohibitions have to be modified in view of the
changing patterns of modern social life. Moreover, if a
devoted disciple of the dead one who belongs to a different
caste comes, it is the duty of the person to feed him on the
Shraddha day. The rigidity of outlook shown by the author
is one cause of modern social revolts. f
q a aae maa NTA a
There is a merit which comes to a person when he gifts
a house to a person. The same merit will come when you
give as a gift a house and some land to a Brahmana. Even
Adisesha (the thousand hooded serpent who forms the bed
of Sri Vishnu) cannot enumerate or describe the good
merits of the gift made to a Brahmana who has wife and
children. A Brahmana who does the things prescribed for
people of other castes, loses his position and has no happiness even in the next world. Likewise a Shudra who does
the works prescribed for a Brahmana will not have a higher
status or merit. But sage Parasara does not hold this view.
Notes
See Manu Smriti, 4.230 and 234
wratreeRyeereRfes area yore WW:
Erag Perk a iaf
Tren ainda fafafa ae RR a
When one desires to have children he should not bathe
in the sea on Tuesday%, Fridays and Saturdays; nor should
he bathe during Rahu kala, nor in a lagna having Rahu in
the seventh, ny during the Parva days. Even a vitiated
lunar day can be accepted for a sea-bath after anointing
oneself with oil and bath after a sexual union, after a death,
after having a hair-cut, and after pollution. This is the view

Second Kanda 221
advocated by scholars of all schools of thought,
Notes
Rahu Kala is observed specially in Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, and Kerala. Standard texts have no mention of it. It
varies from day to day. If the sunrise is at 6.00 A.M. Rahu
Kala is thus distributed—
Sunday 4.30 P.M. to 6.00 P.M.
Monday 7.30 A.M. to 9.00 A.M.
Tuesday 3.00 P.M. to 4.30 P.M.
Wednesday 12.00 Noon to 1.30 P.M.
Thursday 1.30 P.M. to 3.00 P.M.
Friday 10.30 A.M. to 12.00 Noon
Saturday 9.00 A.M. to 10.30 A.M.
Parva days are full Moon and new Moon, Sankranti or
solar ingress into a new sign, eclipses and the like.
Vitiated or pierced (aviddha) lunar day comes when a
day is touched by two or three lunar tithis.
qatar uitata yer
frrattstarorafarasta feerrcararcetist fafa: |
Wt ust faasa agafat fagia
ae wag ma afe warara mA Aaf o It
While offering gifts, taking a purificatory bath and the
like we have to note the lunar day (tithi) at the time of
sunrise on that day. It is ordaincd that a Sanyasi (a Bhikshu or a mendicant) should have his food during the last
one-eighth part of the day, and that he should not cat at
night. A widow also has to observe the same rule. On the
Parva days, the widow should not take even water; shc may
take fruits, but not cooked food at night.
Notes
This rule is too rigid. It is best observed in its violation.
When the day has a duration of thirty ghalis or twelve
hours, the last one-eighth wiil be between 4.30 P.M. and

222 Uttara Kalanevita
6.00 P.M. This is too much, Going without water even
appears only on an ekadasi day (eleventh lunar day) when
it is specifically mentioned as nirjala (without water). The
author's views cannot be accepted.
eer free saaa shat pangeaerat TAfavs gafara pafar enma giga: |
erfrstteredt a area Bra
qae wasrifag: arate areata: 1) ae tt
One may adopt a son permanently or for a short timc
only. The son of the daughter (dauhitra) has then a double
parentage. He has to offer funeral libations (tarpanas,
pindas} and feed both the families in all religious rites. This
is the view of Vasishtha. But Katyayana stated that it is not
proper to perform the Shraddha for both. Vyasa, however,
held that the grandson should perform the Shraddha of his
maternal grandfather also, without any difference.
Notes
This rule is very vague and arbitrary. The present
commentator's great-grandfather brought three persons for
adoption, one after the other. All the three ran away. The
fourth one remained. This grandfather's sons did not observe this rule; and they led happy lives till the very end.
The Shraddha of a maternal grandfather will arise only
when he had no sons, and when he takes his daughter's
son in adoption.
wa We Neva gaen safer aCAN wrens aaa at araftrar aT!
wae afisi a meat FareragatThat mgA g rarai fare gayaen ma aftrati: 32011
Hemadri and Harita observed that a person musl
perform the Shraddha for his adopted father and also for his
original father. He should fuse the Pindas offered to the two
kinds of fathers. In the case of Shraddha, his Gotra will be

Second Kanda 223,
that of his adopted father. At the time of marriage he must
adopt both the Gotras. It is nol proper for him to have a
marriage alliance with his mother's family. His own mother
and his maternal grandfather are on a par with each other.
Notes
The author has entered into a dangerous ground only
to betray his ignorance. When a person is given in adoption,
the mantras chantcd refer to his death at onc place and to
his birth at another. He loses the right to perform the
Shraddhas of his original parents. Rather, he violates
dharma if he performs the Shraddhas for them.
The author states that there should be no marriage
alliance with the maternal side. Is it allowed for persons
who do not go in for adoption? This he rejected earlier. The
statement here shows his confused mind.
ayi faeta Aai arg ita
aed agaaa fe uiar 4 Hage
ames fra wert afe ar urat a A AM 83 1
Even when the Nandikarma is performed, one should
not procccd with upanayana if there is a fall of meteors, and
showers of fire, or ifthe mother of the boy enters then into
her menstrual course. If these events take place after the
initial ceremonial meal of the Brahmacharins, the upanayana should not be stopped. The same principle applies to
the marriage of the daughter. The father by himself should
not give his daughter in marriage. When the mother is dead,
the father can perform the upanayana, if he is free from any
pollution.
Notes
Nandi Shraddha is a rite performed on the day of
Upanayana, but before the Upanayana. Upanayana is the
investiture of the sacred thread and initiation into Gayatri.
Five Brahamacharis who had Upanayana and who are not
marricd are fed in Nandi Shraddha. The father can give his

224 - Uttara Kalamrita
‘daughter in marriage even if his wife is in her menses. But
ihe clothes of the wife are kept on the saat next to him. This
is the cusiom followed.
aya maea faqe: ares maA: ae 1
After the Nandi Shraddha, the Brahmachari should
cat only in the company of his mother, Likewise the bridegroom should eat always along with his wife after marriage.
The bridegroom should have his hair cut as per the custom
‘in his family. The sacred fire kindled in Upanayana is
inferior to the Grihya fire. When the ordinary fire is mixed
with the sacred fire, it should be worshipped with the
mantra beginning with ‘Pahi’ (protect me). It should be
worshipped thus only by the learned, not by those who
have no relationship with the boy.
Notes
The first sentence is vague and is contrary to the
` observed customs. The mother has to sit with the father
when the inilialion into Gayatri is given. This is not allowed
after a meal. The author's confused mind gives risc to this
objection. The bridegroom and the bride have to eat side by
side on the day of marriage only. On other days she may eat
later.
TENA Wears ia amama a: |
-amaya factors afa priaesaeia yeaa Ag: 34 1
The smarta houschold is one which follows the grihya
` and kalpa Sutras and the Smritis. The Smartlas are different
from Vaishnavas. This is a peculiar distinelion followed in
Soulh India alonc.
When the ordinary firc is followed by the Smarta

Second Kanda 225
house-hold (Grihya) fire, one should sprinkle its ashes
chanting the hymn that begins with ‘Sam no devih’. Then
he should offer oblations with the mantra beginning with
‘Pahi’. When the Grihya fire and the ordinary fire are mixed
before the commencement of the worship of the marital fire
and the Sthalipaka, the oblations have to be offered in
accordance with the importance given to the fires.
Notes
Tite m À appears in Taittiriya Samhita, 1.1.12.8’and
7.1.13 and 8.60.10. The Grihya and Kalpa Sutras will give
the proper one. Wf WH 241: is in Rig Veda 10.9.4 and in
Taittiriya Samhita 1.2.11 and 2.5.8.5.
urar fiery rantaan quiet gmi aT gera arada gua: |
aafe a Aag:
Ramena aiaga paa ar GERAN ae it
If the fires are combined after the homa was begun, the
fire should be separated into two parts. One will be for
Sthalipaka which should be completed with final oblations.
But, the wise say that the ghee should not be poured with
the spoon. When the sacrificial twigs (Samidhas) bound to
the spoon (Sruva) are destroyed, the fire should not receive
any oblations with that spoon. If, however, the spoon is
forgotten, the oblations have to be offered to Soma.
Beret ae aat g fart ag: wa at eT:
Yataryaacnrafe qn atgreqad TA: 1
separa a alert: wa wera
weitere yida yai wedeafa: ureratit ae 11
After a person loses his wife, he can remarry only in
the odd years from her death. Where the remarriage takes
place in even years, it is not beneficial. When a girl has her
first menses before marriage, her father and brother become sinners. In order to be free from sin, the husband
"ret

226 Uttara Kalamrita
should not have any sex with his wife before her first
menses.
Notes
Child marriages came into vogue only after the Muslim
invasions. Social and political factors were responsible forthis. In the Vedic times a fully grown woman was bent on
choosing her own husband. The latter authors interpolated
verses into the Smritis to give sanction to child marriages.
A girl, according to the Vedic instances, should get married
only after her menstrual periods begin.
auffaufraaaerafvan ore Teo wa:
HUTA RAA A aa fafer: |
marian sage saga
ware yiana maa 1 ae tt
The first lunar day of the year is the first day of the
bright half of Chaitra. This should not be vitiated by the
previous tithi (amavasya). Ifa part of amavasya is present
at sun rise, it has to be rejected as the first day of the year.
The birth of Sri Rama was at mid day on the ninth
- lunar day. Sri Rama truly confers liberation on man. If this
ninth lunar day (navami) is vitiated by a portion of ashtami,
it should be avoided by all those who take a vow, fast and
worship Sri Rama. But if on that day the Moon is in the
constellation of Punarvasu, it is very auspicious for the
worship of Sri Rama.
wafeppraaeea Agra yu:
mia a ari qi wear ERT!
areal @ Uta ar eRe wet yar
are saf safer arpa gyal Be H
The beginning of Treta Yuga, which coincides with the
birth day of Parashurama, is auspicious and it falls on the
third lunar day in the month of Vaishakha (bright half}. It
is also Akshaya Tritiya. This tithi should be at noon and it
should not be vitiated by the second lunar day.

Second Kanda — 227
In the case of Shraddha and the like the tithi should
extend up to the afternoon also. The best observances like
the celebration of Nrisimha Jayanti should have the tithi
upto the evening. But if the constellation is Svati, it is not
auspicious.
Notes ;
Nrisimha Jayanti, the day of the Nara-Simha avatara,
falls on the fourteenth day of the bright half of Vaishakha.
sarai aai ween fe actofdhearedt a7
aame wives firer a wr fink:
Tiia waft: rant aed aera
gaga a af aad wareedt aaa volt
The Grihya Sutras state that the upakarma (annual
renewal of the sacred thread for the householders) for the
boy who had his Upanayana earlier in the year, should be
performed in the lunar month Sravana. But it should not
be performed on that day if there is a solar ingress into a
new sign, or if Guru or Shukra or both are combust. Those
following Yajur Veda perform it only on the full Moon day
of Shravana month. Those who follow Rig Veda observe it
on a day when the Moon is in Sravana constellation. The
followers of Sama Veda observe it when the Moon is in
Hasta.
Now we describe the eighth lunar day of the dark half
of Sravana month which is the birth day of Lord Srikrishna.
TAVATUTATS A WTA: BVA AT WANT
Afk afe agera renf ator wt
arada afa aratataTMT Ua a Aa a g aA fear yT n we
Lord Srikrishna was born on the eighth day of the dark
fortnight of Sravana month. If that happens to be a Wednesday and if the Moon is in Rohini, it is most fruitful and
sacred. But the tithi should extend upto mid-night and it
should not be vitiated by the previous tithi.

228 | Uttara Kalamrita
q umida yt: yaratana
TA m a faereare ya ar Aidra m
“MT RTE R VAM WaT A AL R N
_ When this Janmashtami tithi extends beyond three.
‘yamas at night, the fast can be given up at the end of the
tithi or at the end of the constellation. It is equal in effect
to Maha Shivaratri.
The fourth lunar day in the bright half of the Bhadrapada month is auspicious for the worship of Lord Ganesha.
If the tithi touches the next tithi and if the constellation is
Chitra, it is highly praiseworthy. lt is not so if the third tithi
touches: it.
Notes
A day of 24 hours has eight yamas and each yama is
for three hours.
yon sgia mog at aegen EET
maè ufe er agdenfeastal wer yw
et drei piena aà m
temsainfrel fagrecerat Bt areeeRP OTR Ya
Rishi Panchami is very powerful if it is connected with
the previous fourth lunar day of the bright half of Bhadrapada, not with the sixth lunar day.
When the fourteenth lunar day of the bright half of
Bhadrapada extends upto noon, Lord Ananta should be
worshipped on that day.
The fourteenth day in the dark fortnight of Asvina
month is known as Naraka Chaturdasi. It gives rise to great
religious merit for any one who takes an oil bath on that day
at the time of the rising of the Moon.
wre mfa far agi ya: woef
mr agaaa NETTA |
wrt Aeara age aa È) afha:
wrafeanitiverrgeaniza Aa xx 1

Second Kanda i 229
A bath in the early morning on the fourth day of the
bright half of the month Magha is delightful to Adisesha,
` the Lord of the serpents. Likewise a bath on the Ratha
Saptami day (seventh lunar day of Magha Shukla Paksha) |
is very pleasing to the Sun, if there is also the constellation _
of Anuradha.
It is also meritorious like taking a bath on the occasions of a crore of solar eclipses, or like the bath when the
twelve sun rise together at the same time.
The sacred Shivaratri extending upto midnight in the
dark half of Magha will reward a person with a union with
Lord Shiva.
Notes
By no stretch of imagination or astronomical manipulations can we have the constellation of Anuradha on the
Ratha Saptami day. The constellation will be near about
Asvini only. The author has lost touch with the elements of
astronomy.
Maha Shiva Ratri falls on the day when the fourteenth
tithi in the dark half Magha month extends at least upto
midnight on that day.
mà ma agiri firafate: ar wife mfa frar
pama Renaa: raar: vier yA
dtan fe pia Fifer AA AR wy tl
In the dark fortnight of the lunar month of Magha the
fourteenth tithi is called Shiva-tithi, a day sacred to Lord
Shiva. It is also called Maha Shiva Ratri. This fourteenth
day in the dark half of every lunar month is also sacred to
Lord Shiva. Hence one should devoutly worship on this day
Lord Shiva alongwith the Divine Mother at dusk (pradosha). This gives glorious results,
Likewise on every day there is a period of three
muhurtas as soon as the Sun touches the peak of the
_ setting hill. At this time he should be worshipped.

230 l Uttara Kalamrita
On the Shivaratri day a period of two Ghatikas (48
minutes) at midnight is called Maha-Nisha or the great
night.
Notes
Does a muhurta cover 24 minutes? Actually a 48
minute period is called muhurtaka. In reality a muhurta is
only a period of three minutes, It is a time of seven and a
half Vighatikas.
TARA Wt A Ag ar at A,
qat amaf aai a aR pia Arar |
qui waft a ni af màniga
qia praa afe vàm garh aT xa
When ekadashi (the eleventh lunar day of the bright
half of the month) does not fall on two days, Dvadashi (12th
tithi) should be observed on the next day. But when it falls
on two days, ascetics and widows should observe it on the
second day. A dual tithi does not exist on the second day.
Still it is called such. Only the first day will dominate. If
there is an unvitiated 12th tithi, that alone is the best.
Notes
A fast is undertaken on the eleventh lunar tithi and it
is broken on the next day.
freer akraq art Aragi afèr
garai aqurer gai EN arom!
Tuani aik ayeni wt
gaam: wA ar a ver a arettar gÅ: wis 11
` If the Ekadashi ts vitlated by the next tithi, it should
be given up like poison. The next day ts to be accepted for
fasting, though it is not strictly Ekadashi. The fast is to be
` broken the day after this. This is the opinion of the Vaishnavas. According to them Ekadashi should not be vitiated
by Dvadashi, and the breaking of the fast should be ac-

Second Kanda 231
cepted by the wise even after the 12th tithi is over. .
Der anata verte fe war yeni afr
we areg ugha nn wee
walt amefa fr fafi ar aisaka
me anaE aE aÀ KS a mT we I
A Shraddha should not be performed on the day of a
solar eclipse. But on the day of a lunar eclipse; it can be
performed, because the eclipse of the Moon and its attendant rites take piace at night while the Shraddha is performed in the day-time.
If the authorities are too many and create doubts, one
must follow the convention accepted by the majority.
Fiaa: at g aAa aa aa: ve we o
If the case of the rituals and sacrificial rites related to
marriage, pollution (ashaucha arising from a death or from
a birth) does not affect the concerned Brahmanas (Dvijas)
till all the functions are completed, once the Nandi
Shraddha and the Dikha-Vidhi are performed.
In the case of Shraddha, there is no ashaucha once the
cooking is completed or the food is taken up.
Likewise in a sacrifice when a Brahmana is sprinkled
with the sanctified water for initiation, he is not affected by
ashaucha. The actual sacrifice, however, begins later with
the chanting of the Vedic mantras.
aA: aama oe xfs amanaya df
mÀ gf 7 fafa faan a deft favors
Pieters faafarn fe fafgat metai fr awan are gefen taae fð yo 1

232 . a _ Uttara Kalamrita
The sacred texts (Shruti) declare that if there is no
sólar ingress into the next sign during a lunar month, it is
called mala (soiled) or adhika (intercalary) month. Sacrificial and other rites related to the Manes (dead ancestors)
are forbidden in that month. The daily and ordained duties’
alone should be performed in that month by the wise or
discriminating ones, Only the monthly Sraddha can be
performed in this month. In the case of this intercalary
month, the month has sixty days. The annual Shraddhas,
sacrifices and similar rites concerning the gods are not to
be performed.
Notes
‘Tt is the custom to perform the annual Shraddha in the
-{ntercalary month and also in the next one.
pipet a ada: weafrergear: qafay wes yddau ura: qat: or: wader
. Yat weer ata segue: Wercedter: YA:
qat wrest ahem: qaeent quareg Afaa: 4g 1
Ten Ghatikas before and after the solar ingress into
"Mesha are auspicious, in Vrishabha it is 16 Ghatikas
before, in Mithuna 16 after that, in Karkataka 30 ghatikas
before the ingress; in Simha 16 before, in Kanya 16 after;
in Tula 10 before and after; in Vrischika 16 before; in
Dhanush 16 after; in Makara 40 after; in Kumbha 16
before; and in Mina 16 after.
Notes
This is arbitrary. For Uttarayana (solar ingress into
Makara) the auspicious time extends to twenty Ghatikas
after the ingress. In the case of Dakshinayana (solar ingress
into karkataka), the auspicious time begins at twenty
Ghatikas before the ingress and ends with the ingress. This
is the view of the Dharma Shastras of Madhava, Nirnaya
Sindhu and others.

Second Kanda 233
wera ady afg ver ot gh parasai
frefigaftaguri fam aft ot Aa fafi: 1
Toners wa aaah arran
mÈ girisa ara TT 1 4 UI
A single prostration with folded hands is for the gods
Two are for each sage, and three each tothe Manes. As per
the rule only one salutation is for a woman, but three for
the mother and those of her stature or position. This is the
general rule to be followed in Shraddha.
For the Vaisvadeva, food should be cooked separately.
Fanfara a ead ak iaga Ysera 4a ut
The libations of water for the dead (tarpanas) should
not be dropped on the bare ground or into an iron or bronze
vessel. Join the thumb to the index finger and the covered
space below these closed fingers or between these two
fingers is a sign of inviting the dead ancestors. With the
other finger one should offer rice or food on the ground with
deep devotion. The same rule operates in the case of the
offering to Chitra. This is made while one begins to eat. This
should not at all be eaten.
Notes
Chitra is the name for a small quantity of cooked rice
taken from the plate and placed on the ground near the
plate. It is offered to the ants, birds and the like later on.
mS BE maadena mafaSmi a arsada natie
mq get a miga aera À
marermtael aisha meut ARA Aam ue n
The’ food is to be offered to the five vital airs before

234 Uttara Kalamrita
eating the food. The particles or small quantities are to be
taken (1) with the thumb, index finger and middle finger as
an offering to Prana or vital air; (2) with the thumb, middle
and ring fingers to Apana air; (3) with the thumb, ring and
little finger to Vyana air; (4) with the thumb, index and little
finger to Udana air; (5) with all the fingers to Samana air.
One should observe, therefore, silence while eating.
On the day of marriage the bride and bridegroom
should fast at night.
Notes
There are five vital airs called Prana, Apana, Vyana,
Udana, and Samana. These are within the body.
When the time of the marriage is in the fore-noon, the
bride and bridegroom along with the parents of the girl have
to fast till sthallpaka is completed on that night. Fasting in
the night is unnecessarily invented by the author.
meag a wea AT aaa
qaaa wafaaa ata
Wet a eratara 3 ae FASOTETSA raraga À a T afa yy N
If a person is to perform Nandi Shraddha, and if his
father is alive, he should not mention the names of his dead
ancestors with their particulars, and he should not use the
seeds of sesamum. He should mention only their Gotra. Or
he himself may do the Nandi Shraddha for his paternal
grandfather and others. If the mother is in her menstrual
course, the auspicious marriage rite should not continue,
even if the Nandi Shraddha is over.
ui ziyad faa art aAA A
EMTALA rg aa FTA: |
g n a waredtafe uraa a aA
SPARTA: MERA NERAN UR
Suppose there is a Shraddha on the marriage day.

Second Kanda 235
How should sthalipaka be done? Divide the duration of the
night by thirty. Omit the last two parts. Just before the last
two parts, in the 28th part the sthalipaka homa should be
performed, if it is not an amavasya (new moon night, the
30th tithi). If the day is an amavasya and if the woman has
no child, the Darsa homa should be gone through and also
on the day of the solar ingress.
Notes ;
No one in his senses can fix the day of the marriage of
his daughter or son on the day he has to perform a
Shraddha.
qirda: gepennt
mierea at peda gfir
gar wieed ga À agaia
agiia nae Ayaka gA ue 1
When the. wife is pregnant the tonsure ceremony
{chaula) of his son should not be performed, and he should
not have a hair-cut. He should not during the period of
pregnancy erect pillars, lay the foundations, or construct a
house. The pregnant woman should not take a bath in the
sea and she should not go on a long journey. When a child
is born on the amavasya of Bhadrapada (Mahalaya or
‘Pitrimoksha amavasya), or at the time of the death of a
family member, or on the first day of the lunar month or on
the twelfth day of the dark fortnight, one should go through
his daily vaisvadeva as per the rules laid down by the
experts in the four forms of knowledge.
at wrest freee caret agarayere ot
moga afe aii afe fry: wat gara R
Ros a a ma gA mi RRRA ue 1
Now the author describes tarpana (offering water with
the seeds of sesamum to the dead). Offering tarpanas to the
dead is important on every amavasya (dark moon day), and

236 Uttara Kalamrita
on Mahalaya {last day of the lunar Bhadrapada). These are
given in order of importance. Then the tarpana should be
given on the day of death, the day of Shraddha. If the
Sapindikarana has been done, then the tarpana on
amavasya and the one on Mahalaya amavasya should be
done in the first year itself.
When one visits the holy waters or shrines the following should be avoided by the wise: (1} offering holy water,
(2} rule regarding the fingers while eating, (3) difference in
the branches {(Shakhas) of the Veda, {4} the question about
satisfying the dead ancestors, (5) the scattering of the
particles of food for the unknown or un-cared for dead ones,
(6) invoking the souls of the dead, and (7) offering oblations
into the Shraddha fire. The same rule holds good in the case
of the sankalpa Shraddha too,
Waa ST AKAN Ey SAT ST
wearer: firgerafad nagan A
re arag aa charset
araeaiste aa: at 7 a aie wat fg ait ue tt
Just as one performs Shraddha for his father, he
should do the same for the wives of the father as well. He
should do similarly for his own dead wives, elder brothers,
paternal uncles and maternal grand father. Oblations are to
be made in the aupasanagni (the marital fire), and those of
the Shraddha in the ordinary fire. Even the son of a co-wife
has the right to perform the Shraddha of a wife belonging
to another caste. But the husband should not do it.
Notes
* The rule stipulated here is not followed.
ate: Gray E ahr waste A qf:
Yaurgirgfern ufe war sat wet ena: |
fayre q a yoi sarge Ad mrp:
wi eaat: ut fag wa ut SERI o 1
When one of the uterine brothers has sons, all the

Second Kanda f - 237
brothers should be deemed to have children as far as the
problem of Shraddha is concerned.
Likewise if one of them alone is married, that wife
represents the position of a wife for all of them for the
purpose of the Shraddha. Her own sons, brothers and
father are excepted.
If a woman whose husband is alive and who has no
sons or dies, or if a widow dies, the function of uniting her
with the dead ancestors is performed soon after Sapindikarana. This is the view of some. According to others, it
should be performed on the first death anniversary.
Notes
The view stated here is preposterous. Sapindikarana is
done on the twelfth day after the death.
gdb Ghee eb bldiols ore u
In the annual Shraddha, when ghee is applied to the
Pinda of the mother, if the Pinda of the father breaks away,
the Shraddha has to be performed again.
The food which remains and which is sprinkled with
holy water by the priest, should not be given up. It should
be eaten, or it should be buried in the earth for the first two
years and later burnt.
Notes
This is a strange custom. It has no authority. In the
Shraddha for the father the Pindas are for the father, grand
father and great-grand father. This Pinda for the mother
does not arise. If it is Shraddha for the mother the Pindas
are for the mother, her mother-in-law, and the latter's
mother-in-law.
The Pinda is not meant for eating, It is to be mixed in
a tank or river, burnt, or buried. The author has a confused

238 l Uttara Kalamrita
mind. If it is buried, it is never exhumated.
miasan yatta ur rA
qoi aia a wa megaa ard a at frets
ma Ahr gaara wat ratmM area gga aena fret AR 1
If one does not unite with his wife after her menstrual
bath is over and if she has a desire for sex, inspite of her
nearness, he commits the sin of killing a child in the womb.
But if a woman after her menses does not join her
loving husband, she has her next birth as a hog, a dog, a
wolf, or a jackal. Hence a couple must have sex which can
result in the birth of a good son, and this takes them finally
beyond the mundane life.
wrrecrayraranreafe EE 4 ATER az UI
A woman has menses because of four causes. These
are (1) excessive passion, (2) ailment, (3} age, and (4) food
or medicine. The cause depending on the age is the most
important one. Menses continue till the woman is fifty years
old. They begin around the age of eighteen and last for three
days in every month. If the menses reappear within eighteen days, there is no bad effect and no dosha (pollution or
ashaucha).
Notes
; Generally the first menses can appear at any time after
the girl completes twelve years of age.
arta torent aga yar ered aig
wares g Usa efor tenis ar era ay it

Second Kanda 239
Some authorities declare that menses appearing before fifteen days do not cause ashaucha (pollution, staying
out of doors). But if they appear after fifteen days and before
twenty one days, the ashaucha is for two days. On the first
day of the menses the woman is an outcast, on the second
a hater of Brahmanas (Dvijas), on the third day like a
washerwoman, and on the fourth day she is pure and can
take up her personal activities. On the fifth day she is
absolutely pure and clean and can have sex freely, if there
is no other trouble like ill-health.
Yat Aa y gic saree ward,
ast araerar g wafer and a hafa
Ryecaned wae wre fads,
mamaia ddaa 1&4 tl
One who is recently married to a delightful or charming wife, should perform a sacrifice, or celebrate his birth
day, a Shraddha, or a Parva like the darkmoon or solar
ingress, On that day he should have no sex with his wife.
If he has it, he must take a bath with his clothes on, and
should cleanse his body with the seeds of sesamum. On
such days he should not see a dead body, he should not
climb a western or strange hill, and he should neither go to
sacred rivers nor worship the gods.
arenen gean ae aagWof wusna yereofepfa: aeriene |
Taenia a quad yfafer favsyari pAarate aada mafaa Ap ag tt
No Upanayana (wearing of the sacred thread and initiation into Gayatri) is allowed after one such was performed earlier within six months. He must give up old and
broken pots. Repairing or thatching the roof, sweeping the
floor and the like in the house, shaving and the like are to
be avoided during this period.
But on the day of death, he can perform the Shraddha
and offer the Pindas. He can also do kripa Shraddha for the

240 | . Uttara Kalamrita
destitute that are dead. He should not go to Gaya for
performing Gaya Shraddha for his parents. Otherwise he
becomes a sinner.
Wet retat aad fxm:
walang eeraaaaatterena Safer
wat afarot we fergie erat we Rt
BE Amaaan g ana ART N GOH
A Dvija should fix his sacred thread round his right ear
while going for urination. In the day time he should go to
the bank of a tank or river and wash his genitals. In the
night he should only pour water on them or moisten them.
After excretion (stools) the genitals and the right hand
should be cleansed with mud, and the left hand should be
purified with thrice as much mud as before. Then both the
hands should be cleansed with double the quantity of the
mud prescribed earlier. The anus should be cleaned five
times with the mud prescribed. The other limbs (sex organ
and the testicles) should be cleansed with twice the quantity of the mud prescribed.
Notes
This is a custom said to be followed in Tamil Nadu. The
author is evidently a native of this area. It is called
chauchavyan by them.
faite wear ag ay giei |
WH agoa: HS Begs waa:
We mfi wat a i yar g pad
qe aera Pai eean Ge N
After a sex-act, urination and the like and the various
parts are to be cleaned in the folowing manner: the genitals
should be washed thrice, the anus six times, each hand ten
times, then again the anus once, twice and thrice the
palms, back of the hands, thighs and loins. If there is a
slight emission of the sperm, it should be cleaned twice.
These rules apply only for the day time. If it is at night the

Second Kanda 241
above numerals should be halved: If it is during a journey,
the nwmber is only one-fourth.
Notes
We have noticed this custom only among orthodox
families of Tamil Nadu. The later part of the verse is outrageous.
metre ràe piagne:
ward madri apioa yira
Pirpana ATATA:
Pra a yfe ay eeina oa g
The cleaning process given in the previous verse is for
a house-holder. It is doubled for a brahmachari (unmarried
celibant). It is thrice for a Vanaprastha, the third ashrama
when the person retires to a forest. It is four times for the
asetic. Only by a holy bath the woman should wash away
the ointment, sandal paste and the like. Shudras and those
that observe some view like the brahmacharins, urchins,
uneducated or ignorant rusties should follow the same
procedure. The body should not be given away into the
waters after death. There are crores of tirthas (holy rivers).
Notes
The author forgets that an ascetic can have jalasamadhi, giving up his body in a flowing river or lake. The
great spiritual giant and avadhuta His holiness Chandra
Sekhara Bharati left his life in the river.
der qfi Raze w farad sa meaa
UAY Wate Fe eT ged raw: |
wre Teta g aaa Fe ETAT Ate
ame fafa fraa ya ert fa Ga: 11 von
The Gods take the offerings with their heads, the
manes (dead ancestors) with their mouths, the yakshas
with their waists, and those that have narrow lower lips and
other similar creatures with the lower parts of their bodies.

242 Uttara Kalamrita
The water left on the left side is like blood, and that on the
right side is holy like the water of the Ganges. The washing
of the hair is a useless bath if drops of water continue to fall
later.
get gida qed iega:
wee att fastest art nogan
fat ahem aa a amen wen afa yary maaa auaa gaa RA oe H
After taking food, and after urination, excretion
and falling of sperm, one should gurgle water one
hundred and eight times to wash his mouth, In the
solar months of Mithuna, Karkataka, and Simha alli
the rivers are in their menstrual courses. Hence it is
not proper to bathe in these rivers during these
months (roughly from the fifteenth of June to the sixteenth
of September every year). But if one has such a bath, he
should get purified by a bath at the confluence of the river
and the sea.
Notes
The months referred to come in the rainy season when
the rivers swell. It is also believed that a husband and his
wife should not bathe together in the Narmada.
ered magni magae afri at
te ardana wear thal a aafe
mi aa mafa fired tà a fà ar:
mA aR Ae ardiena aPresd a g 02 H
On religious occasions related to the gods and the like,
one should wear a pavitra made of darbha, copper, silver or
gold. If it is of gold, it should be worn on the ring finger. This
Pavitra is auspicious for the worship of the God, not for that
of the Manes. This should not be worn if the father or elder
brother of the person is alive.

Second Kando 243
Notes
Pavitra is formed in the shape of a ring with the end
projecting outside. It is essential in rites devoted to the
dead. The author has not followed the custom.
mai ayi fagfes sear yarersta msere agaa: ga aeien |
wer magri fanas afigrerseqad yi
uani wut ge sa E aae ER 93 11
On the day of the Shraddha of the father or mother,
one should repeat the Gayatri mantra ten times at dusk. He
should do so on the days when the study of the Veda is
prohibited, and on these days it is for twenty eight times.
On auspicious days, Gayatri should be repeated 1000, 500,
300 or 128 times. On Sankranti and other days, if the
annual Shraddha also falls, one should first offer libation
of water to the dead and then alone start performing the
Shraddha.
Notes
The lunar days when Veda should not be recited are 1,
8, 9, 14, 15, 16, 23, 24, 29 and 30. On the day of Shraddha
the Tarpanas (offerings of water to the three generations)
are given after the ceremony is over and before the agent
takes his food.
sre Miragre fered
quite afte qed defek |
Fare a orion aari g at ati
ya: emaa: weed fates wyareatqit ox it
There are Shraddhas of different kinds. Tirtha
Shraddha is observed at centres of pilgrimages. Gaya
Shraddha is done at Gaya in modern Bihar (Originally a
Vihara, a Buddhist centre). There is Mahalayala (the last
day of lunar month of Bhadrapada). Then there is ashtaka

244 Uttara Kalamrita
Shraddha; it is on the eighth day in the third month
of death. Next there is the annual Shraddha. On all
these days one would offer watery libations (Tarpanas)
with seeds of sesamum in the afternoon, if the lunar
tithi extends till then. This rule applies to the monthly .
Shraddha (Masika) also, or even when a child birth
appears in the family.
One whose father is alive may be performing the
Shraddha for his mother. He should not give tarpanas
(libation of water for the dead). Normally one should have
a bath, become pure, and offer the tarpanas as per the
rules. Then alone he should go about his Sandhya Vandana, worship and the like.
red a rent mfa ett querer Fert: 11 ou T
After the annual Shraddha is over, the Brahmana
should offer the daily tarpanas, perform his Vaishvadeva
sacrifice, with rice specially cooked for that purpose, and
_ then proceed to his daily Brahma Yajna.
The annual Shraddha should not be performed with
the seeds of Sesamum, if it is a day of marriage, upanayana
or Chaula. In the Shraddhas for the dead Pretas and in
Gaya Shraddha, if the Sun has set, it is belleved that the
two luminaries are together present.
wrt sfai Resan Aai aratq 119g H
Tarpanas or libations of water with the seeds of sesamum should be offered to the Sun and the Moon if a
Sunday coincides with the seventh lunar day and with his

Second Kanda 245
own birth day. If one desires prosperity, he should not
perform the bath with earth and with offering of the Pindas
and seeds of Sesamum on Sundays, Tuesdays and Fridays,
‘coinciding with the Magha Nakshatra, or with the fifth or
ninth tithis, or with the constellations Ashvini, Bharani,
Krittika, or Mrigasira. It should not be done when the two
ayanas coincide.
Special Offer
f you enjoyed this book and would like to
have our catalogue of over 1000 titles on Astrology and other occult sciences, just send
your name and address and Rs 5/- Postage
stamps (US $ | for overseas Customers) as handling cost to: _
Ranjan Publications
16, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj,
New Delhi-110002 (INDIA).
A Glimpse of
KERALA ASTROLOGY .0o.P. verma
The present work A Glimpse of Kerala Astrology is
} condensation of three recognised Kerala classics Kerala fJyotisha, Kerala sutra and Gopale Ratnakara which are unique fn their own way & speak out the essential, principles of Kerala f
Astrology. We suppose our readers will be enlightened by these
A illuminating pearlsof KERALA ASTROLOGY. is. 100/- A:
EEF? ay oat —
PH 52 i

Chapter II
warega Fa: aha qa ac ai T
The original text does not give this division of a Chapter. But the first 76 verses of this kanda have no astrological
significance. What pertains to astrology begins now. Hence
we have made this into a new Chapter.
Draw the figure of Goddess Sarasvati under the sacred
Aum (3%). Draw ten vertical lines and over them ten horizontal lines. The squares formed by even columns and similar
rows (omitting four squares in the centre) are twelve. They
represent the twelve signs of the Zodiac counted from
Mesha. We will now describe the function of the twelve
Bhavas (houses) from lagna onwards so that the wise can
ascertain their significance.
Notes
The Zodical figure is given below. The corner on the left
‘is Mina (Pisces). The signs follow the clockwise direction.
This is the diagram followed in South India.

Second Kanda ; 247
W: ee BEM: Ya gaq wer aag: firar
waid exe pa were FAT WET: AAT!
areas g wa neeme qoi war
atnan renra eeren RRNTT: 1h 3 t
The twelve houses are called (1) body, (2) wealth,
(3) brothers, (4) happiness, (8) children, (6) enemies,
(7) wife or husband, (8) longevity, (9) father, (10) profegsion,
(11) gains and (12) loss.
All planets have a full glance on the seventh from
where they are. There are special aspects for Kuja, Guru
and Shani. Shani aspects the third and the tenth from his
place with a full glance, Guru the fifth and the ninth from
himeelf, and Kuja the fourth and the eighth from himself.
Notes
Actually all planets aspect from where they are, the
houses 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9 and 10 from themselves.
we Anena WEN YET:
dha: aaufa: ya 4 faerie A RI
wag mam ayaa wt earn
ere wedge wd eraredivat: 11 8 1
The benefics owning the konas (1, 5, 9) are beneficial
if they occupy the kendras or houses 2, 3 or 11. But a
benefic owning a kendra will not give good results. On the
other hand, a malefit owning a kendra is not inauspicious.
If the lords of the eighth and the twelfth from lagna are in
conjunction, or if they have exchanged houses, they produce different results. The eighth lord gives good result and
the twelfth lord gives wealth, luck and the like.
aise Aaga: qt gefa Aart are |
wary menea afe mA erag area
aaga a an fagra wernt canted) Saget
qane uaea g AR: e
If one of the two planets owning the eighth or the
twelfth house also owns the lagna, he is beneficial. Guru

248 i i Uttara Kalamrita
and Shukra owning kendras are not beneficial. If they are
posited in maraka houses (second or seventh from lagna),
they put an end to the life during their major periods. If
Budha is posited in the same way, he gives similar results.
If the Sun or the Moon own the eighth house, they wilt not
prove marakas (significators of death). When Kuja owns the
fourth and the ninth houses (for those born in Simha
lagna), or if he owns the fifth and the tenth houses (for
those born in Karkataka lagna), he is very auspicious. But
he is not so if he owns only one of the two houses. This
applies to those born in Dhanush, Makara, and Kumbha
lagnas.
Notes
Shani, Shukra and Kuja are benefic for those born in
Kumbha, Tula, and Mesha lagnas respectively even if they
-own malefic eighth and twelfth houses. Mars is a benefic for
Mesha lagna and Shukra for a Tula lagna. Mars is a malefic
for Vrischika lagna and Shukra for Vrishabha lagna.
waquiandt udierafearaat werent
waa dence serge aR: |
aa a gaa veanftaragaen A yar:
À zerafa ata: quent waren ati & i
When Rahu and Ketu are strong, they give the results
like the plancts owning a malefic house and in the house
they are situated or with whom they are together.
If the lords of kendras and konas are not with Rahu or
Ketu, they give beneflc results. If they are otherwise situ-
‘ated, the results will be malefic. Though Rahu and Ketu are
malefics, they become benefics by their positions or by their
association with cerlain planets.
A ext af do ferna aara ar feart
oath at gaa A dhege: |
maena arise yaa ara & 1

Second Kanda 249
If Rahu or Ketu and the lords of a kona (1, 5, 9), are
together in the ninth or tenth, or if one of them is in the
ninth and the other in the tenth or vice versa, there is
prosperity to the native. A conjunction of either with the
lord of a kona will be beneficial. In these circumstances the
major periods of the nodes and of those with them will bring
happiness. If there is a malefic planet associated in the
same way with a node, the subperiod of the planet that can
cause a Yoga, will be adverse.
plm a aire eae karasa
wart gat aaa Safran
aient + yR araa ar
A Ae are areafite tart RaT: o
Rahu and Ketu are auspicious when they are ina kona
(1, 5, 9) or in a kendra (1, 4, 7, 10); or when they are
aspected by or associated with the lord of that kona or
kendra house. They are beneficial also when they are with
the lords of any kona or kendra house.
If the lord of the ninth owns the eighth or the twelfth
also, or if the lords of the ninth and the tenth are with the
lords of the eighth or twelfth, then the benefic nature of the
yoga is lost.
The eighth house is called the house of longevity.
The eighth house from the eighth (the third from
lagna) is also the house of longevity. The twelfth houses
from these {the second and the seventh from lagna) are
called the death-inflicting (maraka) houses. The planet in
the second from its lord is a malefic. During the major
period of such a malefic planet, or in the major period of the

250 i Uttara Kalamrita
planet owning the twelfth house, the person concerned has
great sorrow or misfortune.
CMTS IRR a CHT:
U g a, RÀ wat ETARA
wen aiam: eig Yor ay: wet gi
a ar at guya sien aq: eyed we R
Shani alone among all the planets has the power of
killing the native. He can do so in the subperiod of a benefic
or in his subperiod in the period of the malefic. But to do
this he must be connected with the lord of the eighth or
twelfth Bhava or is with a death-inflicting (maraka) planet.
All planets in their own subperiods give the results which
are natural to them or to those with whom they are together.
ararot 9 centtrrefarararany Tat aq
werd dega gag een aaen ar
Ten Bawa: YN F fe ye wares Àd arcana ufe aan STAT o t
The lords of the subperiods may be inimical to the lord
of the major period. The results thcy give are io be judged
according to the nature of the lords of the subperiods.
Even in the major period of the lord of a kona (1, 5, 9}
the subperiod of the lord of a kendra (1, 4, 7, 10) may not
be beneficial; but it is bencficial if the lord of the said
kendra is connected with a benefic. But in the subperiod of
a maraka planet the resuits should be judged on the basis
of the planet or planets with whom he is conjoined.
qa: meae aegerafa yrat a Acasa:
Jagaan yarate a fae ative: carga:
sat areca: yun carat aa: AfA
wearer aAA: maa TOT RR H
The subperiod of a malefic can prove auspicious by his

Second Kanda 251
relation (conjunction, exchange, aspect) with the planets
mentioned above. because of their equal benefic nature
both the yoga karakas and the plancts with whom they are,
they give good results in their periods and subperiods.
A yogakaraka planct is able to do good in his period
during the subperiod of anothcr planet, even though the
latter is not connected with him.
Rahu and Ketu are beneficial during the periods of
benefics, if they arc associated with benefics.
aA a ya aa afearararat wf:
Ura ACA MR waar: TAT: |
tan that prada g Penran fer RR
' When: Rahu or Kelu is with a benefic and placed
between two malcfics, then the subpcriods of the malefics
who are not wilh the nodes, give benclic results. If the
bencfic associaicd with the node is a yogakaraka, his
subpcriod gives mixed results. If he is nol so conjoined, the
results are very bad. If Rahu or Ketu is a maraka, then the
demise comes in the subpcriod of the benefic referred to, or
in that of his own subpcriad.
wart giana yfer sacaraa: ta Hei
yagir fae: sent aera |
mienta fae: Ragot agrada |
mA agia ena aAa faafaa N
During the major period of Shani, the subperiod of
Shani gives the results of Kuja, and his own results appear
in the subpcriod of Kuja. Similarly in the major period of
Kuja, he gives the results of Shani in his subperiad, and his
own in Shani's subperiod.
If the lords of Lagna and Chandra lagna exchange
signs, lhcy confer Rajayoga on the native. Rajayoga also
ariscs when tlic lords of the ninth and the tenth houses
interchange signs or are together.

252 Uttara Kalamrita
To help the students we will after a full investigation
describe the effects of the different lagnas and the relation
of the planets to them.
Notes ,
Consider Chart 113 for this significant verse. The
Kuja and Guru. Though he
was an officer in the Indian
and they aspect each other. Kuja is in the sixth. In the
‘major period of Kuja he Rani
Budha 21
Shukra 1
Ede
health deteriorated. In his
own sub-period, the sixthexchange between Guru
Gur 17
Kuja ?
Railways, the sub-period of
Kuja in his major period
shot into lime light—note
that the sixth is also the
Shani R 25
Lagna 18
placed Kuja showed the re- J+
sults, and he expired in
Yoga, Guru, Shukra and
Kuja give rise to Maha
Ketu 26 Shukra 3
Chandra 4 Budha 18
acted adversely as Shani
was in the eighth and has a 2-12 relation with Kuja.
house of profession and
that he exchanged signs.
Shani’s own sub-period. Shani is lord of the second, and
Kuja lord of the twelfth from lagna. Shani in the ninth did
Purusha yogas. There is a
strong Raja yoga caused by
Take Chart 114. It is that of a poet, a film composer,
who died in 1989. Kuja and Shani are in mutual kendras
Shani's major period
started in 1986, and his
not give any yoga, except that the native died at the height
of his popularity. They have exchanged results.

Second Kanda 253
unt Ahe aut a queer: yA wer
Urata at: RARR CUTA ATN: |
want afe aftr: wes wa fe ata
. tet miai aga wet cfr gettin ee i
For those born in Mesha lagna Budha is a malefic. Sun
and Guru are benefics; and if they are together, they are
yoga karakas. The conjunction of Guru and Shani is beneficial. The conjunction of Guru with others is not good.
Shukra is a maraka. Shani and others may be malefics; but
they do not kill.
Notes
Guru and Shani as lords of 9 and 10 prove auspicious
only in 9 or 10. Ravi is the lord of a Kona. Budha as lord
of 3 and 6 is a malefic. Shukra owns two maraka houses.
Some authorities hold that Shukra for Mesha lagna, and
Kuja for Tula lagna are not marakas.
Tat aiana: VE A Seats aradt
wha ey afe ma geet Anii fire: |
a: qaa wer parga fray at
wa gua miagh ardt pA eis ey tt
Shani can do good for Vrishabha lagna. Even if Guru
and others prove marakas, if they are alone they do not
cause death.
For those born in Mithuna lagna Ravi, Kuja and Guru
are malefics. The effect of their conjunction gives adverse
results. The Moon by himself will not cause death. The rest
can kill.
For those born in Karkataka lagna Budha and Shukra
are malefics. Kuja and Guru are benefics.
Notes
For Vrishabha Shani owns the strongest kona and
kendra. As regards karkataka lagna, we cannot accept the
author's view about Guru. The mulatrikona of Guru be-

254 Uttara Kalamrita
comes the sixth and hence he is a malefic. Similarly Shukra
for Vrishabha lagna is nota benefic as he owns the sixth as
his mulatrikona.
amt aA tit waiters fegan
ee ee ee
ari ta ye: gafada daraa
yet fara: a a mice u
Kuja is a yoga karaka for Karka lagna as he owns a
kendra (10) and kona (5). Other than the Sun the rest can
cause dedth. These are the effects for those born in Karkataka lagna.
For Simha lagna Budha and Shukra are benefics. Kuja
and Guru are yoga Karakas. The conjunction of Guru and
Shukra is not beneficial. Budha and others can bring about
death.
Kuja, Guru and Chandra are malefics for Kanya lagna.
Shukra is the only benefic.
Notes
For Karkataka and Simha lagna Kuja is a yoga Karaka
as he owns a Kendra and a kona. Budha is a malefic for
Karkataka as he owns houses 3 and 12. For Simha lagna
Shukra owning a Kendra becomes a functional malefic.
Guru owning his mulatrikona as the fifth house is a benefic.
For Kanya lagna Kuja owns 3 and 8, while Guru owns
two kendras. These two are malefics. It is debatable
whether the Moon becomes a malefic.
giaa waaga Aer wat feat Fat
we eat wast eag over: wera eet
wea aqean ufka mragat
ate ofa a TA watt AeA: 11 S
Here is a modification. Chandra and Shukra are yoga
karakas for Kanya lagna. It is better that they are together.

Second Kanda . 255
Shukra alone is a maraka, and not the others.
For Tula lagna Guru (lord of 3 and 6), Ravi (lord of 11)
and Kuja (lord of 2 and 7, maraka house) are malefics. The
Moon (lord of 10) with Budha (lord of 9) causes Raja yoga.
Kuja is a maraka. Ravi and Guru do not cause death. Shani
and Budha are benefics.
Notes
Other standard texts state that Shukra for Mesha
lagna and Kuja for Tula lagna are not marakas.
Shani is a yoga karaka aS he owns a kendra and a
kona. Having his mulatrikona in the twelfth, Budha cannot
be considered as a full benefic. Guru is a malefic. But in the
fourth or in the tenth he has given excellent resuits.
WW dinga AAAS RNAAR: YN:
qatar arend sitet + yar eel
darn: wey ure aff waived war:
Qatserafirtisyy: yprat etary ami ge N
For Vrischika lagna Kuja (lord of 1 and 6), Budha (lord
of 8 and 11), and Shukra (lord of 7 and 12) give inauspicious results. The Moon is the only benefic. Ravi and
Chandra give very good results when they are together or
separate. Guru by himself is not a maraka. lf Budha and
others behave like marakas, they can cause death.
For Dhanush Lagna Shukra alone is a malefic. Ravi
and Kuja are great benefics.
Notes
For Vrischika lagna the mulatrikona of Kuja falls in
the sixth, and hence he is a malefic. In spite of the author,
the conjunction of Ravi and Chandra is not at all favourable
as it takes place around the new Moon (amavasya). Budha
as lord of the eighth is found to be giving good results.
For the lagna of Dhanush Kuja's mulatrikona and
Ravi's are in 5 and 9. They are great benefics. But Kuja

256 Uttara Kalamrita
must be ahead of Ravi.
art meaig, gt ta graa:
wa muya: pogan: Aea arta: tl
wean spre cad a fred we: wran
Fen yaam: fareq PRASA BTA 11 ey H
For those born in Dhanur lagna, the combination of
Ravi and Budha causes Raja yoga (lords of 9 and 10). But
Budha is a maraka, and not Shukra and others.
For Makara lagna Chandra, Kuja and Guru are malefics. Budha and Shukra are benefics. By himself Shani will
not kill. Kuja and others can kill. The best yoga karaka is
Shukra.
Notes —
For Dhanush Budha owns two Kendras. lf he is not
with malefics, he becomes a malefic. With Ravi he is a
benefic.
For Makara lagna Shukra’s mulatrikona falls in a
kendra. Does he not become a malefic?
` Budha is a benefic as his mulatrikona is a kona house.
Experience shows that Guru gives good results for
Makara lagna. Shani is not a maraka as he owns the lagna.
` But in lagna he can cause death.
Wrayerpan YANRAN: Ya: Yat wear
dmat a efigia aerate ant ue
we: yraa: sult gafa rA adit Te:
aha at apa fa erp wai aero: 11 20 1
For those born in Kumbha lagna Chandra (lord of 6),
Kuja (lord of 3 and 10) and Guru are malefics. Shukra is a
benefic. The combination of Kuja and Budha causes a
benefic yoga. Guru is not a maraka. Ravi, Kuja and others
can kill.
For those born in Mina Lagna Shukra and Shani are
bencfics. Kuja and Chandra are malefics. Guru and Kuja in

Second Kanda 257
conjunction cause Raja yoga. Kuja is not a maraka. But
Budha is a maraka. If Shani and others prove Marakas,
they cause death.
Notes
How can Kuja be a malefic for Kumbha? He owns an
upachaya and a kendra. The author contradicts himself
when he speaks of a yoga for the conjunction of Kuja with
Budha (lords of a kendra and a kona).
Shukra is a first rate malefic for Mina lagna as he owns
houses 3 and 8. Shani's mulatrikona falls in the twelfth.
Mars as the lord of 9 and Moon as the lord of the fifth are
benefics, inspite of the author.
If Budha is a benefic for Simha lagna, Guru can as well
be a benefic for Kumbha lagna.
wa Amga: enh gproraraafifiecar
wert wea: Rame wet ATTY!
yrange frear BM, ear
aq: arg avira Rag yor ee A Sw th Ww I!
These are the results for those born in Mina lagna.
The benefic or malefic results of any planet are to be
interpreted in the light of the nature of the concerned
planet, its position, its ownership, and its association with
others.
The benefic planets give the native wife and children,
happiness to the father, profits and other benefits in their
periods. These are relaled lo the Bhavas they own and they
occupy. The results will appear in their sub-periods of other
planets as well.
wired gemia y giad gen aeg:
a mA + Aa asta ate ana Sea: FTL
Mea amara yarra area 3aada ot agea arm aya a? 11
Wise and intelligent ones after studying and com-

258 Uttara Kalamrita
prehending astrology ask whether any one has understood
this subject. The answer is in the negative. If there is any,
he is the only one and he keeps it to himself. Even asses,
dogs and the like are born under similar yogas, and they
also get the results of such yogas in the Dasas of the_
concerned planets. But these yogas are also subject to
other forces or influences.
rar afe Agrama: fe aaa ae
arent afe we paraad, gR: |
Fa At ate eat Jaga anA Stara
trae af uaaa g gtr Parent 23 0
When any malefic is exalted along with being a maraka
the evil it can do need not be described. Shani gives very
good wealth and prosperity if he is in lagna and if the lagna
is Tula, Dhanush or Mina. If in this situation the seventh
house is not occupied or aspected by Guru or Budha, the
native becomes a king. Yet one can predict death in the
major or sub-period of the lord of the seventh house.
area IN wea Aes pA:
arptteaymeedt ale qa wage Fayre: |
aragrate ard tage rga fa:
maea ater Ae Berea ATA! Ve
When Shukra is in agna and Guru in the seventh, or
_when Guru is in the eighth from the lord of the eighth and
‘is in the twelfth from a malefic, the native has a life of only
thirty years. When Shani is in the eighth from the lord of
the ninth and is in an odd Navamsa, the native docs not
have continuous prosperity. lf he is similarly posited
with respect to the lord of the fourth, the native loses his
vehicles.
Notes
Consider Chart 115. Shukra is not in lagna, but opposed to Guru. This Guru is in the cighth from the eighth

Second Kanda 259
edad lord: and is aspected by
Shani R 14 him. A powerful malefic is
in the twelfth from Guru.
Kuja and Shani are in opposition. This one died in
1942.12.19 Pe | an accident in 1966. It was
even said that he committed suicide. He did not
complete even 24 years.
Consider Chart 116.
Here Shani is in the eighth EE
from the lord of the ninth. Katu Gum A
But he is not in an odd
navamsa. Still he lost the
huge property he inherited. 116
His prosperity started de- jcramazs 1919.15
ate? c
clining towards the end of ee
Guru's major period. He
died in 1977 in the last 20.48 Raby 1443
antardasa during Shani's | Fev ;
major period.
Te agis wafed wer Agaga N tte
When the Moon is conjoined with Shukra, and the lord
of that house is in a Kendra or Kona, the native will have
good vehicles throughout his life and he has prosperity.
If the lord of the eighth house counted from the third
that is, the lord of the tenth from lagna) is in houses 1, 3,
6, 7 or 11 one should expect loss of brothers. If the eighth
house has a debilitated planet and Guru neither aspects it
nor is in that house, the native's death is early.
aona Prethigastercafnafrareeredyat
UF Vega a kgga mrad faf
UÈ manmi a maaygeaten vga
agaga fara maa aea Ra REA: R N

260 Uttara Kalamrita
When the lord of the eighth house from the ninth (it is
the lord of the fourth from lagna) is aspected by the Moon,
the native has a short life. If Shukra and Rahu are there, the
prosperity of fortune of the native will start declining from
Ketu's major period.
If Shukra is in the sixth or in the eighth and is with
Ulka and similar meteors, the longevity of the native is
considerably reduced. This can take place when a planet
owning a movable sign gets into that from a dual sign on
its transit.
Notes
Ulka is an extremely dangerous comet. It is at the fifth
or the tenth constellation from that in which the Sun is
posited.
In Brihat Samhita (33.8) Varahamihira thus describes
the Ulka: “It is broad at the top and has a small tail. As it
falls down, its dimensions increase. It has a length of three
and a half cubits. There are several varieties of it”.
The life of a person is {1) long, (2) medium, and
(3) short in accordance with the placement of the lords of
lagne-and the eighth house as follows:
(1) If they are in fixed and dual signs—long Hfe.
(2) If they are in movable and fixed signs - medium
(3) If they are in moydble and dual signs - short life,
_ Similarly when both the lords occupy (1) movable
signs - long life, (2) dual signs - medium life, and (3) fixed
signs - short life.
Notes
These principles are taken directly from Jaimini’s

Second Kanda 261
Sutras. See his Sutras in Chapter II and Pada 1,
and Chapter III and Pada 1.: Using 1 for movable
signs, 2 for fixed signs, and 3 for dual signs we tabulate
thus:
Long life Medium Short life
l and 1 l and 2 land 3
2 and 3 2 and 1 2 and 2
3 and 2 3 and 3 3 and 1
The rule is not so simple as it appears. It is only a
ign and ready method that the author outlined here. For
a clear exposition see Jaimini Sutras published by Messers
Ranjan Publications.
miriga aggere
famea A a AN MANA: 14 22 N
(1) If a child is born on any Sunday, Tuesday or
Saturday;
(2) If the days mentioned are the Iunar Tithis 2, 12 and
(3) If the constellation is other than Chitra - then
declare the child is illegitimate - born to its mother from one
who is not her husband.
Notes
The verse is not available in full. Similar ideas appear
in Brihatjataka, Phaladipika, Jataka Parijata and so on.
But one should not jump to a hasty judgement. There
are many other factors to be considered.
frareaquieniva me: wrat ware
ageya yatai, ai aga R
(1) When malefics are posited in the fourth and the
eighth house from Shukra, (2) from the lord of the seventh
house, or (3) when Shukra is between malefics and has no

262 Uttara Kalamrita
` benefic aspect in the charts of the husband and the wife, itis called Vahnipata-yoga - fall of fire, a malefic yoga.
Notes
This verse also is incomplete. Moreover, it is not in the
Shardula Vikridita metre employed by the author throughout. It is an interpolation.
See the tenth Chapter of Phala Dipika.
In this Chapter after the twenty second verse the
author has strayed into problems that he has touched upon
earlier.
tt afer sit aag sercerenget ies: ware: 1)
UL Bares weet: 1
Here Ends the Second Kanda of Uttara Kalamrita.
The two Kandas of Uttara Kalamrita end here.
N Byer set
` - EA Saxena N
Aa, ` ofi
irst time introduced by “Daivajnd Neelkantha” the concept of f;
ered Horoscope called the Varshaphala or Annua., A
chart based on sound astrological principles. Complete text in E
Sanskrit, English translation notes & exhaustive
commentary with practical example Horoscopes.
